Jack Straw urges swift implementation of EU anti-terror measures
Security and defence
2005-09-07 - 18:26
In the wake of last week's bombings in London, UK Foreign Secretary Jack Straw called on 12 July for the EU anti-terrorism action plan to be put into effect rapidly, in particular the measures to combat the funding of terrorism. Mr Straw, who was speaking to the European Parliament's Foreign Affairs Committee, also welcomed recent developments in the EU's common foreign and security policy (CFSP).
Terrorism
"There is no magic answer to terrorism" , said Mr Straw, adding that terrorism was a disease that strikes at all and that it must be fought. He stressed that the victims of the London attacks were of different backgrounds and religions.
Mr Straw, a former home secretary, wanted to see closer cooperation between police and intelligence services in the EU. "There is no case for a new EU structure for the sharing of intelligence", he said later at a press conference, adding "we need to strengthen cooperation on the ground" . He pointed out that the EU had already adopted an action plan for fighting terrorism, which was based on mutual recognition, but he went on to say "Trying to harmonise the different legal systems in the 25 Member States is strictly for the birds" .
Foreign policy
Reviewing various foreign policy areas, Mr Straw said that over the four years he had been foreign minister the CFSP had developed and strengthened. He referred to EU cooperation in the Middle East peace process and on Syria and Lebanon and to EU mediation on Iran. Commenting on the outcome of the G8 meeting of leading industrialised nations, he argued that the Gleneagles summit amounted to a platform for real change in Africa. The EU, he said, had decided to double its aid to Africa, although the need was not just to increase but also to improve the quality of aid. He emphasised the importance of measures to promote good governance.
Enlargement
Replying to questions on enlargement from several MEPs, the UK foreign minister acknowledged that the European Union needed a "period of digestion" but said it must stick to its commitments. The pace of enlargement depended on the EU's ability to absorb new states. "The EU is more popular outside its borders" and is still attractive, he said. The neighbourhood policy for non-member states must be strengthened. As to Turkey, Mr Straw pointed out that it simply wanted to be judged by the Copenhagen criteria for EU membership.
EU constitution
To questions on the Constitutional Treaty, Mr Straw replied that certain provisions, such as the reform of the rotating presidency of the Council and steps to beef up the role of national parliaments, could be put into effect without waiting for the end of the ratification process. However, he ruled out any idea that plans to set up an EU diplomatic service could go ahead.
12.07.2005 Committee on Foreign Affairs In the chair: Elmar BROK (EPP-ED, DE)
20050826IPR01419
EN
1
PHOTO
20050822PHT01287.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
