EU should cooperate more with US in Mediterranean region
Development and cooperation
2005-09-07 - 18:26
MEPs are disappointed with the results achieved since the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership was set up ten years ago in order to strengthen the political dialogue between the EU and Algeria, Egypt, Jordan, Israel, Lebanon, Morocco, the Palestinian Authority, Syria, Tunisia and Turkey.
At two hearings, one with experts on human rights issues, held on Monday, and a second one on Wednesday with experts on education, immigration and the political situation in the region, there was disappointment in particular with the lack of political reforms and economic progress .
"The main objectives ten years ago were the stabilisation of the region through economic and other tools and the creation of a political identity in the region. On neither point have we been successful," rapporteur Anneli JÄÄTEENMÄKI (ALDE, FI) said, "although on other issues there have been successes."
Sandrine GRENIER of the Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Network said: "We are rather disappointed, all of us. We haven't seen a huge improvement." She added that the declarations and documents have not been followed up in the human rights field. Ms Grenier held out more hope for action at regional level: "The bilateral dimension shows more progress, as with the working groups with Morocco and Jordan." Dorothée SCHMID of the International Relations Institute in Paris explained that the Euromed partnership had originally had a global and political scope, but that it gradually changed into a more traditional form of economic cooperation.
The EU's "soft" approach would thus appear not to be working satisfactorily, but neither is the American approach achieving success. It would therefore be advisable for the EU and the US to work far more closely together, MEPs said, although with each maintaining its own approach.
Other issues raised during the hearings were better education, especially for adults and women, better cooperation between the EU and the Mediterranean countries on immigration issues and economic cooperation.
11.07.2005 Committee on Foreign Affairs, subcommittee on Human Rights In the chair: Hélène FLAUTRE (Greens/EFA, FR)
13.07.2005 Committee on Foreign Affairs In the chair: Emma Nicholson (ALDE, UK) & Elmar BROK (EPP-ED, DE)
Procedure: Own-initiative Plenary vote: October I, Strasbourg
20050826IPR01421
EN
1
PHOTO
20050822PHT01307.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
