Only full EU membership acceptable, says Turkey's chief negotiator
Enlargement
2005-09-07 - 18:26
The Turkish chief accession negotiator rejected proposals for a ”privileged partnership” as an alternative to EU membership for Turkey, when appearing before the Foreign Affairs Committee on Tuesday. Mr Ali BABACAN went into some detail to set out the political and economic reforms that have been achieved so far by his government and answered a number of searching questions from MEPs.
Full EU membership is the goal to which both the EU and Turkey have committed themselves, Mr Babacan said: ”No other relationship is foreseeable for Turkey.” He added that Turkey already has several arrangements with the EU, such as the customs union, and that it was difficult to see what could be added to that in a special relationship. Turkey can live with the ”rigorous” negotiation framework as proposed by the European Commission two weeks ago, but ”would take issue if there were new hurdles” , Mr Babacan said. ”The negotiations will be difficult, but we will be patient, tolerant, focused and we will work hard” , he said, ”knowing that we will have to win the hearts and minds of those who are still sceptical”.
Opening a series of questions from MEPs, Camiel EURLINGS (EPP-ED, NL), who is the rapporteur on Turkey’s accession progress, asked whether the ”law on foundations” - concerning the legal rights of churches - will be amended now that enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn has deemed it to be insufficient. Mr Babacan assured him that the concerns of the Commission and of Parliament will be taken into account when the Turkish parliament debates the bill after the summer recess. Mr Eurlings also mentioned the problems with freedom of the press and the lack of socio-economic development in south-eastern Turkey.
In answer to concerns raised by a number of MEPs about an apparent slow-down in the reforms, Mr Babacan replied that the "critical mass" of the reforms had been achieved prior to the Council’s decision in December last year to open negotiations. Implementation of the reforms takes some time, he added, and therefore the Turkish government prefers to evaluate progress on the basis of whether there is improvement compared to the previous year. More importantly, the political will and the support of the population are strong enough to carry through these reforms. But this support can be fragile, he added, and if comments by EU leaders and the Parliament are not phrased carefully, ”people may be offended” . Equally, the political will and support will only be there if the target of negotiations is full membership.
On Cyprus, Mr Babacan stressed that the ”Ankara Protocol”, extending the customs union to the new Member States, including Cyprus, will be signed before the start of the negotiations, scheduled for 3 October. Turkey was and remains willing to find a solution for the divided island and has shown this when it supported the Annan plan, which was approved by referendum in the northern part of Cyprus, but rejected in the southern part.
Regarding Armenia, Turkey last year invited Armenia to take part in a committee of historians to research these events, Mr Babacan told MEPs, but so far had received no response. On south-eastern Turkey, Mr Babacan explained that the region had lived through decades of ”terrorist attacks” and that the lack of security had traditionally scared off investors.
12.07.2005 Committee on Foreign Affairs
In the chair: Elmar BROK (EPP-ED, DE)
20050826IPR01420
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
