Broader EU-China Relations Needed
External relations
2005-09-07 - 18:26
A longer-term trade strategy needs to be devised to enable industry in the EU to face up to the many challenges posed by the rise of the Chinese economy, says the EP Trade Committee in a draft resolution adopted by a large majority on 30 August. The resolution will be put to the vote at Parliament's plenary session of 26-29 September. Before the vote Trade Commissioner Peter Mandelson told MEPs that in his view protectionism was not the solution.
In its resolution, based on a report by Caroline Lucas (Greens/EFA, UK), the Trade Committee calls on the Council and Commission to recognise that "the challenges currently being experienced by the textile, clothing and footwear sectors, and which will soon be experienced by other sectors such as the bicycle, automobile, machinery and iron and steel industries, are systemic in nature" and that "a longer-term strategy for EU industry must urgently be developed in order for the EU's international trade policy to take into account and address in advance the challenges, such as the current imbalances it is experiencing with China" .
In her report Caroline Lucas points out that bilateral trade has increased 40-fold since the reforms launched in China in 1978, reaching €175 billion in 2004. In 2003 China became the EU's biggest trade partner after the United States but the EU currently has a large and growing trade deficit (€78.5 billion in 2004).
Textiles
Regarding the issue of textiles and the protocol to the agreement between the Commission and the Chinese government for China to limit its exports, MEPs voiced concern about the practical implementation of this accord. They call on the Commission "to ensure that any revised agreement takes appropriate account of the interests not only of consumers and EU companies but also of textile producers in developing countries which have suffered from the expiry of the agreement on textiles and clothing" .
While welcoming the progress made by China towards meeting its international commitments within the World Trade Organisation (WTO), MEPs call for further dialogue with Beijing to support China's efforts to combat pirating and counterfeiting, for example by implementing the agreement on Intellectual Property Rights (IPR). The resolution calls on the Commission to "take the appropriate measures" by "monitoring the problem and, if necessary, bringing it before the WTO" .
The Trade Committee also voices concern at the social and environmental impact of China's economic expansion. The resolution points out that China has become the world's second biggest energy and raw materials consumer - and also the second largest emitter of greenhouse gases. It calls on the Commission "to investigate the most effective way of negotiating the introduction of minimum social and environmental standards into trade agreements and ensuring their effective enforcement".
Turning to social measures the resolution states that, while progress has been made, around a quarter of the rural population in China lives in extreme poverty. It calls on the Commission to take into account, in trade relations with China, the question of developing a cohesion policy in the country.
The resolution notes the steady rise in the number of industrial disputes since 1998 and urges the Chinese authorities to authorise the establishment of independent trade unions, the introduction of free collective bargaining and to set up "an exchange programme between European and Chinese trade union officials to enable China to benefit from Europe's many years of experience in the area of employee participation" .
Political dialogue
The committee reminds Member States that the EU's code of conduct on arms exports lists respect for human rights in the country of final destination as one of the criteria. MEPs say the human rights situation in China remains very worrying. They want the EU to conduct, in parallel to the development of trade relations, a more intensive political dialogue ranging from human rights issues to regional and global security questions.
Protectionism not a solution
Trade is not a tap that can be opened and closed at will, said Commissioner Peter Mandelson in reply to the many concerns expressed by members of the Trade Committee on the issue of textile imports from China and trade with China in general. He indicated that the agreement reached in June with the Chinese authorities to limit the volume of imports from China would not last if the goods remained stuck at the borders. "Are we going to send these licensed goods back to China? Who will pay?" asked Mr Mandelson. He also pointed out that this solution would have damaging repercussions for Europe's small retailers and consumers.
Asked by several MEPs about the problems other sectors might face, Mr Mandelson answered that the EU had instruments and policies to counter any unfair measures. He added that the Commission was carrying out a long-term enquiry into allegations of dumping of footwear. In the longer term, he believed the solution depended on decisions in the areas of investment, the knowledge economy and the supply of products in a global economy.
30.8.2005 Committee on Foreign Affairs In the chair: Enrique BARÓN CRESPO (PES, ES)
20050907IPR00044
EN
1
PHOTO
20050907PHT00054.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
