Working hours opt-out could end: on-call time to count as working time
Employment policy
2005-09-07 - 18:26
Speaking on the debate on the working time directive, Alejandro CERCAS (PES, ES), rapporteur for the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, said it was Parliament's responsibility to restore confidence in the European social model given the high expectations of Europe's citizens. He considered that working conditions were the way to do this. "We need to give a clear signal of our commitment to and trust in the European Social model.
Just as citizens are looking for progress on the constitutional front, they are also asking what the EU can do for them".
He called for the opt-out to be scrapped without exceptions, saying that there must be the same legal base in all Member States. " The opt-out runs counter to the goals of worker health and safety, and violates the fundamental principles of the Constitutional treaty and the Charter of Fundamental Rights". Citing the Lisbon Strategy, he said that he was in favour of flexibility, but that the opt-out clause had to be struck out.
On the matter of on-call time, including the inactive part, he said that this had to be considered as working time. He stressed the need to respect the acquis communautaire and the ECJ's court rulings on the definition of working time. Finally, he called for a balance to be struck between the need for flexibility and the health and safety of workers, adding that these terms were wholly compatible. Acknowledging a consensus in Parliament, he called on the Commission and the Council not to break any agreement.
Stephen HUGHES (PES, UK) was in favour of the phasing out of the opt-out along with an annual calculation of working time so as to allow greater flexibility for business while also improving worker safety. He considered an opt-out to health and safety legislation to be " wrong in principle " and stressed the importance of a " proper balance between work and family life ". On the danger of the opt-out, he said, "o pening the door to a universal opt-out is in reality the path to a long-hours economy ." And where the opt-out is not used, he said that it made more sense to repeal the legislation. Citing a 1996 ECJ ruling linking personal well-being to work and family life, he finished by emphasising the impact of work on quality of life. " Everything is to do with work and family life ."
Jean LAMBERT (Greens, ALE) said that the working time directive was " an extremely important piece of legislation and an historic struggle for the labour movement ". She expressed concern at the prevalence of long working hours throughout the European Union, reaching 60 hours per week according to UK-based Work Foundation. Considering that the legislation, in so far as it applied to employees, was all about the rights of employees, she rejected the demands for flexibility as " a one-way street ". The issues, according to her, were social health and safety. " Tired workers are dangerous workers ", she said. She criticised the way in which the opt-out is used by employers, taking away workers' choices, who often have no idea that there is a limit to working time. She concluded that all on-call time must be considered as working time, whether in the health sector or not, and saw as " crucial " the issue of compensatory rest because " stress is one of the biggest causes of time off work ".
Derek CLARK (IND/DEM, UK) called for a " better deal " for workers, saying that " the best deal a worker can get is to have a job ". He thus criticised the proposed directive on the basis that it would not improve employment or working life. He referred to the experience in the UK, which he said demonstrated that less regulation leads to more employment, and drew a link between the low unemployment rates of the UK, Denmark and Sweden, compared to the rest of the Member States, and the " non-indulgence " in EU restrictive practices. He concluded by saying that the EU was not in the real world.
Philip BUSHILL-MATTHEWS (EPP-ED, UK) focussed his comments on the opt-out. He disagreed with the rapporteur who stated that the opt-out " goes against the fundamental principles of the treaty ". The Commission, he said, thought that the opt-out should exist 10 years ago and it is continuing to support it. The question on working time was about who decides; Mr Bushill-Matthews stated that it was not for " out of touch " politicians to decide but rather for the millions of workers to decide and for the opt-out to continue to exist. Many of the new Member States supported the opt-out as did all the social partners except the ETUC. SMEs disagreed, he said, with abolishing the opt-out. He stated that he would oppose the report from the rapporteur.
Chris DAVIES (ALDE, UK) stated that the opt-out was important on the grounds of subsidiarity. It was not for the EU to decide how to restrict working hours and the issue had nothing to with health and safety. It was not for the EU to interfere in this area and he disagreed strongly with Stephen Hughes his PES colleague. Despite the single market, countries continued to compete against each other and therefore should have the right to establish their own working time regulations. He was against blanket control by the EU. Mr Davies stated that he had never worked less than a 48-hour week and had no intention of doing so. Finally, he stated that the regulation would only serve to encourage euro-scepticism and lead to an increase in the black-market sector.
20050824IPR01364
EN
1
PHOTO
20050818PHT00042.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
