Support for embattled OLAF at EP hearing
Fraud
2005-09-07 - 18:26
If the European anti-fraud office (OLAF) did not exist, it would have to be invented. That was the overall conclusion of a public hearing at the European Parliament on 12-13 July on the subject of strengthening OLAF. The hearing was organised by the Committee on Budgetary Control and brought together MEPs, Commissioners, members of other EU institutions, and experts from several Member States and the US.
The committee will use the findings of the hearing in its work on the European Commission's proposal on modifying the OLAF regulation.
Hardly any EU institution or agency has been the subject of so much criticism as OLAF. Established in 1999 in the wake of the resignation of the Commission under Jacques Santer, OLAF has often been blamed for being slow and ineffective, not least in connection with the infamous Eurostat case. But in summing up the findings of the hearing, Herbert BÖSCH (PES, AT) concluded that it had given OLAF's reputation a boost. "We are sending a clear message to OLAF staff that we recognise and appreciate their hard work," he said.
OLAF mandate and tasks
This message was welcomed by Franz-Hermann BRÜNER, Director General of OLAF. He felt that "OLAF should be respected, not loved." He stressed that the average duration of an OLAF investigation had gone down from 38 to 22 months. Although a number of MEPs called for investigations to be speeded up, Simon BUSUTTIL (EPP-ED, MT) pointed out that representatives of external agencies were unanimous in their praise of OLAF. David GODWIN from the Irish Customs Service stated "OLAF's assistance and co-operation has been invaluable for many years." But Clare WELLS-SHADDAD, EP Central Financial Services Director, called for OLAF to concentrate its internal investigations on the serious fraud cases and " to let the institutions take care of minor cases themselves."
Status and institutional framework
Lars TOBISSON, Member of the European Court of Auditors, presented a special report (ECA 1/2005) on the management of OLAF. In his view, the "hybrid status" of OLAF, which has investigative autonomy but reports to the Commission for its other duties, has not adversely affected the independence of its investigative function. He especially noted that since the Director General of OLAF was appointed, "his independence has never been under any real threat." However, he also noted that the Supervisory Committee, whose primary function is to strengthen OLAF's independence, by focusing on internal investigations and individual rights, has "caused friction between the Director General and the Committee."
Control architecture
Bart STAES (Greens/EFA, BE) was concerned about the rights of individuals under investigation by OLAF. He called for a consistent framework of control mechanism instead of the current "patchwork" system. He stressed the potentially disastrous effects when information about an ongoing investigation is leaked to the media. An experienced Brussels lawyer, Jean Noël LOUIS, wanted responsibility for such leaks to be " placed squarely on the shoulders of the institution concerned." Jens NYMAND-CHRISTENSEN, Director at the Commission, pointed out the need to strike the right balance. We want "fast results and thorough investigations combined with respect for individual rights," he said.
The outlook for the future
While declining to speak about the implications of the Eurostat case, Commission Vice President Siim KALLAS spelt out in some detail his vision for the future of OLAF. He wanted to keep the hybrid structure but felt that "OLAF should concentrate on cases of serious fraud . " In this connection he called for an expanded role for the Supervisory Committee, which should be expanded to include representatives from Parliament, Council and Commission. The Supervisory Committee should then be responsible for defining the principal tasks of OLAF and to " provide overall guidelines without interfering directly in individual investigations." Mr Kallas was also very keen for the current system of handling sensitive information to be improved. It is unacceptable that an ongoing investigation is "compromised by an information leak," he said. He called for closer cooperation between OLAF and the authorities in the Member States, as well as between OLAF and Europol and Eurojust. Life would have been much easier with the establishment of a European Public Prosecutor as envisaged in the EU Constitution, but "there is no chance of that happening before 2010 at the earliest," he concluded.
Conclusion
In conclusion, Herbert BÖSCH (PES, AT), said that OLAF's image had been strengthened considerably by the hearing. It was evident that OLAF's independence has been clearly established, notably by " Parliament, Council and Commission all pulling in the same direction." He supported the notion of strengthening the Supervisory Committee by introducing representatives from the EU institutions. Finally, he welcomed the flexible approach of Commission Vice President Kallas in accepting ideas that went beyond the original proposal for modifying the OLAF regulation.
12-13.07.2005 Committee on Budgetary Control In the chair: Szabolcs FAZAKAS (PES, HU) Procedure: Public hearing
20050826IPR01423
EN
1
PHOTO
20050822PHT01313.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
