Mining waste: MEPs stand firm
Environment
2005-09-07 - 18:26
After the serious accidents notably in Romania in 2000 and in Spain in 1998, where mining waste containing heavy metals or cyanide was released into the environment, the EU decided that a directive targeting this sector was needed to regulate the management and storage of such waste. The Environment Committee adopted this new text today, 13 July, by 36 votes in favour, with 5 against and 15 abstentions.
As a result of the vote, major differences with the Council are likely, particularly over the derogations Member States should have.
Some types of waste can present dangers to public health and safety as well as the environment. The collapse of a heap of inert waste in Aberfan, Wales, caused 144 deaths in 1966, and the rupture of a fluorite tailings dam in Stava, Italy, left 268 dead in 1985. In all, it is estimated that waste from mining industries amounts to about 29% of the total waste generated in the EU each year (400 million tonnes).
During the debate that preceded today's vote, rapporteur Jonas SJOSTEDT (GUE/NGL, SE) expressed his displeasure with the common position adopted (with some difficulty) by the Council. "The Council has created new categories of waste and multiplied the national derogations. It has set the bar far too low", he said. He proposed an amendment to limit the derogations : "I don't want big holes in the net. The exceptions envisaged by the Council are unacceptable", he stated. The Environment Committee followed his lead by deleting a series of derogations introduced by the Council.
Former installations, where the sites have been closed, also represent, in the eyes of the rapporteur, real "time-bombs" . Here too, MEPs tightened up the Council's proposed measures. They want an inventory of closed sites to be established by every Member State in the three years following the entry into force of the directive, prioritising the most dangerous sites. The site should if necessary be rehabilitated in the following four years at the expense of the waste producers. This point is of particular importance to the new Member States of Central and Eastern Europe where many mining companies have long flouted safety standards.
In the future, every time a mining site starts up, a financial guarantee must be given and regularly adjusted, to ensure that obligations are met, during and after use of the site, for the rehabilitation of the land within the site as well as land directly affected by the waste facility.
MEPs also tightened up the conditions for allowing waste to be dumped in rivers and seas (which in principle is forbidden) as well as the classification criteria for the most dangerous facilities (known as category A).
13.07.2005 Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety Chair: Karl-Heinz FLORENZ (EPP-ED, DE)
Procedure: Codecision, 2nd reading Plenary vote: September I, Strasbourg
20050826IPR01432
EN
1
PHOTO
20050822PHT01289.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
