EU Aid To Togo Must Wait Till Situation Improves
External relations
2005-09-07 - 18:26
The Togo authorities will need to make greater efforts to restore democracy and guarantee fundamental rights if the EU is to resume cooperation aid, say MEPs.
Four months after Togo's presidential elections of 24 April, which were followed by street violence in the capital involving security forces and opposition supporters, Parliament's Development Committee invited representatives from Togo's new government, some opposition parties and NGOs to a meeting on 29 August in Brussels to evaluate the situation in the country and its ties with the EU, which are currently frozen.
MEPs and members of the Togo opposition parties voiced particular concern at the plight of the over 18,500 refugees who have fled to the neighbouring countries of Benin and Ghana to escape the violence that erupted on 26 April when Faure Gnassingbe, son of former president Eyadema Gnassingbe, was declared the winner of the elections. More than one hundred people died in street demonstrations.
Togo's Foreign Affairs Minister, Zarifou Ayeva, admitted at Monday's meeting that human rights were not fully observed during the elections but argued that creating a government in only 60 days in such a violent environment had been a big challenge. " During its first two months the new government has been trying to restore order in the country. We are now trying to make sure that people who were imprisoned without charge are released. We need full recognition of what we are doing to establish stability in our country, and we also need economic help to achieve this ".
Yawovi Agboyibo (member of the opposition in Togo and chairman of the Comité d'Action pour le Renouveau ) denounced the violation of human rights by the government-backed militia and the fact that many newspapers, TV and radio channels had been closed down. " During the elections we suffered falsification of electronic files, intimidation, efforts to prevent vote counting, interruption of telephone communications and so on ", he said. Agboyibo said it was now vital that the perpetrators of violence should acknowledge what they had done and that justice be restored, so refugees could gain the confidence needed to return to the country. Gaëtaa Mootoo (Amnesty International) agreed, saying " The victims want justice and reparation, impunity must be avoided ". The reform of the judicial system and of the army or police forces was seen as an absolute priority.
Lastly, Paul Rigaud (Amnesty International) complained that " France continues to provide substantial military and economic support to the country, which only increases the feeling of impunity for the government members ".
Lack of mutual trust
In a resolution adopted last May, the European Parliament urged the Togolese authorities to comply with the 22 undertakings given in connection with the Cotonou Agreement to strengthen democracy. A key undertaking is to launch a real political dialogue. John BOWIS (EPP-ED, UK) was concerned that nobody seemed willing to guarantee that there would be no repetition of the violence. The Constitution had been ignored, he said.
" The problem is the lack of trust ", said Marie-Arlette CARLOTTI (PES, FR). " I speak on behalf of the Socialist group when I say that the EP resolution still stands: we do need a political dialogue yet we do not trust each other. (...) The so-called 'radical opposition' also needs to have the political will to suggest some positive solutions ", she added, concluding that the resumption of EU aid to Togo would have to wait for further signs of progress.
29.8.2005 Committee on Development In the chair: Luisa MORGANTINI (GUE/NGL, IT)
20050907IPR00046
EN
1
PHOTO
20050907PHT00058.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
