Irish petitions to the European Parliament - how Irish citizens influence EU law
Petitions
Ireland
2005-09-07 - 18:26
Any EU citizen who is adversely affected by a breach or non-application of EU law has the right to petition the European Parliament to take action on his or her behalf. Ireland, with 1% of the EU population, accounts for approximately 2% of petitions received by Parliament. Irish petitioners have highlighted environmental concerns in a number of cases.
Petitioning the European Parliament is one of the most important ways in which citizens can seek non-judicial redress if their rights are infringed, and the number of petitions to Parliament has increased dramatically over recent years.
Certain issues recur frequently in petitions, most notably environmental issues and issues relating to free movement of persons within the EU, in particular with regard to cross-border transfer of welfare entitlements and recognition of qualifications and professional experience.
Ireland, with 1% of the EU population, accounts for approximately 2% of petitions received by Parliament. Irish petitioners have highlighted environmental concerns in a number of cases. A petition was sent to Parliament, for example, concerning lead pollution caused by a former opencast mine in Silvermines, Co Tipperary. When the European Parliament's Petitions Committee brought this to the attention of the European Commission, the Commission initiated legal proceedings against the Irish Government for non-compliance with EU Directives on waste and on aquatic pollution.
The European Commission also issued warnings to the Irish Government over the issuing of aquaculture licences in Lough Swilly in Co Donegal, following a petition signed by thousands of local residents voicing concern over pollution from salmon and shellfish farms in the lough.
Environmental issues in Ireland remain a source of concern to the Petitions Committee, which has emphasised that citizens should not have to wait until legal proceedings are launched in order to avail of their basic environmental rights. In 2003, after receiving a number of petitions from different parts of Ireland concerning drinking water quality, the EP Petitions Committee sent a delegation on a fact-finding mission to Ireland which travelled to Kilkenny to meet petitioners and witness their problems at first-hand. The Committee’s report noted that while infringement proceedings were underway, they take a long time to come to fruition and s a consequence of legal action in this particular case, the Irish Government is now spending large sums of money in improving drinking water supplies, and water treatment projects are all due for completion by 2006.
Another recent petition concerned voting rights for EU nationals in Ireland. Following the European elections in June 2004, an Irish citizen complained to Parliament that his French wife, in order to be allowed to vote in Ireland, had to sign a declaration that she would not also vote in France. This declaration had to be witnessed by a notary, at the expense of the petitioner. The petitioner argued that his wife was being discriminated against, as she had to incur extra financial costs in order to exercise her right to vote. The European Parliament and Commission agreed with the petitioner and took the matter up with the Department of the Environment, which agreed that non-Irish EU citizens should not have to face extra costs when voting.
Sending a petition is a straightforward procedure, and can be done by letter or online.
20050819IPR00522 How to send a petition to the European Parliament
EN
1
LINK
/parliament/public/staticDisplay.do?id=49&pageRank=1&language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
