Gordon Brown: Europe must face up to scale of economic challenge
Economic and monetary union
2005-09-07 - 18:26
Gordon Brown told MEPs that the increasingly global economy presents Europe with a huge challenge in maintaining its competitiveness. Speaking on 12 July to the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee to present the programme of the UK presidency, the British Chancellor of the Exchequer said full employment could be a realistic goal only if the EU faced up to the scale of reform needed.
Mr Brown highlighted in particular the growing strength of Asian economies: "Twenty years ago, ten per cent of manufactured goods were made in developing countries - soon it will be fifty per cent. Asia's share of output stands ready to surpass that of Europe, in ten years it will probably be 50 per cent higher. We have to face the fact that Europe has not only been growing at half the rate of the US, but at a quarter of the rate of China." He said the EU's founding fathers had assumed national economic integration would over time be replaced by European economic integration, but: "There are now global flows of capital, global companies, global brands and global supply of goods and services. We should be honest about the scale and intensity of change needed to adapt to this."
The Chancellor spoke of the importance of maintaining high social standards, but said today's European social model was not a success, with 20 million unemployed in Europe, more than half of them out of work for more than a year. With more jobs likely to be 'outsourced' away from Europe, at least 22 million new jobs would be needed by 2010. Mr Brown said there needed to be a Europe-wide commitment to completing the single market, an active competition policy and reform to state aid rules, so that aid would focus on research and development, enterprise and regional imbalances, thereby tackling market failure. "We must remove barriers to employment, encourage the skills of the future and make work pay," said Mr Brown, who repeatedly stressed the importance of action by Member States to equip their citizens for the challenges of the future.
Ieke VAN DEN BURG (PES, NL) asked about the reform of the stability pact , praising Mr Brown's own 'golden rule' on government borrowing. The Chancellor was positive about the pact's new emphasis on public investment, its greater attention to the economic cycle and to general government debt, though he said the test of the new pact was still to come. He added: "Of course there will be a debate about the European Central Bank - whether it should have a symmetrical inflation target as we do in the UK."
Both Kurt LAUK (EPP-ED, DE) and Wolf KLINZ (ALDE, DE) wanted to know what would be done to reduce the regulatory burden of EU laws. Mr Brown said both proposed and current regulations should be subjected to a series of tests: a cost test, a competitiveness test and a risk based test. The last of these meant an approach where risks are analysed first, so that companies would only be asked to provide essential information.
Dariusz ROSATI (PES, PL) and Antonis SAMARAS (EPP-ED, EL) both raised the issue of the Common Agricultural Policy , one of the main stumbling blocks at the recent summit. Mr Brown said "If we are genuinely to face up to global challenges, it does not make sense for 40 per cent of the EU budget to go to a sector which accounts for four per cent of employees and two per cent of output." For Mr Brown, priority should go instead to spending on areas such as science and infrastructure. He also warned that agricultural subsidies from rich countries were pushing out production from poorer countries. The UK presidency would do all it could to make progress towards a Financial Perspective agreement, he said, adding that this always took longer than planned.
Asked by Guntars KRASTS (UEN, LV) about the services directive , Mr Brown said there needed to be a balance between the requirements of the single market and the maintenance of high social standards. He suggested services of general interest could be excluded from the directive, though these would have to be clearly defined, and perhaps limited to social services and public health.
12.07.2005 Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs In the chair: Pervenche BERÈS (PES, FR)
20050826IPR01427
EN
1
PHOTO
20050822PHT01291.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
