Payment Orders: the European way
Free movement of capital
2005-09-07 - 18:26
The Legal Affairs Committee decided on Thursday to support the creation of a European payment order (EPO), a new procedure designed to speed up resolution of cross-border payment claims. By adopting a report by Arlene McCARTHY (PES, UK), MEPs backed the Commission proposal to establish a system to recover debts which should be cheaper and less complex than the existing national ones.
The new EPO should allow individuals and businesses to enforce uncontested payments through a harmonised process applicable throughout Europe. According to the proposed regulation, it will be possible, for instance, to claim payment for unpaid bills for mail order or internet purchases through a simple procedure. The EPO would only apply to payment claims that are not subject to legal controversy in any Member State.
The current situation causes problems for economic operators, who encounter difficulties, delays and unexpected costs when dealing with unfamiliar legal procedures in foreign countries. The small business sector in particular should benefit from a simple and cheaper procedure for pursuing payments across the EU. For this reason, MEPs amended the Commission proposal to allow private parties to apply the EPO procedure for non-cross border cases too, if they consider it more convenient than the alternatives.
The committee agreed with the Commission that Member States should be able to adopt the EPO on an optional basis for cross-border payments, running alongside their existing systems. When it comes to purely national cases, MEPs in the committee said Member States should have the choice of whether to adopt the EPO, rather than this option automatically being available as proposed by the Commission.
Finally, MEPs asked the Commission to present a cost-benefit analysis of the EPO five years after it enters force.
14.07.2005 Committee on Legal Affairs
In the chair: Giuseppe GARGANI (EPP-ED, IT)
Procedure: Co-decision, first reading Plenary vote: September II, Strasbourg
20050826IPR01431
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
