The European Parliament, champion of cultural diversity
Culture
2005-09-07 - 19:08
The European Parliament recently launched a call for the governments of EU countries to present a united front in the negotiations on cultural diversity taking place within UNESCO. Though forced to "spectate" on events, since culture in its broader sense falls within the remit of the individual EU Member States, MEPs wanted to express their commitment to multilingualism and cultural respect in a political resolution (which has no legal force) adopted on 14 April.
In 2001 UNESCO adopted a universal declaration on cultural diversity, but this proved inadequate for dealing with threats to cultural diversity throughout the world. Consequently, in October 2003, the UNESCO General Conference launched the preparation of a draft international convention on the protection of the diversity of cultural contents and artistic expressions, which is set for adoption in October 2005.
In contrast with trade or cooperation and association agreements with third countries, it will not be the European Commission that is negotiating for and on behalf of the EU, but the Member States. The Commission, which sits as an observer at UNESCO, has nevertheless made a commitment to MEPs to keep the European Parliament regularly informed. The UNESCO convention could be binding on its signatories and therefore have repercussions for the EU. MEPs have made no secret of their concerns. The resolution insists in particular that ‘ the European Union and its Member States should do nothing in the process of the negotiation and conclusion of this Convention to compromise cultural diversity or undermine the ability of governments to support cultural diversity and identity ’. They also intend to win acceptance for this policy within the World Trade Organisation (WTO) as part of the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS).
International trade – cultural exception
MEPs are particularly concerned about the compatibility of the future UNESCO convention with international trade rules. Citing the dual economic and cultural nature of cultural services and products, Europe has resisted the push, particularly from America, to open the audiovisual sector to market rules. Member States are also, for the moment, reserving the right to subsidise cultural products in the name of linguistic and/or cultural diversity, which the WTO feels is likely to create a distortion of competition with respect to the principle of equal access to the market. The national treatment principle forces members to give all service providers, regardless of nationality, the same treatment as national service providers. Discrimination between national and foreign service providers in the internal market is therefore prohibited, other than in negotiated exceptions. Another fundamental problem is the maintenance of public subsidies that the European Parliament considers essential for European cinema, which because of the linguistic diversity of Europe, does not have a large integrated market.
The importance of public aid
Members of the European Parliament feel that the convention should underline very clearly the right of States to develop and sustain policies and laws designed to promote and protect cultural diversity and media pluralism, ‘ notably public service broadcasters ’ (…). Consequently the Convention should ‘ recognise the importance of both direct and indirect public financial aid and that States Parties may determine the nature, amount and beneficiaries of such aid ’, according to MEPs.
The EU equals cultural diversity
The Treaty on European Union, which entered into force on 1 November 1993, states that the Union ‘ shall respect its rich cultural and linguistic diversity, and shall ensure that Europe's cultural heritage is safeguarded and enhanced. ’ [1]
The Treaty also specifically asks the Member States to encourage cooperation in the audiovisual sector. The text specifies that the Community must take cultural aspects into account in its action under other provisions of the Treaty, including competition policy, where public subsidies for the audiovisual sector will still be permitted. The European Constitution confirms this policy.
The next intergovernmental negotiations at UNESCO are set to take place between 24 May and 4 June 2005. The aim is to reach agreement on the draft Convention at the General Conference to be held between 3 and 31 October.
[1] This quote is actually taken from the Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe, not the Treaty on European Union.
20050819STO00756 European culture portal (European Commission) Convention on the protection of the diversity of cultural content and artistic expression Report by Christa Prets on Enlargement, cultural diversity: the role of the European regions and international organisations
EN
1
PHOTO
20050819PHT00575.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.ec.europa.eu/culture/portal/action/diversity/internat_level_en.htm
EN
3
LINK
http://portal.unesco.org/culture/en/ev.php-URL_ID=11281&URL_DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201.html
EN
4
LINK
/oeil/FindByProcnum.do?lang=en&procnum=INI/2002/2269
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
