Services Directive: Directions for use
Free movement of services
2005-09-07 - 18:26
Nobody challenges, at least not openly, the goal of establishing a genuine internal market in services in the Union. However, opinions differ on how to achieve this goal and on the extent of liberalisation. On the eve of the European Parliament’s decision one thing is certain: the European Commission’s proposal for a Directive is due to undergo a major face lift.
The objective of ensuring free movement of services in Europe is not new. Indeed, as early as 1957, the six founding countries of the European Economic Community undertook to create an important market in which persons, goods, capital and services would circulate freely. Forty-five years later, of the four freedoms inscribed in the Treaty of Rome, that covering services has not been achieved:
In a communication published in 2000 the Commission wrote: (…) ‘a decade after the envisaged completion of the internal market, there is a huge gap between the vision of an integrated EU economy and the reality as experienced by European citizens and European service providers.’
Benefits expected from the liberalisation of services
The European Commission estimates that services represent 70% of the wealth and jobs generated in the Union. Europe has not fully exploited the potential of this rapidly expanding market in terms of growth and job creation because of persistent obstacles to the free movement of services. A Commission Report published in 2002 scrupulously lists hundreds of disguised or discriminatory administrative obstacles or protectionist measures. Nowadays, for example, if a businessman wishes to establish himself in another Member State he must, in certain cases, prove that his activity is ‘economically necessary’. ‘Necessary’ usually has to be understood as an activity which does not compete with local service providers. This forces the service provider to carry out market studies, which can be very costly.
According to the Commission, opening up the sector to competition could stimulate growth in the European economy and create jobs. This objective is part of the Lisbon strategy, aimed at making the European economy more competitive, a strategy to which the European Parliament subscribes.
Besides, the consumer should be able to benefit from this liberalisation too. There would be a wider choice of services. If it were simpler to supply services from one country to another, the consumer could access them more easily. For example, many States currently grant tax deductions for professional training and in particular for learning a foreign language. However, national governments grant these deductions only if the candidates take the courses in their countries of origin and not in the United Kingdom for English or Spain for Spanish.
20050819FCS00997
The role of the European Parliament and the timetable
In its resolutions of 2001 and 2003 the European Parliament regards completion of the internal market by establishing an internal market in services as ‘the top priority’. Members also reiterated that ‘ a fully functioning Internal Market for goods and services is an integral part of meeting the economic reform goals established by the Lisbon European Council’.
In January 2004, boosted by this political support, the European Commission, then led by the Italian Romano Prodi, presented a proposal for a Directive. The text was drafted by the services of the Internal Market Commissioner Frits Bolkestein of the Netherlands, hence the name ‘Bolkestein Directive’. The draft was forwarded to the European Parliament and the Council of Ministers. It is imperative that these two institutions, as co-legislators, find common ground so that the text can enter into force.
Parliament is not captivated by the draft
Ten parliamentary committees are currently working on the Commission’s proposal for a Directive. Some have already expressed their opinion. The Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection is the lead committee for this dossier – this is the ‘committee responsible’, as opposed to the others which merely express their opinion. The Committee on the Internal Market has given German Social Democrat Evelyne Gebhardt responsibility for drafting the report which will serve as the basis for the European Parliament’s position.
Once adopted by the Committee on the Internal Market, the report will come before the House for approval by the Members of the European Parliament at first reading, probably during the October part-session.
After this first reading the European Commission will be able to introduce changes to its initial proposal in line with the amendments proposed by MEPs. Following that, the text will be forwarded to the Council and debated. The Member States may then adopt a ‘common position’. If the Council and Parliament are in agreement on the content of the Directive, it may enter into force. If not, the work and negotiations will continue.
At present it is difficult to foresee what the European Parliament will decide and whether the amendments it may adopt will be accepted by the Council.
Uncertain timetable
In its draft the Commission provides for progressive and differentiated liberalisation according to category of service. In certain cases liberalisation might be postponed for ten years after the Directive enters into force.
However, taking account of the progress of the work and the breadth of the debate, it is virtually impossible, at this time, to say when the Directive might enter into force and in what form. The End of the Deadlock MEPs take a big step forward
What is the Commission proposing?
The Commission is first of all proposing to allow service companies to establish themselves more easily in another Member State. To this end, it provides in particular for the simplification of administrative steps which would be fewer in number and also easier to complete. Main innovation: the service provider would apply to ‘single points of contact’, instead of having to appear before several authorities in the host country.
Next, the draft Directive aims to facilitate temporary and cross-border service provision. Depending on the type of service and the stages of liberalisation, the Commission is proposing either the country of origin principle (as a basic rule) or harmonisation (generally in a supplementary role). The country of origin principle means that the service provider is subject to the law of the country in which it is permanently established and not in the State in which the service is provided. Hence it is the responsibility of the country of origin and not the country of destination to monitor whether the service provided by the company complies with regulations.
Whatever the scenario, the text advocates better cooperation between national authorities. It invites them to exchange information on current legislation and requirements governing the provision of services, to transfer the necessary documents and to strengthen coordination of rules of access to the market in services. The draft covers a very wide range of services, but derogations are provided for.
Application of the law of the country of destination
Because such great disparities exist between countries, a whole series of special derogations from the country of origin principle are provided for in the draft Directive. These derogations relate in particular to labour law (minimum wage, working time, security, health and safety standards). For example, employees sent abroad by their company will be subject to the social security law of the country in which they are working if they stay longer than eight days. In this particular case, as regards labour law, the Directive concerning the posting of workers applies, and not the Directive on services.
Another derogation relates to particular places where the service would be provided, if this were justified in order to maintain public order, public safety or protection of public health or the environment. For the same reasons, which are described as overriding, a Member State may suspend the application of the Directive to a certain type of service.
Which services does the draft cover?
The Directive covers a very wide range of services. In the category of services temporarily provided abroad, proximity services are involved only to a limited extent. Indeed, it seems unlikely that a resident of Marseille would call in a repairer established in Prague when his television breaks down. A more frequent situation, perhaps, would be for a plumber in Saarbrücken to have occasional clients on the other side of the border, around Metz.
On the other hand, services provided at a distance (by Internet, telephone or other modern means of communication) are becoming increasingly numerous. A company may also provide services temporarily or across borders by the provisional posting of its employees. For example, a Spanish manufacturer of an industrial machine sold to a Slovak company may send his workers out to install the equipment in Bratislava.
Not all services are covered by the draft Directive. In particular it would not apply to services which, by their nature, are already governed by specific regulations. For example, electronic communications services and networks or financial services fall into this category.
In addition, non-economic services of general interest are also excluded. Even if this seems simple, it is not easy, in practice, to define the concept ‘of general interest’ and the non-economic nature of a service. The case law of the European Court of Justice is useful but insufficient to establish a definition acceptable to all Member States.
Certain commercial services in which public interest is evident are also excluded. This is the case for the supply of water and energy. Nevertheless, the fact that these services are not covered by the Directive does not mean that their liberalisation is not pursued by other legislative routes. Education, which remains a national responsibility, and public administration are also excluded.
The divergences
The draft ‘Bolkestein Directive’ has met with a chorus of disapproval. During the debate, especially in the European Parliament, three camps came into being: at one end of the spectrum there are those who support the Commission’s text and in particular recourse to the country of origin principle to stimulate the liberalisation of the sector, and at the other end there are those who oppose it. Between these two tendencies, others regard the main lines of the Commission’s text as acceptable, but believe it needs to be reviewed and corrected in order to allow the country of origin principle to operate in practice.
Behind these divergences there is a fundamental political problem: finding the balance between the need to open this sector up to competition and the need to preserve the European social model. Divisions over this complex issue go beyond the usual political and national rifts.
The Commission’s proposal to apply the country of origin principle to obtain liberalisation of services in the EU is the subject of intense debate. Should this liberalisation of the market in services be accompanied by prior harmonisation (or approximation) of the conditions for practising a profession? Then, a decision needs to be taken on what should be the driving force behind this liberalisation: the country of origin principle proposed by the Commission, the principle of mutual recognition advocated by the German Social Democrat Mrs Evelyne Gebhardt, rapporteur for this issue, the ‘internal market clause’ or indeed the country of destination principle.
The other main subject of debate relates to the scope of the Directive. Here the distinction between services of general interest (to be excluded) and services of general economic interest (covered by the Commission’s proposal) constitute the principal bone of contention. Two options are envisaged: very wide scope (50% of EU economic activities according to the Commission) with more numerous derogations or more limited scope without derogations.
Other points of debate relate to criteria by which certain restrictions on the free movement of services could be maintained by Member States, and the choice of the best approach for ensuring legal clarity of the text.
Harmonisation, the country of origin principle or mutual recognition? – A background history
At the outset, the internal market was built on the harmonisation of national legislation. Member States had only to reach agreement on the standards with which a product had to comply for it to move freely without hindrance in the internal market. Given the breadth of the task, harmonisation rapidly found its limits. Non-tariff barriers multiplied, putting a brake on the liberalisation of the market.
In 1979 the European Court of Justice made a famous ruling, in the ‘Cassis de Dijon’ case. Here the European judges took the view that any product legally manufactured and marketed in one Member State could be sold in any other Member State. What was good for a Frenchman and recognised as being so by French law could not harm a German. Consequently, an importing Member State was obliged to accept products from another Member State (country of origin) , even if these products did not conform to national standards in the country of destination . This is the genesis of the principle of ‘mutual recognition’ or of ‘country of origin control’.
In the same ruling, the Court recognised that a Member State could impose restrictions on free market access to a product manufactured in another Member State if these restrictions were justified by public order and met a series of conditions:
The restriction must be proportionate to the objective pursued;
It must be impossible to achieve this objective by less restrictive measures.
Transposed to services, this case law poses the following questions:
To what extent is it possible to apply this case law, which related to the free movement of goods, to the free movement of services?
Does not the country of origin principle, as defined by the European Commission in the draft Services Directive, go further than the Treaties as regards the free movement of services but not as far as the case law in terms of the authorisation of certain national restrictions?
What is known as the internal market clause is similar to the principle of country of origin control. It was introduced in various items of legislation linked to the internal market, in particular those on electronic trade. Are there grounds for applying a principle which has so far governed individual sectors of activity to a framework Directive which embraces the majority of services? Initial proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on services in the internal market submitted by the European Commission Draft parliamentary report by Evelyne Gebhardt (PSE, DE), rapporteur for the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection European Parliament and Commission documents assembled for the open hearing of 11.11.2004 on the Services Directive 2002 Review of the Internal Market Strategy – Delivering the promise
European Parliament Resolution on the Communication from the Commission to the Council, the European Parliament, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions:
EN
1
PHOTO
20050818PHT00030.jpg
EN
4
LINK
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/site/fr/com/2004/com2004_0002fr01.pdf
EN
5
LINK
/comparl/imco/services_directive/050525_pr_gebhardt_en.pdf
EN
6
LINK
/comparl/imco/services_directive/default_en.htm#
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060418STO07420 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060220STO05373 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P5-TA-2003-0058 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
