Software patents: the ‘historic vote’ in the European Parliament brings the battle to an end
Research and innovation
2005-09-07 - 18:26
The European Parliament has voted against patenting software, burying the proposal from the Commission and Council. Parliament’s overwhelming rejection sends a clear message to the other two institutions that no legislative proposal requiring its agreement can succeed unless its opinion is taken seriously. But the debate isn't over: how long will it be before the next bout of arm-wrestling begins between the supporters of ‘free software for all’ and those advocating ‘American-style’ patenting?
Did you think the IT world ended at your PC? You were wrong. Your vacuum cleaner, your washing machine and your microwave oven as well as hundreds of appliances all around you only exist thanks to software. Tens of billions of microprocessors have been programmed to make those appliances work. But before being made to work, they had to be invented. Not only your car, but also your disposable razor and your comb, too, have without a doubt been designed with the aid of a computer. In the beginning, there is always an idea. Next there is a program (algorithm, source code) which makes the software operational. A whole series of ideas and inventions are needed to ensure that, at the end of the chain, your car’s ABS and your mobile phone are in working order.
To each his own patents system
Like any creation, property rights to these inventions can be protected by law. Several types of intellectual and industrial property protection are possible. Patents and copyright (the famous © on the cover of the novel you want to read or on the packaging of your new DVD) are the most familiar. And herein lies the problem: which form of protection should one choose, and what stage of the computer-implemented invention (source code, software or just the final product) should be covered?
In the Member States of the EU, as in most other countries, there is a rule whereby software as such (not geared to an industrial application and not constituting a technical contribution to it) is not patentable. It benefits from protection through copyright, just like a literary work.
But in practice every State has its own way of looking at the question and its own specific patenting system. There can be different ways of registering a patent, and even different definitions of what is patentable and what is not. In Europe today, a patent can be issued by the national offices and by the European Patent Office (which is not an EU body). The first objective of the Directive proposed by the European Commission was to harmonise national systems for patenting innovations which require specific software for their creation. Hence it was not a matter of changing anything, according to the Commission, but of supporting existing practice.
However, the problem lies precisely in the fact that existing practices are disparate. That is the vicious circle. Parliament’s decision to bury the Directive, by rejecting the Member States’ common position, means that the proposed solution was not acceptable to MEPs.
20050819FCS01001
The stakes in the battle
Would the rule by which ‘pure’ software is not patentable be threatened? Apparently not, since the European Patent Convention, known as the Munich Convention, ratified by some 20 European countries, should guarantee its permanence. But interpretations of this text have opened up a breach and over 30 000 software patents have already been issued by the European Patent Office. This trend is even more marked in the United States and Japan, and certain national offices in the EU are leaning in the same direction.
Some will ask: why not? The problem is not merely legal. There are economic implications and, according to opponents of patented software, political ones as well. The two camps agree on one point: Europe needs more innovation. The Lisbon strategy says so, and the need to face up to American and Japanese competition on the globalised market is obvious. According to some, including major multinationals, innovation benefits from patents. Research and development is expensive, and patents ensure a just return for those who undertake it. By patenting his invention the inventor enjoys a monopoly over it and, for a certain period, anyone wanting to use it has to pay him. That seems logical.
However, the software patent does not come under the same umbrella as other patents. As a work of the human mind, software is protected by copyright just like a novel or a painting by a great master. Hence it is the expression of the idea which benefits from protection, and not the words used in writing the text or indeed the intellectual process which has resulted, through the author’s hand, in the novel. Only software which is a new invention ‘susceptible of industrial application’ can be patented and thus benefit from far greater protection.
Greater protection means restricting access. Now, the activities of many small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) depend on the use of programs invented by others. SMEs fear that once these programs are patented, they could become inaccessible. They are also afraid that large multinationals, alone capable of bearing the high costs of the procedures, will take over software that is not currently protected. They are therefore defending ‘free software’ and are opposed to the move towards the American model whereby virtually everything can be patented. The advocates of free software argue that access to new technologies is important for democracy and they highlight the political aspect of the issue.
The debate is not over
MEPs have been divided on this issue throughout the three-year debate and it looked as if it would be difficult to obtain a compromise. Nevertheless, they managed to do so in September 2003. In expressing their agreement on patenting ‘computer-implemented inventions’, they restricted the scope of the Directive to avoid patenting software as such. Parliament’s principal amendments were rejected by the Council. Finally, seeing no possibility of compromise on the basis of the Member States’ common position, Parliament rejected the text in its entirety.
For the first time ever, MEPs decided that an additional negotiating stage (provided for in the Treaty and known as the conciliation procedure) was pointless: the differences were too profound. In addition, MEPs were under no illusions about the attitude of the Council and the Commission towards this dossier. According to the rapporteur, French Socialist Michel Rocard, Parliament’s vote expressed ‘collective anger throughout because of the way the Directive was handled’ by the other two institutions. They have shown ‘total and sarcastic contempt for the decisions made by this Parliament at first reading’.
It is difficult to say whether, and when, the European Commission will present a new draft on the patentability of software. But the debate is not over and the advocates of both camps remain on their guard. We experienced the same dilemmas when the protection of medicines and biogenetic inventions were discussed. In a world dominated by new technologies, the problem of access to inventions and the costs of implementing them are more topical than ever. This goes beyond the purely legal and economic context. Official site of the European Patent Office
EN
1
PHOTO
20050818PHT00032.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.european-patent-office.org/index.en.php
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
