Textiles: the European Parliament proposes a response to the Chinese challenge
External relations
2005-09-10 - 10:30
The EU should place further restrictions on ‘abnormal imports’ of Chinese textiles – that was the watchword in the European Parliament last July. The massive influx of T-shirts and other items of clothing ‘Made in China’ onto the European market since the beginning of 2005 calls for a reaction. MEPs are proposing that the EU regard this as a challenge rather than a danger. As long as trading rules and equitable social standards are observed, Europe has sufficient assets to face the competition.
No less than 913 million pairs of socks and tights of Chinese origin landed on the EU market in January and February. This is one of the figures which provoked an outcry in Europe. Indeed, imports of these products were 57 times higher than in the same period in 2004, while the number of Chinese T-shirts in European shops increased by 187%. These figures, published ahead of the referendums in France and the Netherlands, inflamed the constitutional debate and, in the opinion of some people, demonstrated the EU’s inability to defend jobs in the textiles and clothing sectors.
Textiles and clothing constitute a key sector for the EU
It was in order to deal with this situation that the European Commission, on behalf of all the Member States, concluded an agreement with China on 10 June, which will allow it to monitor and limit imports of certain Chinese textiles until the end of 2008. This arrangement was made shortly before the expiry of the date of the European Commission’s ultimatum to Beijing. Had an agreement not been reached, the EU was prepared to use the safeguard clause which, subject to approval from the World Trade Organisation (WTO), gives it the right to limit imports and thereby protect its market.
But Parliament would like to go beyond the terms of the agreement, signed by the Chinese Minister of Commerce, Bo Xilai and the European Commissioner for Trade, Peter Mandelson. According to MEPs, the agreement should limit importation of other Chinese products. The European textiles sector is a key area for the EU, representing approximately 180 000 European businesses, many of which are small and medium-sized enterprises. Following the accession of 10 new Member States to the EU in 2004, this sector employs almost 2.7 million people, many of whom are women.
China’s accession to the WTO in 2002 and the end of the quotas on textile products, which provided protection for national markets between 1974 and 2005, led to a massive influx of Chinese textile products. But the problems predate that, since this sector lost almost 850 000 jobs and thousands of businesses in the European Union between 1990 and 2001.
More of a challenge than a danger
However, this is not to suggest that protectionist rules should be reintroduced and quotas re-established. MEPs would prefer to treat this situation as a challenge rather than a threat. The market must remain free and competitive, but competition must be fair. In order to achieve this, all partners must respect the keynote according to which a trade policy with the rest of the world has to be based on two principles: fairness and reciprocity. These were the words of the French Christian Democrat MEP Ms Tokia Saïfi, who drafted the resolution on the future of the textile and clothing industry after 2005, which was adopted by the European Parliament last July. But this is not the case today.
Firstly, it is difficult to compete with a market such as China, which is not free. Chinese textile companies are still state-run and benefit from aid which distorts competition (interest-free loans from state banks, export subsidies, disguised subsidies such as the supply of free electricity). Secondly, it is not simply a matter of profit. Those companies which wish to export to Europe should respect human rights and international standards on the environment and employment. According to MEPs, any importation of products into the EU which is in breach of these rules, in particular where products have been manufactured by prisoners, children, slave labourers or workers without trade union rights, should be prohibited.
Focusing on quality and combating counterfeits
Europe has assets which allow it to be optimistic about the future. The EU as a place of origin is a guarantee of a product’s quality. Products with a high added value are the European textile industry’s trump card. MEPs would like to see innovation encouraged in order to make European industry more competitive. But as long as its creativity and innovation are undermined by pirating and counterfeits, it is difficult to reap the full benefits of these key advantages. As it happens, the lion’s share of all counterfeits introduced onto the European market, almost 70%, comes from China. Fortunately, there is a legal basis for combating the global marketing of counterfeits: the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS Agreement). Thus, MEPs believe that China should impose stricter penalties on those who infringe these rules.
In order to face Asian and also American competition, Parliament is proposing that the two shores of the Mediterranean join forces to create a ‘ Euro-Mediterranean production area’. Finally, an aid plan for the reconstruction and conversion of the European textiles and clothing sector should be implemented. But, as is well known, conversions of this kind often go hand in hand with local or sectoral crises. In order to remedy this, MEPs would like to see the provision of financial aid by means of the Structural Funds (EU aid to regions in difficulty).
Nothing is simple
Do exports of Chinese textiles pose a threat to jobs in Europe? Undoubtedly. But China is the EU’s second largest trading partner. Although there are numerous strains on relations between the two entities, cooperation is developing. It is true that there is an increasing surplus on the Chinese side. However, the EU also exports a significant quantity of goods to China, such as industrial machinery, cars and aircraft. China is a formidable competitor for the EU in certain areas but it is even more so for developing countries. It would be unjust to deprive the most vulnerable countries of all protection. Finally, certain non-governmental organisations emphasise that restricting Chinese imports also means limiting the development of the 100 million Chinese who live below the poverty line.
20050819STO00986
EN
1
PHOTO
20050818PHT00177.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
