MEPs cautious about bigger role for Europol in fighting euro forgeries
Police cooperation
2005-09-07 - 19:08
At present each EU Member State has its own body for fighting the production of forged euros. Worried by widespread counterfeiting of the euro, six States last year proposed that Europol be named the EU's central authority for anti-forgery measures.
The European Parliament gave its opinion on 12 April this year. It said Europol should play a more prominent role but it should cooperate more closely with national bodies and was not ready to take full responsibility for fighting this crime on its own .
The EU's need to please as many Member States as possible made the security features of the new notes highly sophisticated - which makes it virtually impossible to produce an exact copy of a euro note. Yet digital colour scanners and printers can produce replicas which are poor in quality but good enough to fool many people. In 2004 alone, the European Central Bank withdrew from circulation euro notes to the value of € 44,801,510. The authorities are particularly worried about specialist forgers in Eastern Europe and Latin America.
How can I spot a counterfeit euro banknote?
The watchwords are: " Feel, look and tilt ". You should then be able to see if it is real or not. Euro banknotes include a number of security features which make them difficult to reproduce. The European Central Bank (ECB) and the 12 national central banks conducted an information campaign in 2002 which focused on the security features, so everyone should be able to recognise genuine banknotes. This information is still available on the ECB's website.
The ECB has also set up a database to store information on forgeries and established a Counterfeit Analysis Centre. The information in the database is shared with all bodies involved in combating forgeries: Europol, Interpol and the European Commission.
In their opinion, Members of the European Parliament agreed that Europol should centralise all the information to investigate and prevent the production of fake euros but they said it should always act " in close cooperation with the national central offices of the Member States ".
Two main reasons were put forward by Spanish MEP Agustín Díaz de Mera: Europol is currently unable to forward information directly to Member States (it has to do so through the relevant 'national liaison office'), something which would slow down the supply of information; and it is also unable to forward personal data to a third State unless an agreement to that effect has been concluded beforehand. " I ts legal framework, its lack of operational functions and the fact that Europol has no budget of its own with which to provide operational support in Member States makes cooperation among the national central offices and Europol essential ", said Mr Díaz De Mera.
20050819STO00752 The European Central Bank gives clear answers to frequently asked questions concerning the circulation of euro banknotes and how to recognise false notes or coins (in English). This EU website provides legal information on the measures taken so far to prevent the production of fake euro bills.
EN
1
PHOTO
20050819PHT00577.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.ecb.int/bc/faqbc/circulation/html/index.en.html
EN
3
LINK
http://europa.eu.int/scadplus/leg/en/lvb/l33136.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
