Terrorism: there must be a balance between individual freedom and the protection of civil society
Citizens' rights
2005-09-07 - 18:26
In the opinion of Jean-Marie CAVADA (ALDE, FR), Chair of the Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs, ‘There is inevitably a conflict between freedom of the individual and measures taken by the government in order to protect civil society. It is essential to find a balance between the two.’ But there is one thing to bear in mind: ‘it is not the State that controls the citizens but the citizens who control the State,’ he adds.
You are the Chair of the European Parliament's Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs . Last June alone, Parliament adopted seven recommendations and resolutions on the fight against terrorism. Yet, at the same time, MEPs remain opposed to certain anti-terrorist measures in the area of international cooperation. Why, for example, is Parliament opposed to the transfer of air passenger data to the American and Canadian authorities?
J-M. Cavada: It is necessary to distinguish between form – that is to say the legislative procedure chosen – and content. In the case of the agreement with Canada, what Parliament criticised in particular was the procedure used, while emphasising that the content was significantly better than that of the agreement with the United States. What Parliament is asking for is a formal international agreement, subject to Parliament’s assent. The procedures chosen by the Council and the Commission are neither transparent nor democratic.
As regards the agreement concluded with the American authorities, our criticism also related to content. The key word here is ‘excessive’. According to Parliament and the data protection authorities, the quantity of data which the United States is asking us to transfer is excessive, the time for which they are to be held is too long, the number of recipient authorities too high and the identified objectives too numerous, and all this is being laid down without the necessary guarantees.
Parliament is not opposed to exchanging data, but it insists that European principles be observed. Some of our European States have lived under dictatorships, in some cases for long periods. That is why we must be intransigent regarding these principles. The State does not need to know everything. It is essential to respect the principle of proportionality. It is not the State that controls citizens but citizens who control the State. We must avoid introducing measures which may turn out to be a system of mass surveillance.
20050819FCS00978
Biometric passports: for or against?
One of the ideas put forward for preventing terrorism is machine-readable passports and identity cards. Such documents would contain biometric data. A passport of this kind has been tested in France, at Charles de Gaulle Airport. Most of the British public is against the idea of a biometric national identity card. Last year the European Commission proposed including biometric identifiers on European passports. What is you opinion on this issue?
J-M. Cavada: When Parliament delivered its opinion in the vote on the EU citizens' passport regulation, it supported the use of biometric data. However, it refused to allow citizens’ fingerprints to be included in the data stored on chip. This decision, taken by the Council, came as a surprise not only to us, but also to the national parliaments.
The lack of transparency and legitimacy was clear: there has been no public debate on this issue and no real participation by MEPs. The wider scope of codecision aplying since 1 January 2004 enables the European Parliament to make its voice heard today.
Security and freedom – a contradiction?
It seems that security measures and freedom of the individual are sometimes contradictory. Do you think that the danger of terrorism may cause attitudes to shift more in the direction of accepting strict security measures to the detriment of individual freedoms? Have you observed such a tendency in your own parliamentary committee, particularly following the attacks in London, during the ongoing discussions on the tighter control and harmonisation regarding telephone and electronic communications in the EU?
J-M. Cavada: There is inevitably a conflict between individual freedom and measures taken by a government in order to protect civil society. It is essential to find a balance between the two. We need an open debate on this issue and I believe that a keyword in this context (and equally on the question of PNR and biometric data) should be ‘proportionality’.
At the LIBE Committee meeting of 13 July 2005 our committee had the chance to debate this very point with the Home Secretary, Charles Clarke, representing the British Presidency. Despite being horrified by the attacks on London and demonstrating their full support for the British Government, LIBE’s members were highly critical of the measures planned by the UK to combat terrorism.
As regards the draft framework decision on the holding of data, the Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs, supported by Parliament in plenary, recommended that the initiative be rejected. We also requested an impact assessment from the British Presidency on the effectiveness of such measures. We expect to receive information in the coming weeks, and the final vote on this text has been scheduled for the second session in September.
Freedom, security and justice: more power for the European Parliament
On several occasions you have spoken in favour of strengthening the powers of the European Parliament as regards legal immigration, data protection, the fight against terrorism, and indeed criminal matters. Why do you believe that Parliament should have a stronger voice in the area of freedom, security and justice? Is this not purely an ‘institutional ambition’?
J-M. Cavada: Power is not an end in itself. We are convinced that Parliament, as the body representing citizens, has an important role to play. Its contribution is essential for a balanced and democratic outcome. It is Parliament which condemns the fact that the ‘principles of liberty, democracy, respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, and the rule of law’ formulated in Article 6 of the Treaty on European Union have not been sufficiently implemented to date. The case of legal immigration is an interesting example of legislative schizophrenia, in which the Council refuses to extend the scope of codecision in compliance with the provisions of the Treaty in force, but even the governments recognise the legitimacy of such an extension and are preparing to sign a treaty which will constitutionalise the procedure.
It is also a question of efficiency. Codecision means that the Council acts by a qualified majority instead of acting unanimously. Acting by a qualified majority is indispensable if we are to be in a position to take the decisions which public opinion expects of the EU. This is not tantamount to a dictatorship; rather, it makes it easier to find solutions which are acceptable to everyone. Obviously, the institutions do not do everything, but improving the institutional framework is essential for success. European Parliament legislative resolution on the proposal for a Council decision on the conclusion of an Agreement between the EC and Canada on the processing of Advance Passenger Information
EN
1
PHOTO
20050818PHT00238.jpg
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2005-0294 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
