Gender discrimination and health systems
Social policy
2005-09-07 - 18:26
Gender has an enormous impact on health, as much as age or socio-economic differences. The need for a better understanding of this issue was the subject of an own-initiative report on gender discrimination and the health system adopted on 14 July by Parliament's Women's Rights Committee. The report, drafted by Eva-Britt SVENSSON (GUE/NGL, SE), was adopted by 21 votes to 2, with 5 abstentions.
A key step is to make health sector workers aware of the role of gender in determining the individual's health. This means including education on gender disparities in the training of healthcare staff. Knowledge of support techniques is essential to help female victims of violence. The committee also wants EU policies and programmes to give priority to preventing female genital mutilation and prosecuting the perpetrators.
All publicly funded health services should provide good healthcare and social security services on equal terms, say MEPs. However, the rapporteur points out that this is not always the case, citing a study from a Stockholm hospital which shows that if women received the same care as men, the resources spent on women's treatment would increase by 61%. Or if women's standard of treatment were the norm, a saving of 33% would be made.
The report urges improved measures to fight breast cancer. Comprehensive screening programmes in accordance with EU guidelines exist in only nine Member States (Belgium, Finland, France, Spain, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Sweden, Hungary and the United Kingdom). The Women's Committee wants the other Member States to make mammography screening at two-yearly intervals available to all women aged 50-69. Regular screening can reduce breast cancer mortality by up to 35% among women in this age group.
Lastly, the report calls for research into different areas relating to gender and health and the use of gender-disaggregated statistics and data in all health and medical services. It also stresses the importance of developing the gender perspective in health strategies on national and European level.
This report was among those highlighted yesterday by the UK Minister for Women and Equality, Meg MUNN, in her appearance before the committee. The UK presidency will be holding an event, Tackling Health Inequalities , which will look at some of the issues raised in the report.
14.7.2005 Committee on Women's Rights and Gender Equality
In the chair: Anna ZÁBORSKÁ (EPP-ED, SK)
Procedure: Own-initiative Plenary vote: September I, Strasbourg
20050826IPR01429
EN
1
PHOTO
20050822PHT01297.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
