MEPs want a strictly limited 48-hour working week
Social policy
2005-09-07 - 19:08
For the last 15 years, the European Parliament has been striving to contribute to the construction of a social Europe. MEPs in Strasbourg could soon be leaving European ministers with their backs against the wall by demanding the removal of exemptions to the 48-hour limit on the working week laid down in EU legislation.
Europe’s powers in the social field remain limited. Governments are reluctant to transfer prerogatives that might imperil their own social model. It is for this reason that EU governments have kept tight control over pension and social security schemes, for example. Nevertheless the EU can still take measures to improve the health, safety and protection of workers. In 1993, to accompany the creation of the single market, Europe adopted common general rules on working hours. European legislation states that workers have the right to at least 11 hours of rest each day, and to breaks. The working week was therefore set at 48 hours, with at least four weeks’ annual leave. For night workers the maximum working time was set at eight hours in every 24.
However, the rules do not apply to everyone. From the start, the UK ensured the limit on the working week did not automatically apply to workers in Great Britain. Cyprus and Malta have followed suit. Other EU countries have chosen to use the exemption – also known in Community jargon as the ‘opt-out’ clause – for selected professions such as health and catering. This system of exemptions has some downsides. In the United Kingdom, for example, employees are free to accept or reject the 48-hour limit, but they are asked to do this when signing their contract. Problems have arisen in other Member States – France, Spain and Germany – with the calculation of hours worked by doctors on call in hospitals and with the obligations on members of certain professions. Should the hours in which professionals are present without actually performing a particular task be counted as working hours? The response has major consequences for the way the services concerned are organised.
New legislation has been proposed by the European Commission (the EU Executive) in an attempt to readdress these shortcomings by tightening up the conditions for using the opt-out clause and introducing a distinction between ‘on-call time’ and ‘inactive part of on-call time’, which is not counted as hours worked. The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs, which is preparing the recommendation to all Members of the European Parliament, takes a different view. It is proposing the imposition of a complete ban on exemptions to the maximum 48-hour working week. It has also decided that ‘on call’ time should in most cases be counted as working hours.
The European Parliament, meeting in its plenary session in Strasbourg, is expected to vote on this text for the first time in May. European Social Affairs ministers will then discuss the proposal. The text is unlikely to be approved at this first reading. To be adopted, it must receive the support of MEPs and all 25 Member States. The proposal is a directive, which means that, once adopted by the EU institutions, it must also be transposed into national legislation in the 25 Member States, who will have two years in which to do this. It will not apply to European workers until this two-year period has elapsed.
20050819STO00760
EN
1
PHOTO
20050818PHT00276.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
