Codename: REACH. Mission: to identify nearly 100 000 products and their effects
Environment
2005-09-07 - 19:08
For nearly two years, the proposal for a directive aimed at regulating all chemical products has been the subject of impassioned debate, judged too lax by some and too bureaucratic by others.
It is one of the largest legislative texts with which the European Parliament has ever been faced. MEPs, who must approve the text by common accord with European ministers, will debate it in the autumn with the aim of finding a satisfactory balance between the three pillars of sustainable development: the economy, society and the environment.
If you are one of the 5 million Europeans employed in the chemicals sector, you are no doubt already familiar with REACH. The codename is nothing more than an acronym for ‘Registration, Evaluation and Authorisation of Chemicals’. Its purpose is to establish a European regulatory framework for the registration, evaluation and authorisation of chemicals. The project has achieved consensus on one point only: that it is necessary. There are currently around 40 disparate and incomplete European directives governing the sector. Adequate information on the environmental and health impact of most of the 100 000 chemicals used in industry today is lacking.
REACH takes up the challenge of setting a single regulatory framework that will do away with existing texts. The European Commission’s original proposal, with its 137 articles, 17 annexes and 1200 pages, has already demonstrated the conceptual difficulty of the task. Extensive consultation has been undertaken, and this is continuing.
Because of the breadth of the subject, several parliamentary committees have been consulted and hearings have been organised with representatives from industry, consumer organisations and environmental protection agencies. There is constant discussion in the corridors of power, and lobbying is in full swing. In the first stage of the legislative procedure, the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety will present a report to be debated by Parliament. It will be drawn up by the Italian Socialist MEP Mr Guido Sacconi.
Too much bureaucracy?
The Commission’s proposal envisages the registration of every chemical produced or imported into the EU in quantities of one or more tonnes per year. The potential impact of these substances on human health and the environment will have to be scientifically evaluated. The most dangerous substances will be authorised only if the capacity to control the risks has been demonstrated. A European Chemicals Agency will be set up to process the data, take part in evaluations and grant authorisations.
Without wishing to prejudge the positions that will be taken in the coming months in the Environment Committee and the plenary session of Parliament, it seems that MEPs are already expressing serious concerns that are sure to guide their amendments. The criterion of quantity (1 tonne per year) chosen by the Commission is likely to produce a significant amount of unnecessary bureaucracy in the case of relatively harmless products. Some MEPs are looking for an approach based more on quality, which prioritises the most dangerous substances. They would also like to see the Agency, which will be based in Finland, given a more extensive role.
SMEs, substitute products, etc.
There is also a great deal of concern over the impact of these plans on the many small and medium-sized businesses operating in the sector, which could experience a dramatic rise in costs. A recent independent study commissioned by the European Commission and published on 27 April 2005 did much to allay fears of a drive to relocate outside the EU and of a significant increase in the cost of European chemical products. SMEs, which provide many jobs, will nevertheless have much more difficulty integrating REACH than the large multinationals. Finally, environmental protection organisations are continuing to push for the use of less harmful substitute products, where these exist, to be made compulsory rather than optional.
20050819STO00764
EN
1
PHOTO
20050819PHT00677.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
