The proposed changes to fisheries aid criticised
Fisheries
2005-09-07 - 19:08
The European Commission has proposed changes to the financial aid given to EU fishermen. In a public hearing held on 29 March 2005 by the EP's Fisheries Committee representatives of the fisheries industry criticised the proposed measures.
According to the Commission proposal, the European Fisheries Fund (EFF) will replace the current Financial Instrument for Fisheries Guidance (FIFG). The fund, which will cover the period 2007-2013, will have an annual budget of 700 million euros. Its aim is to help reduce fishing pressure in order to allow the recovery of fish stocks and to encourage the use of more environmentally-friendly equipment and practices in fishing and aquaculture.
During the hearing many representatives of the fisheries industry stressed that through the proposed rules the socio-economic viability of fishermen is endangered. According to Frederico Pereira, Portuguese fisheries trade unionist, the new financing rules are unsatisfactory. " Adequate financial compensation for the whole period during which restrictions apply is necessary " said Mr Pereira. Otherwise, he added, " when the stocks are recovered, there will be no fishermen left ".
Another speaker, Guy Vernaeve, pointed out that despite some interesting features, such as the administrative simplifications, " the rest of the Commission proposal is a source of enormous concern ". He criticised particularly the measures proposed to ensure the sustainable development of coastal fishing areas, as only those that have less than 100,000 inhabitants will be eligible for support.
Pier Salvador, an aquaculture representative, stressed that too much attention is being paid to the environmental aspects. This, however, he added, will lead to the reduction of production and the consequent increase of fish imports, which could mean that the EU consumers will in future be running the risk of buying lower-quality products.
In contrast to other speakers, Stephanie Schmidt, WWF Germany, was more appreciative of the Commission proposal. As she said, " the regulatory framework has been simplified, more emphasis is given to the protection of the environment and natural resources and the implementation of recovery and management plans is strongly supported ".
At the end of the hearing David CASA (EPP-ED, MT), who will draft the EP report on the EFF, stressed the importance of a healthy fisheries sector for the future and said that " environment and fisheries do go hand in hand ". According to the MEP, the socio-economic impact of the regulation on the industry should be addressed.
20050819STO00754
EN
1
PHOTO
20050818PHT00435.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
