Euro-Mediterranean Partnership needs to be improved
External relations
2005-09-27 - 11:28
The Euro-Mediterranean Partnership for closer cooperation between the EU and the countries around the Mediterranean basin has not brought the results which were expected at its launch ten years ago, says the Foreign Affairs Committee in a report by Anneli Jäätteenmäki (ALDE, FI) adopted on Monday evening. Nevertheless, MEPs say the partnership remains the appropriate framework for the EU's policy towards the Mediterranean region.
MEPs in the committee are concerned that the partnership has not helped solve conflicts in the Mediterranean region. They also note that "no substantial progress has been achieved in the field of democracy and human rights" and that more progress needs to be made in reducing poverty and bridging the North-South gap. MEPs stress that "political will and a pragmatic vision" are needed more than ever - but the budget should be on a par with the ambitions. Of crucial importance is greater participation of all Mediterranean partner countries in the decision-making process.
A main priority, says the report, is the development of education and vocational training, with specific attention to women and underprivileged groups such as illiterate populations, female students and populations in rural and suburban areas. In order to increase prosperity, the European Investment Bank Facility for Euro-Mediterranean investments should be further developed, with an emphasis on micro-credit facilities. Cooperation should be encouraged in the fight against organised crime and terrorism, while ensuring the respect for human rights. The EU and its Mediterranean partners should also increase their cooperation in the management of migration flows, while maintaining the principle of "non-refoulement" as laid down in the Geneva Convention and addressing root causes as well as negative effects of illegal immigration. On the issue of human rights, the Foreign Affairs Committee said that the clauses suspending Euromed Association Agreements should be invoked in the case of violations of human rights and democratic freedoms.
The EU partner countries in Euromed are Algeria, Egypt, Jordan, Israel, Lebanon, Morocco, the Palestinian Authority, Syria, Tunisia and Turkey.
The report entitled "the Barcelona process revisited" and drawn up by Ms Jäätteenmäki was adopted by the Committee on Foreign Affairs on Monday 26 September. The own-initiative report will be considered by the October II plenary session in Strasbourg.
2005-09-26 Committee on Foreign Affairs in the chair of the Committee on Foreign Affairs Toomas Hendrik Ilves PES EE 20050922IPR00642
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
