New website for European Parliament
Institutions
2005-09-15 - 13:14
With the launch of its new website on 13 September the European Parliament is hoping to communicate more effectively with the people of Europe. The institution took the step of reforming its existing site following a series of reports by MEPs which called for the Parliament to become more intelligible and "closer" to the general public.
Reflecting this mood of encouraging greater openness and transparency in the workings of the EU institutions, Josep Borrell, the President of the Parliament, used his remarks at the official launch to reflect on the present difficulties the EU faces;
Mr Borrell said that "it is obvious that there is a gap between European citizens and the European construct...We must consider the causes of this growing disaffection. It is particularly serious among young people. They are alienated from the EU." He went on to say that one of the principal reasons for this disaffection arises from "communication difficulties between the European institutions and citizens."
The launch took place amongst invited press, guests and parliament employees, many of whom had donned black T-Shirts with slogans advertising the site. One read: "who cares about Europe? I do". The phrase used to promote the site is: "457 million citizens @ one address" - signifying the population of the EU and its elected representatives.
Primarily, the most important task of the new site is to better inform the general public of the role and workings of the Parliament. To this end, the site has been totally redesigned to be more user-friendly with the emphasis on making the site "more dynamic and attractive". It is divided into five separate areas; News, Parliament, your MEPs, Activities and EP live. (For a full description of these please click on the link below to the official press release).
In his closing remarks Mr Borrell warned that a new website was merely a first step. "We are very conscious that the improvement in communication won't be like waving a magic wand," he said. But "today we have taken a first and important step."
20050913STO00296 You’ll find on this page all the material from the communication campaign : wallpapers, pictures, posters and so on.
EN
1
PHOTO
20050913PHT00294.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/ep_products/
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20050908IPR00068 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
