MEPs demand more money for cultural and student exchanges
Culture
2005-09-13 - 18:43
The Culture Committee adopted four major reports on 12 September calling for increased funding from 2007 to 2013 for EU education and cultural exchange programmes. MEPs also recommended some changes in the scope, including the target groups, of these multi-annual programmes. The reports were all adopted under the co-decision procedure by overwhelming majorities.
Lifelong learning
In their vote on Erasmus, Leonardo, Comenius and other sub-programmes that make up the EU Lifelong learning programme for 2007-13, the committee followed the suggestions of rapporteur Doris PACK (EPP-ED, DE), who described the European Commission proposal as "well-designed" while nevertheless calling for more money to cover proposed improvements.
To increase student mobility grants, secondary school mobility, school exchanges and cross-border teacher mobility, the committee backed Ms Pack's call for an additional €980 million for the whole package over and above the multi-annual budget of €13.62 billion proposed by the Commission.
For the Erasmus sub - programme, which promotes student mobility, the committee voted to increase the monthly standard grant from €210 in 2007 to €300 in 2013, topping the Commission's figures of €200 and €250. Ms Pack called it " particularly worrying" that this, the most popular European grant, has remained at €150 per month since 1993 despite rising costs for students living abroad.
The committee also agreed with its rapporteur's proposal to cut back slightly the share of the budget for the Leonardo da Vinci sub-programme, which supports vocational training. Ms Pack regarded the Commission target of 150,000 trainee placements in 2013 as "over-ambitious" and stressed the much higher monthly costs of a Leonardo placement (€3,644) compared to Erasmus (€1,775).
The committee also voted to increase the participation of pupils and teachers in the Comenius sub-programme, which is designed for schools, and to create a new programme ( Comenius-Regio) within Comenius to promote cross-border teacher mobility, especially between adjacent regions. Other amendments focus on simplifying application and grant award procedures, the teaching and learning of official, regional and minority languages as well as two foreign languages, higher grants for disabled participants and support for sign languages and Braille.
Youth in Action
Another programme MEPs are keen to support is Youth in Action , designed to promote active citizenship and mutual understanding among young people across Europe. Instead of the €915 million budget proposed by the Commission, the Culture Committee voted for the figure of €1.128 billion suggested by rapporteur Lissy GRÖNER (PES, DE) on the basis of Parliament's position on the Financial Perspective for 2007-13.
MEPs backed the rapporteur's repeated calls for young people with disabilities to be included on equal terms "so as to prevent any form of discrimination". In view of the success of European Youth Week, the committee voted for this event to become an established part of EU youth policy.
Ms Gröner welcomed the overall thrust of the Commission proposal, saying "It is likely to deliver substantial European added value" and describing the new programme as "significantly simplified and more flexible" .
Culture 2007
Turning to the Culture 2007 programme, the committee supported the proposal by rapporteur Vasco GRAÇA MOURA (EPP-ED, PT) that EU funding should be increased from the figure of €236.5 million for the period 2000-2006 to €600 million for 2007-13. The Commission had suggested €408 million. And while the Commission's figure assumes 8% would be used for administration the Culture Committee wants this cut down to 6%.
Alongside the objectives set out by the Commission (trans-national mobility of cultural players, trans-national circulation of art and intercultural dialogue), MEPs emphasised the importance of support for "cultural heritage of European significance" .
The committee decided to move the funding for "sites of memory" from Culture 2007 to the forthcoming Citizens for Europe programme. "The memory of the victims of Nazi and Stalinist totalitarian regimes should be kept alive as well as preservation of relevant historical sites, museums and archives" , says the committee.
Other amendments focus on simplifying the selection criteria and rules governing grants so as to foster participation by smaller and medium-sized projects. For instance, each multi-annual cooperation network eligible for funding should consist of at least six operators from four countries (instead of six as the Commission proposed) participating in the programme. And for shorter projects three operators from three countries are enough, say MEPs. Lastly, the committee proposes that the name of the programme be changed from Culture 2007 to Culture.
Media 2007
The Media 2007 programme seeks to support the fragmented and under-capitalised European film industry. Its aims include preserving and enhancing Europe's cultural diversity and its cinematographic heritage, better distribution of European films both within and outside the EU and boosting the competitiveness of Europe's film industry. Rapporteur Ruth HIERONYMI (EPP-ED, DE) pointed out that American movies account for 71% of the film market in Europe.
The committee first stressed that the budget of €1.055 billion for 2007-2013 proposed by the Commission was the minimum necessary to achieve the programme's goals. Amendments were then adopted to streamline grant award procedures and facilitate access to loans for SMEs in the film industry, notably for independent productions. MEPs deplored the "almost complete lack of companies specialising in providing loan financing in the audiovisual sector".
"In a Europe of 25 Member States cooperation is increasingly becoming a strategic response to strengthen the competitiveness of the European film industry" , said the Culture Committee, pointing to the increasing importance of co-productions and cross-border projects.
The committee also described digitisation as "a decisive contribution to strengthening the audiovisual sector" and "a central feature of Media 2007" . Lastly, MEPs want to see innovative distribution platforms, more European film festivals and the establishment of a Pier Paolo Pasolini mobility scholarship for young filmmakers.
20050912IPR00211
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
