"Hello Dolly - (the sheep)" for MEPs in Scotland
Industry
United Kingdom
2005-09-29 - 09:31
The weeks and months ahead will see strong interest of MEPs in developments in Scotland, with several delegations due to visit. From 5 to 8 October, the Industry Research and Energy Committee (ITRE) is visiting a series of projects and organisations across Scotland.
The visit will start in Edinburgh at The Royal Society of Edinburgh (RSE). The RSE is Scotland’s National Academy of Science and Letters and provides a forum for informed debate on issues of national and international importance. Its multidisciplinary, peer-elected fellowship of men and women of international standing provides independent, expert advice to key decision making bodies, including Government and Parliament.
The ITRE delegation will then move to the Roslin Research Institute in Midlothian, “birthplace” of Dolly the sheep. The Institute is one of the world's leading centres for animal biotechnology. It has internationally recognised programmes on molecular and quantitative genetics, genomics, early development, reproduction, animal behaviour and welfare and has pioneered methods for the genetic modification and cloning of farm animals.
The delegation will then move north to a tour of the laboratories of Dundee University and visit the Scottish Crop Research Institute. The day will close with a presentation and dinner with representatives of the University of St. Andrews in Fife - Scotland’s oldest University (1411) and the 3 rd oldest in the UK after Oxford and Cambridge.
Next, the delegation will fly to the famous island of Islay in the Inner Hebrides on Scotland’s West Coast. There they will see the advances being made in renewable energy sources with the “Limpet” wave power facility, as well as Scotland’s most famous industry - whisky distilling. Returning back to Edinburgh, MEPs in the delegation will take part in The European Forum for Renewable Energy Sources, in the new Scottish Parliament building, and participate in the 6 th Inter-Parliamentary Meeting on renewable energy and energy efficiency in the HUB.
The ITRE delegation comes to Scotland in advance of the much-anticipated 10 th African Caribbean Pacific-European Union Joint Parliamentary Assembly, taking place in Edinburgh from 19-24 November. Other European Parliament delegations may visit before the end of the UK Presidency.
The ITRE delegation visiting Scotland from 5-8 October 2005 includes the following MEPs:
Ján HUDACKÝ (EPP-ED, Slovakia); Romana JORDAN CIZELJ (EPP-ED, Slovenia); Alejo VIDAL-QUADRAS ROCA (EPP-ED, Spain); Hannes SWOBODA (PES, Austria); Teresa RIERA MADURELL (PES, Spain); Šarūnas BIRUTIS (ALDE, Lithuania); Umberto PIRILLI (UEN, Italy)
20050928IPR00843 European Parliament's Industry, Research and Energy Committee
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/committees/presentation.do?committee=1240&language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
