Reform is key for more growth and jobs
Economic and monetary affairs
2005-09-12 - 13:52
If Europe wants more growth and more jobs, the real solution is structural economic reform. This was the consistent message heard by MEPs in the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee when they questioned Economic and Monetary Affairs Commissioner Joaquín ALMUNIA and European Central Bank Vice-President Lucas PAPADEMOS.
According to Commissioner Almunia, Europe's economic growth rate was lower than that of its major competitors in 2004 and the same outcome is forecast for 2005. "With less growth come fewer jobs and more unemployment - and a weakening of the basis of the European social model we have built up over the years. The root of the problem is not imbalanced public finances - that is far worse in the US and Japan - or high interest rates - they are lower than they have been for 30 years. It is structural shortcomings that need to be tackled above all." He argued that reform of the Stability and Growth pact (the framework for the national budgets of EU and in particular euro-zone Member States) and the re-launch of the Lisbon Strategy (an effort to improve the competitiveness of the European economy in the interests of more growth and jobs, while protecting social rights and the environment) were both part of the solution to the problem. Mr Almunia was speaking on 25 April 2005 at a meeting between the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee and members of national parliaments from across the EU.
Addressing the committee the following day to launch the ECB's annual report, Lucas Papademos said the best way for the central bank to support the Lisbon Strategy was by fulfilling its duty to maintain price stability. It is up to the Member States to tackle economic reform: "Comprehensive structural reforms aimed at increasing flexibility and competition in labour, product and capital markets would significantly improve the prospects for non-inflationary economic growth in the euro area, thereby facilitating the conduct of monetary policy and enhancing its effectiveness," he said .
20050819STO00758 Link to ECB's annual report
EN
1
PHOTO
20050818PHT00433.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.ecb.int/pub/annual/html/index.en.html
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
