Trichet: global impact of hurricane Katrina likely to be limited and temporary
Economic and monetary union
2005-09-14 - 15:13
ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet faced questions on oil prices after hurricane Katrina, on expansion of the euro area and on the row surrounding the Bank of Italy in the latest session of his quarterly "monetary dialogue" with Parliament's Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee. Some MEPs also wanted him to do more to encourage growth and jobs in Europe.
Mr Trichet told MEPs that conditions were in place for economic activity to pick up beyond the short term, though there were downside risks related to higher oil prices, low consumer confidence and concerns about global imbalances. Although it was too early to be clear, he said the global impact of hurricane Katrina was likely to be limited and temporary. On inflation, he said, "there continues to be no significant evidence of upside pressures building in the euro area." However, he warned of potential upside risks relating to oil prices, indirect taxes and administered prices and especially potential second round impacts in wage and price setting behaviour, all of which required ongoing vigilance. According to Mr Trichet, "the pace of fiscal consolidation in many euro area countries remains unsatisfactory," while the efforts under the Lisbon strategy to further open EU markets and simplify the regulatory framework in which business operates had the ECB's full support.
On financial services, the ECB agreed with the Commission's Green Paper that the focus should be on consolidation and consistent implementation of the legislative framework, and in particular the aim for "better regulation." The Eurosystem, he said, supported the Commission's plan to propose a directive on securities clearing and settlement, a system "of fundamental importance to the integration and smooth functioning of financial markets."
A number of MEPs asked about new Member States joining the euro. The ECB President said "All provisions of the treaty must be applied rigorously for entry to the euro area. There is no change to the Maastricht criteria - they must be strictly and rigorously implemented. Indeed, I call on all EU members for rigorous implementation of the new framework of the Stability Pact." He expressed confidence that the ECB's decision making process would adapt to expanded membership without threatening its credibility with the markets.
On the arguments surrounding the governor of the Bank of Italy , Mr Trichet noted that "The ECB is inflexibly attached to the completion of the single market with out any consideration of nationalities." He pointed out that banking surveillance was a matter for national authorities, with the ECB's role being simply "to contribute to the smooth functioning of surveillance systems." There was ongoing dialogue between the ECB and the Bank of Italy. He also pointed out that the ECB had received the Italian government's proposed draft law on the Bank of Italy and would provide its comments in due course. "A limited duration mandate is in line with the European and global consensus," he said, but he reminded MEPs that in analysing a previous reform project, the ECB had argued against applying such a change to the incumbent, if the goal was to preserve the Bank's independence.
Responding to praise for US Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan's emphasis on growth and employment , Mr Trichet said they had different responsibilities in a different environment, but the ECB did make a major contribution to growth and jobs: "Nominal and real interest rates are at levels that would have been considered a dream before the euro was set up. We have been very successful in capturing confidence… this is an extraordinary achievement. This is a necessary but not sufficient condition for growth," he said, indicating that structural reforms were needed.
Pressed for more details on oil prices , he noted that, unlike in the 1970s, current price rises were demand-led, not because of the taps being turned off: "We should avoid the errors of the first oil crisis, when there was a long term effect on our economies. We should not make the producer sector bear the whole burden of price changes - this would burden our economies for many years to come," he said.
On rising prices in the property market and the risk of a bubble bursting, Mr Trichet said that, looking at the euro area as a whole, the ECB was not alarmed at this stage, but that this would need to be monitored closely.
At the beginning of the session, in the presence of Mr Trichet, Pervenche Berès (PES, FR), the chair of the committee, paid tribute to Wim Duisenberg, the former ECB President, who died at the end of July. The committee observed a minute's silence in his memory.
2005-09-14 Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs Chair Pervenche Berès PES FR
20050912IPR00217 The full text of Mr Trichet's opening statement is available via this link to the website of the European Central Bank.
EN
1
LINK
http://www.ecb.int/press/key/date/2005/html/sp050914.en.html
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
