EU to start broadcasting to Belarus
External relations
2005-09-15 - 12:14
Plans to start broadcasting from the EU to Belarus were hotly debated at a Foreign Affairs Committee meeting on Wednesday 14 September which was attended by a representative of the European Commission. A number of MEPs were seriously concerned about the limited funding to be made available for these broadcasts and about the languages to be used.
The Commission has made a call for tender for radio and television broadcasts and the creation of websites targeted specifically at Belarus. MEPs doubted, however, that the money available for the project - €2 million over a period of two years - would be sufficient. Some of them argued that a serious EU broadcasting effort is even more important now that Belarus President Lukashenko is broadcasting to the Belarus minority in eastern Poland. " We don't want another Kosovo on our hands", said Barbara KUDRYCKA (EPP-ED, PL).
Separately, the Commission has signed a contract with Deutsche Welle for the sum of €138,000 to start radio broadcasting to Belarus by November. MEPs stressed that the use of the Russian language for these broadcast ran the risk of being misinterpreted as an endorsement of the "Russification" policy in Belarus. The Commission representative at the meeting assured MEPs that the radio broadcasts would also be in Belarussian but insisted that Russian be used as well as a large part of the Belarus population has Russian as its mother tongue. Another issue for MEPs was the content of the radio broadcasts. They wanted to ensure that radio programmes specifically cover events and developments in Belarus itself.
MEPs also worried that the stringent conditions imposed on companies eligible for providing the broadcasts would exclude smaller organisations, especially in the countries neighbouring Belarus. The Commission representative assured them that the Commission was encouraging smaller organisations to join forces and to tender as consortiums.
A proposal for supporting democratisation and the respect of human rights, not only in Belarus but elsewhere, was put forward by Edward McMILLAN-SCOTT (EPP-ED, UK). He advocated the setting up of a European Democracy Foundation which would be at arm's length from the EU institutions so that it could operate without the " stifling rules imposed by the Commission ". Elmar BROK (EPP-ED, DE) countered this with a proposal to allocate specifically targeted funds to the political groups of the European Parliament, which could then use their own, more informal, channels to support democratisation projects in certain countries. " We will certainly have to discuss this in the weeks to come ", he concluded.
2005-09-13 Committee on Foreign Affairs Chair Elmar Brok EPP-ED DE
20050912IPR00216
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
