EP internet communication strategy steams ahead
Institutions
2005-09-22 - 11:09
"Elegant, simple and innovative," is how one French government website describes the new European Parliament site, which offers information in all 20 official EU languages. "Colourful, easy-to-read; packed with information; accessible; transparent," are a few of the other comments.
"The old site was confusing, visually unappealing and somewhat abstemious with information. The new one...is clearly written, easy to navigate and attractive to look at," UPI's Gareth Harding writes. "The beauty of the parliament's latest campaign is that it is not only clear and catchy but makes a stab at humour."
Most commentators approve the increased ease of finding out about MEPs, welcoming the tools that allow them to check out the details of what their representatives have been doing - including their mandates, speeches to the plenary session and questions to the Commission.
Issues to be tackled
While the new look has been mostly welcomed, some of those used to working with the old site are finding it hard to adapt, but the clear structure of the new site should help them quickly to come to terms with the changes.
Some other issues remain. The lack of a forum for discussion or a space for comments has been bemoaned, but as EP President Josep Borrell pointed out when launching the site, the logistics of managing a space where comments can be made in 20 languages still have to be resolved.
There are also concerns about conformity with WAI (Web Accessibility Standards), guaranteeing access to people with disabilities. About 80% of the site is performing and an expert working on the project promises that future steps will make the "site fully accessible by all European citizens."
The relaunch of the website is only the first step in the EP's internet communication strategy. Further improvements might look less spectacular, but we will keep you updated and your feedback is always welcome.
20050921STO00548 All the campaign supports (banners, posters, Flash animation and so on).
EN
1
PHOTO
20050921PHT00557.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/ep_products/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
