European Parliament wants a strong UN
External relations
2005-09-29 - 14:02
In adopting a joint resolution on the reform of the UN, MEPs reaffirm their commitment to a strong UN, reiterating that genuine multilateralism is the most appropriate tool for solving the challenges, problems and threats faced by the international community.
The House hopes that the Summit outcome will be an important milestone towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals by 2015 and the necessary reform which must be completed successfully in order to ensure that the UN continues to play a leading role in today's international system. Parliament takes note of the commitments stated in the Outcome Document and considers this document to be the working basis for further improvements by the 60th General Assembly of the UN in the various areas at stake.
MEPs deeply regret that the Summit has not issued a further appeal to those donor countries which have not yet formally committed themselves to the goal of allocating 0.7% of their GNI to Official Development Assistance (ODA) by 2015. The House commends the EU for its leading role on this issue and invites it to maintain pressure on all donors to set timetables, which should be monitored. Parliament also welcomes the agreement to provide immediate support for quick impact initiatives (quick wins) to support anti-malaria efforts, education and health care
The House commends the decision to create a Peace-Building Commission to help countries make the transition from war to peace, and recognises that peace-building requires an entirely different set of skills to peace-keeping. MEPs consider that there is a need for regional and global peace-building commissions to develop the necessary skills and capabilities, backed by a support office and a standing fund, thereby raising the UN's profile in crisis and post-conflict areas. Parliament calls on the 60th General Assembly to swiftly implement these provisions. Parliament greatly welcomes the inclusion of the concept of human security in the official UN framework-
MEPs also welcome the recognition of the international community's responsibility to protect populations from genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity, as well as the clear responsibility of each individual state to protect their own citizens from these crimes, including through the prevention of such crimes. The House further underlines the importance of the International Criminal Court as an essential body in the task of prosecuting the perpetrators of any of these crimes.
The House fully endorses the clear condemnation of terrorism by the Summit. Parliament regards as a serious failure, however, the lack of agreement on a comprehensive definition of terrorism and urges the UN member states to rectify this without delay. Finally MEPs deeply regret the Summit's failure to reach agreement on measures for nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament, and insists that work and efforts to make progress on these issues must considerably intensify, first of all ensuring full respect for the existing Treaties, especially the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT).
20050922IPR00582
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
