MEPs call for common code of good administrative behaviour for all EU institutions
Petitions
2005-09-13 - 19:53
The Petitions Committee is recommending that Parliament's plenary approve the European Ombudsman's report on his activities in 2004. In a draft resolution by Manolis MAVROMMATIS (EPP-ED, EL) adopted by a large majority on 13 September, MEPs also call on the EU institutions to adopt a harmonised code of good administrative behaviour.
Through the European Ombudsman, EU citizens can obtain redress for cases of maladministration by Community institutions and bodies. The Ombudsman is elected by the European Parliament in a procedure in which the Petitions Committee plays a central role.
This week's draft resolution welcomes the efforts to give the Ombudsman's work a higher media profile, believing this could help reduce the number of complaints received which fall outside his remit. In 2004, almost 75% of complaints lodged fell outside the Ombudsman's remit as they did not concern a Community institution or body. The current Ombudsman, Nikiforos DIAMANDOUROS, is thus urged to continue his efforts to raise public awareness of his functions and responsibilities.
This year, which marks the tenth anniversary of the establishment of the Ombudsman's office, 3726 complaints were received. This represents a sharp increase on the previous year (+53%), half of the extra cases being accounted for by complaints from citizens of the ten new Member States. The cases of maladministration meriting investigation by the Ombudsman can be categorised as follows: lack of transparency or refusal to provide information (22%), discrimination (19%), avoidable delays (12%), procedural errors (9%), injustice or abuse of power (7%), failure to fulfil obligations (7%), negligence (6%) and errors in law (5%).
The Petitions Committee wants all the EU institutions to interpret as broadly as possible the provisions of Regulation No 1049/2001 governing public access to documents. It also approves of the efforts by the Ombudsman to persuade the institutions to meet shorter deadlines for dealing with this type of complaint.
A common code of conduct for all European institutions
MEPs particularly support the Ombudsman's efforts to provide all Community institutions and bodies with a harmonised "code of good administrative behaviour" and urge the Commission to end the current situation.
In addition, the Petitions Committee calls on the Ombudsman to define more precisely the concept of "maladministration" , drawing up a strict and exhaustive list of institutions and bodies covered and categorically excluding all complaints which fall under the responsibility of the Member States’ authorities.
The resolution also backs a review of the Ombudsman's statute and the extension and strengthening of the system of non-judicial appeal which it says "provides citizens with an alternative to legal action whose decisions and recommendations are not legally binding and do not constitute coercive measures" . The Ombudsman is also called on to seek amicable solutions wherever possible in the cases he deals with.
Finally, MEPs commend the good working relationship developed between the Ombudsman's Office and the Petitions Committee, including the process for the mutual transfer of cases, and they stress that they value the close cooperation established by the European Ombudsman with his national, regional and local counterparts, although they would like to see greater cooperation with the petitions committees of the national parliaments.
2005-09-12 Committee on Petitions Marcin Libicki UEN PL
2005-09-12 Committee on Petitions Marcin Libicki UEN PL
20050909IPR00143
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
