Are you sceptical about the euro?
Euro
2005-09-12 - 10:32
Do you remember January 2002 when the euro was launched as cash? The changeover from the old currencies was truly daunting; 300 million people had a new currency in a matter of weeks. Despite a few glitches, the changeover was smoother than even the most enthusiastic supports of the euro could have wished. However, three years later, how do we feel about it as a currency? Has it forced its way into our affections the way the "old" currencies did?
According to a recent report by the European Parliament some members of the public in the 12 countries of the euro zone "have a negative perception of the euro".
Ominously, the report goes on to state that "this tendency is on the rise". In the last report, 66% of people questioned expressed their support for the currency, that's 11 points down since its introduction in 2002. This has prompted the Parliament to vote overwhelmingly in support of a renewed communication campaign to emphasise what it sees as the benefits of the euro. These include:
• price stability • reduced transaction costs • low mortgage rates • easier travel • historically low interest rates
The man who steered the report through the Parliament, the Dutch liberal MEP Jules Maaten, believes that "the euro is probably one of the most successful European projects ever. Thanks to the euro we have had the longest period of low inflation, low interest rates and monetary stability ever, even if the world has been very turbulent these last few years". Mr Maaten wants the European Central Bank and the European Commission to spearhead the campaign. As well as better communication about the euro, the report also calls for greater scrutiny to be paid to whether the euro zone needs to keep the unloved 1 cent coin and whether the 500 euro note is proving too tempting for fraudsters and money launderers.
This latest initiative comes amid concerns that fiscal indiscipline in some EU member states and the results of the French and Dutch "No" votes to the European constitution have damaged confidence in the euro. Since the launch of the currency perhaps the most damaging aspect has been the perception by consumers, particularly in Germany, that retailers were unfairly taking advantage of the changeover to round up prices.
Learning from this experience, the Estonian government has decided to round taxes down and round government subsidies up. Estonia, along with Lithuania and Slovenia, are frontrunners of the ten new countries that joined the EU in 2004 to change over to the euro. Thus far seven countries have linked their currencies to the euro. They will have to be members for two years "without severe tensions" prior to final examination on whether they are really ready to join the euro. When they do join the single currency, they will join the existing twelve countries of the present euro zone plus the non-EU countries that use the currency for practical reasons - Kosovo, Montenegro, Vatican City, Monaco and San Marino. That will leave only the UK, Sweden and Denmark as EU members who have not joined the euro.
"Feel, look and tilt"
In April of this year the Parliament gave a cautious welcome to moves aimed at improving cooperation between different countries in combating currency fraud. Last year alone the European Central Bank withdrew over 44 million euro from circulation to combat fraud. The problem has been aggravated by high quality digital scanners and photocopiers producing replicas good enough to fool some people. In response to this six states have called for Europol to be named Europe's central authority for anti forgery measures. This view was rejected by the Parliament who voted to recommend that Europol increase cooperation with the existing national authorities charged with combating fraud. If you are concerned about a euro note, the official advice is to feel it, examine it closely and then tilt it to see if the hologram works correctly.
20050819STO00995 Website of the European Central Bank European Commission site on the euro The European Parliament's Committee that deals with the euro.
EN
1
PHOTO
20050819PHT00634.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.ecb.int/ecb/html/index.en.html
EN
3
LINK
http://www.ec.europa.eu/economy_finance/euro/our_currency_en.htm
EN
4
LINK
/committees/econ_home.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
