The Internet as a political tool
Information society
2005-09-13 - 14:43
The second in the series of debates organised by the European Parliament on the effects of the digital society was preceded on Tuesday morning by the official launch of Parliament's new website by its President, Josep Borrell.
Mr Borrell acknowledged that a gap exists between European citizens and the Europe built up over the past 50 years. " One of the reasons for this gap is the difficulty of communication between the citizens and the European institutions ," he said. For this reason the European Parliament has transformed its website into a dynamic tool in 20 languages, which is easy to access and to use. " At a moment when our European project needs a new vision of the future, a vision which evokes new hopes and makes sense to all citizens, we offer a new key to enter the European Parliament. I hope they will like this key and will want to enter this house ," Mr Borrell concluded.
The participants in the second of Parliament's debates explored the effectiveness of the Internet as a tool of political campaigning and the possible formation of new political communities. The use made of the web by French opponents to the EU constitution and the campaign for debt relief of the poorest developing countries were presented as case studies.
Guilhem Fouetillou of the French research group RTGI explained how opponents of the EU constitution made far greater use of the internet than supporters: of the over 250 sites examined dealing with the referendum, 161 were hosted by opponents and only 79 by supporters of the constitution. The opposing sites could be considered to be a community in the sense that they usually referred to links of like-minded sites, whereas the supporters of the constitution were more open, providing links to other sites as well. Fouetillou warned, however, that this "geography" did not correspond to the actual social geography of France. In his opening remarks, Bill Hayton, a journalist of BBC On-line, who led the debate, had also pointed out that those with access to the Internet in fact already form a pre-selected, privileged group and that there would seem to be a disjuncture between the users of the traditional media and the young, technologically savvy users of the net.
Somewhat contradictory were the research results presented by Ann Zimmermann, who is studying political public spheres in Europe on the Internet at the Free University of Berlin. Her conclusions were that the Internet would appear to be a replication of actors in the traditional mass media, which continue to be the largest providers of information on the Internet. By contrast, Martin Gill, who is responsible for the Internet campaign of MakePovertyHistory, set out how the Internet and e-mail was used to engage a wide audience in the political aims of ensuring debt relief, better aid and better trade conditions for the poorest countries. The MakePovertyHistory campaign succeeded in having 650,000 registered supporters, who were not only informed about but also encouraged to take part in events and who were put in touch with each other to discuss issues and help with travel arrangements to large protest events, such as the one in Edinburgh on the eve of the G8 summit.
Marielle De Sarnez, a French member of the European Parliament, who recently presented a resolution on the right to reply to weblogs and on a safer Internet for children, pointed out that during the French referendum campaigns the Internet did provide a forum of debate which the traditional media did not. She was also convinced that without the Internet the French "non" would not have been as overwhelming as it was.
All panellists agreed that as a campaigning tool the Internet was used much more by those opposed to established views than those supporting such views. Gill felt that the web was a good forum for people to express their opinions. The possible unreliability of these views was not a real issue, he felt, as people need not trust only one source but could gather different points of view.
On the question of whether the Internet could be a means to bridge the gap between political institutions and citizens, De Sarnez said the web could never be the only tool to do this. This view was supported by Zimmermann, who said that of those who surf the Internet, only 10% do this to look up political information.
20050912IPR00256
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
