Community railways
Transport
2005-09-28 - 15:50
Male conductor on train
MEPs are pushing for compensation for train travellers, but gave a thumbs down to fines for delayed goods deliveries. They want cash refunds for delayed national and international passengers, but feel fines for the freight sector would increase costs and distort competition. Instead, easier access for new companies would provide a boost, they said. To facilitate mobility in the sector, they also want a European licence for train drivers.
More competition on international AND national railway networks
Parliament gave the green light to more competition on international and national railway networks. MEPs demanded that international passenger services be opened up to competition by 1 January 2008 and national passenger services by 1 January 2012. The Commission had proposed 2010 for international services only. More competition on railway networks in order to improve services is a long-standing demand of a majority in the House. The report on more competition in railway services had been tabled by Georg JARZEMBOWSKI (EPP-ED, D) and is part of the legislative package on revitalising the EU railways, also known as the third railway package.
Towards a compensation system for all train travellers
MEPs had good news for passengers when they voted in favour of the introduction of a compensation system for train travellers. Rapporteur Dirk STERCKX (ALDE, B) had argued that compensation should not only apply to international rail passengers, as the Commission had proposed, but also to national ones. Parliament adopted an amendment proposing the following minimum compensation to be paid to passengers for delays:
- 25% of the fare for a delay of 60 minutes or more;
- 50% for a delay of 120 minutes or more and
- 75% for a delay of 180 minutes or more.
This compensation should be paid no later than one month after the application has been made. MEPs also called for passengers who hold a season ticket and encounter repeated delays or cancellations to receive compensation in the form of free journeys, price reductions or an extension of the period of validity of a season ticket. In adopting a range of amendments, Parliament took the view that the right of persons with a reduced mobility should be fundamentally guaranteed. Therefore railway operators must guarantee accessibility of stations, platforms and means of transport by eliminating all obstacles to boarding, disembarkation and remaining on board.
Certificates for train crews
A less controversial part of the third railway package was the report by Gilles SAVARY (PES, F) on a system of certificates for train drivers and other onboard crews and their harmonisation at Community level in order to meet professional, medical and linguistic standards. This report was adopted with an overwhelming majority.
Rail freight compensation system rejected
Finally, Parliament rejected the Commission's proposal for a regulation for rail freight compensation. Adopting the report drafted by Roberts ZILE (UEN, LV), MEPs said that a compensation system would not improve standards in the industry. They also argued that existing international legislation was already imposing strict enough rules on rail transport. Rather than imposing more regulations and fines, the emphasis should be on easier market access for new rail companies so as to increase competitiveness.
The Council of Transport Ministers will now consider the amended third railway package and come forward with a common position.
20050921IPR00565
EN
1
PHOTO
20050926PHT00704.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
