Medicines for children: a European hope
Public health
2005-09-10 - 11:00
Your child has a sore throat and you want to treat it? What could be simpler? All you need is a glass of water, a pill prescribed by your doctor and a knife. Cut the pill in half or in quarters with the knife, as it’s almost bound to be an adult dose. Indeed, in Europe, less than half the medicines given to children are intended for them. A regulation on paediatric medicines, currently awaiting a decision by the European Parliament, may change this situation.
A child who never falls ill? You must be joking! All parents must learn how to handle tablets and capsules, soluble powders and ready-made syrups, suppositories, drops and ointments. Most of these products are intended for adults. What dose is appropriate for a child? Few medicines are sold with measuring devices suitable for children. Depending on the child’s age and the type of medicine, a whole arsenal is needed: small and large spoons, with and without dispensers, syringes and pipettes calibrated in kilograms and millilitres, bottles for dissolving the contents of a capsule, etc.
Children are not small adults
Life is not easy for parents who, like the sorcerer’s apprentice, frequently have to stand in for the pharmacist. But this is not the main problem. A child’s body is not the same as that of an adult; it has a different metabolism. It is not enough to change the dose of a medicine according to the patient’s weight. There is a risk of overdosing or underdosing. Medicines do not necessarily act in the same way in adults as in children. As children grow, they develop in terms not only of their weight and height but also of the functioning of their organs and minds. Pre-term new-born infants, term new-born infants (0 to 27 days), infants and toddlers (28 days to 23 months), children (2 to 11 years) and adolescents (12 to 16/18 years) – at all these stages the organism responds differently. It therefore seems obvious that children need to have medicines developed specially for them.
Why not accept the obvious?
A hundred million individuals, or one fifth of the population of the 25 EU Member States, are under 16. So why do doctors and pharmacists prescribe and supply medicines that have not been developed specifically for them? It’s not a case of incompetence; most often it’s because these medicines do not exist. There are many reasons for this.
Firstly, many medicines developed for adults need to be adapted before they can be given to younger patients. Children under the age of six cannot be given large capsules or tablets; medicines must be administered in liquid or smaller solid forms. Then, before they can be sold in pharmacies, substances developed in the laboratory have to be tested. This is required by law prior to marketing. However, once they are recognised as being specifically for treating children, additional tests are needed to take account of this. And extra testing means extra costs when placing the product on the market. Finally, it would be difficult to test the influence of a substance on the child’s organism without involving children in the testing. But, of course, clinical tests on children raise ethical dilemmas.
The doubts cannot be left unanswered. Health, especially that of children, is a priority in its own right. When discussing costs, however, we must not lose sight of the burden of ill-suited therapies on health budgets. And as for the ethical questions, can we seriously argue that prescribing adult medicines to children is more ethical than controlled tests covered by appropriate regulations? Some claim that prescriptions of this kind amount to uncontrolled experiments with an unknown impact on children’s health. Finally, we should not forget children suffering from chronic diseases, condemned to take ill-suited medicines for years and to suffer the consequences for the rest of their lives.
A new deal
The example of the United States shows that it is possible to find a way out. Since 1998 an American law (the Pediatric Rule) has required laboratories to file a dossier to apply for authorisation to market drugs developed for children as well as for adults. The draft Regulation on medicinal products for paediatric use, presented by the European Commission to Parliament and the Council, aims to do the same. It establishes a Paediatric Committee responsible, among other things, for assessing needs for medicines for children.
In addition to its present responsibilities, the European Medicines Agency (EMEA), located in London, will look at clinical testing in children, using a database of studies already carried out, mainly to avoid such testing being repeated unnecessarily. The members of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety showed broad support for this draft during a vote on the report by Françoise Grossetête (EPP-ED, FR) last July. To facilitate public paediatric research, Mrs Grossetête is proposing that a special European fund be set up. She believes that pharmaceutical research and development in Europe requires coordinated action by Member States, since no single country has the necessary capability.
20050819STO01005 Official site of the European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products (EMEA), London
EN
1
PHOTO
20050818PHT00179.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://europa.eu/agencies/community_agencies/emea/index_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
