The Internal Market: mission still unaccomplished
Free movement of goods
2005-09-16 - 14:15
INFO-Globalisation-01
Members of the Internal Market Committee met with experts and Commission Vice-President Günter Verheugen at a public hearing on Thursday to tackle questions on the state of, and future plans for, internal market legislation. What began as a debate on implementation and regulation became a discussion on the need for reform. Speaking about the REACH dossier now before Parliament, Mr Verheugen told MEPs: "this is the sort of legislation the Commission will never file again."
Referring to the Commission's campaign to scrap legislative proposals that no longer have a raison d'être , Arlene McCARTHY (PES, UK) opened the hearing by noting that the EU needs to look seriously at how to improve legislation in the area of the internal market. Pointing to Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso's recent remarks - Mr Barroso referred to a number of laws drafted by the Commission as "absurd" - Mrs McCarthy asked: "Why do we have absurd laws?" [...] "How did we get here?"
Part of the problem, argued Raymond COINTE, of a Commission working group on better regulation, is lack of consultation with stakeholders. Member States, he maintained, do not want to see the systematic imposition of a Brussels-based system without having domestic actors involved or consulted. He said "We want to ensure that new legislation is well thought out [...] We should not stop ourselves from casting a critical eye on legislation that is pointlessly complex or otherwise harmful for companies." Lorenzo Allio from the European Policy Centre argued that the legislative process should also be accompanied by an upgrade of the quality, credibility and utility of available scientific advice.
Speaking about the Commission's plans to do away with some proposals currently in the pipeline, Mr VERHEUGEN made it clear that the Commission "wants to filter out those projects that will have a negative impact on competitiveness, economic growth and employment" . On a parallel track, the EU executive will aim to simplify existing regulations: such simplification, noted the Commissioner, "is not a question of weakening or diluting the acquis but of providing simplified and clearer legislation" . Parliament, Mr Verheugen noted, stands to play a significant part in this process: as the simplification campaign will require new legal acts, cooperation between the Commission and the EP needs to be guaranteed from the outset.
Malcolm HARBOUR (EPP-ED, UK) appealed to the Commission for better analysis and impact assessment during the early phases of drafting legislation. If we did better analysis work on dossiers like REACH or the services directive from the very beginning, he contended, we would have a better end product much sooner. Mr Verheugen, in response, outlined his initial doubts about REACH, noting that he had seen the regulation as "a clear example of legislation that is too complicated and too ambitious, too lacking in transparency." REACH, which has set off an unprecedented lobbying campaign and given rise to thousands of amendments in several EP committees, "is the sort of legislation the Commission will never file again" , he said.
Enforcement not rigorous enough
Problems in optimising the potential of the Internal Market arise not only with the legislation itself but with the lack of compliance and enforcement among EU members, argued many participants. "We do not have systematic monitoring on compliance in the Member States" , noted Wim VOERMANS of the University of Leiden. Annual reports on monitoring application of Community law in the EU-25, he noted, do not explicitly score, analyse or compare compliance or enforcement. Perhaps, Prof. Voermans wondered, there should be an EU institute charged with this - after all, counting on the goodwill of the EU members themselves to deliver sound monitoring is risky. How can one expect countries to report, if they are not forced to do so, that they have enforcement problems? We have a big debate on better regulation and on simplification, he continued, "but where is the big debate on enforcement" ? According to Annette DRAGSDAHL, a Danish specialist, it is the sheer scale of available legislation which hampers monitoring activity: "market surveillance authorities do not have a chance to cope with this amount of documents" .
As another speaker saw it, barriers to tapping the full potential of the Internal Market also lie elsewhere. " Full benefits of the Internal Market cannot be had" when transitional rules are still in effect for the free movement of workers from the new Member States, argued Peter GOTTFRIED from the Hungarian Ministry of Integration. In this light, he noted, the services directive to be voted on by Parliament is of "fundamental importance" . Alluding to Mr Gottfried's comments on monitoring transposition and compliance of EU legislation in Hungary, Mr Harbour claimed that the EU should see what it can learn from the experience of the new Member States "before we lose [their] institutional memory" .
Mrs McCarthy, who organised the hearing, is to draft an own-initiative report on the basis of its findings.
2005-09-14 Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection Chair Phillip Whitehead PES UK
Public Hearing on Implementation, impact and consequences of internal market legislation
20050912IPR00218
EN
1
PHOTO
20050822PHT01291.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
