Briefing, 26-29 September 2005 - Strasbourg
Institutions
2005-09-23 - 13:29
The second Strasbourg session of September sees a busy agenda for MEPs. Parliament will officially welcome Observers from Bulgaria and Romania. The 35 Romanians and 18 Bulgarians will be able to participate in parliamentary committee meetings but not vote or address the plenary. Both countries are expected to join the EU 1 January 2007.
On Monday evening, before Parliament begins to tackle its legislative work, President Josep Borrell will make a statement on the future of Europe. This will be followed by reaction from the political group leaders. The issue of the Commission's decision to withdraw legislative proposals is also likely to be raised. President Borrell will also hold a press conference in Strasbourg on Tuesday 27 September at 12.15.
On Monday, MEPs will debate the 25th anniversary of Solidarity (Solidarnosc) and its message for Europe. The subsequent resolution is expected to call for 31 August to be marked as Liberty and Solidarity Day.
On Tuesday, the plenary session opens with the debate on procedures in Member States for granting and withdrawing refugee status. Parliament will vote on the question of data retention for the purpose of combating crime, including terrorism. The Civil Liberties Committee is recommending rejection of the initiative on data retention as sizeable doubts remain on the choice of the legal basis and the proportionality of the measures. France, the United Kingdom, Ireland and Sweden submitted the proposal on data retention. Also on Tuesday, MEPs will debate the legislative package on how to improve the EU's railways (known as the third railway package). The Transport Committee wants international passenger services to be opened up to competition by 1 January 2008 and national passenger services by 1 January 2012.
On Wednesday, Parliament will discuss the controversial issue of the opening of accession negotiations with Turkey which was a feature of the recent German election campaign. Also on Wednesday, the Commission and Council will make statements on oil dependency and oil prices, reform of the UN and on Belarus. The House is set to adopt resolutions on all of these matters. MEPs will also debate EU-India relations. The Foreign Affairs Committee is backing a new strategic partnership and calls for extra funding for its implementation.
Ari VATANEN (EPP-ED, FR), a former World Rally Car Champion, will lead the debate on the important issue of how to reduce the number of road accident victims in the EU. The own-initiative report aims at improving and strengthening the proposal, in particular with regard to young road users and their education, vulnerable road users and the introduction of cost-effective intelligent safety systems.
Thursday opens with a Commission Statement on the textile industry given the recent EU agreement with China. Caroline LUCAS (Greens/EFA, UK) will present her report on prospects for trade relations between the EU and China. The session will end as usual with three debates and resolutions on human rights in the world (see below).
Changes to the agenda
Parliament's Conference of Presidents met on Thursday 22 September and adopted the final draft agenda for the September II session with a number of changes to the previous version. These are as follows:
The report from Bert Doorn (EPP-ED, NL) on statutory audit of annual accounts will now be debated on Monday evening. The second item on Tuesday morning will now be a statement from the Commission on the EU/USA agreement on wine production.
Votes without debate on Tuesday will now also include a report from Stefano Zappalà (EPP-ED, IT) on public tendering procedures and from Klaus-Heiner Lehne (EPP-ED, DE) on the request for the lifting of Marios Matzakis's parliamentary immunity, along with the final vote on the report by Alexander Nuno Alvaro (ALDE, DE) on communications data retention.
The reports from Arlene McCarthy (PES, UK) on the European Payment Order, by Paolo Costa (ALDE, IT) on the EC/Azerbaijan air services agreement and by Johan Van Hecke (ALDE, BE) on the production of pharmaceuticals for countries facing serious health problems have all been postponed to a future session.
The regular human rights debates at the end of the session will deal with Nepal, Uzbekistan and Tunisia.
20050923STO00660 Briefing, 26-29 September 2005 - Strasbourg
EN
1
PHOTO
20050923PHT00688.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20050919BRI00405 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
