Human rights in Nepal, Tunisia and Vojvodina
Human rights
2005-09-29 - 17:55
As is customary, the plenary session ended with debates on human rights. Resolutions were adopted on Tunisia, Nepal and Vojvodina.
Tunisia
In its resolution on Tunisia, Parliament welcomes the significant economic and social progress made in Tunisia, including in the areas of education and training, health and social security, and expresses its hope that this progress will be accompanied by similar advances in the areas of the strengthening of democracy, the rule of law, human rights, in particular freedom of expression and association, and judicial independence, which are part of the Barcelona Process acquis. It also hopes that the political dialogue conducted between the EU and Tunisia in the context of the association agreement will continue to play a key role in promoting and improving human rights.
MEPs express their concern at the case of Maître Abbou and call for his immediate release. They also call on the Tunisian authorities to provide all the requisite explanations concerning the case of the Zarsis Internet-users and to allow the Tunisian Human Rights League (LTDH), the Union of Tunisian Journalists (SJT) and the Association of Tunisian Magistrates (AMT) to carry on their activities freely and to hold their congresses.
Parliament expresses its concern at the lack of progress towards the release of EU funding intended to provide financial support for the projects undertaken by the Tunisian Human Rights League (LTDH) and the IMED\AFTURD project on positive action for women's rights of citizenship and equal opportunities in the Maghreb, the project undertaken by Santé Sud and the modernisation plan for the justice system. It calls on the Tunisian Government to take immediate action to release the EU funding intended for the above-mentioned projects and rapidly to reach agreement on the modernisation plan for the justice system.
MEPs call on the Council and Commission to work to improve the management of projects under the MEDA programme and EIDHR and urges the Commission to draw up the measures which will have to be taken if no progress is made towards the release of blocked funds. They also urge the Council and Commission to step up their political dialogue with Tunisia, which is based on mutual understanding and respect and has the aim of encouraging democracy, respect for human rights, the rule of law and good governance, by calling for the establishment of a fully operational EU-Tunisia Human Rights Subcommittee to discuss the overall human rights situation and, in particular, individual cases.
Nepal
In the resolution on Nepal, Parliament welcomes the ceasefire declaration by the Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist) and the first steps by the seven-party alliance to start a political process to resolve the armed conflict. It calls for an indefinite extension of the Maoist ceasefire and for King Gyanendra to reciprocate the ceasefire and engage in constructive talks with political groups, which should include the Maoist rebels, with a view to restoring democratic processes in Nepal.
It call for urgent action by the Nepalese authorities with a view to the upcoming Troika visit and asks them to cooperate at these meetings to enable a fruitful discussion to take place, with a view to furthering the peace process and reinstating democracy, with the guidance and encouragement of the international community. MEPs call on King Gyanendra to guarantee the full sovereignty of parliamentary democratic authorities. They ask for the international community to establish a Contact Group, made up of Nepal’s key partners and international organisations (the EU, the US, India and the UN), to provide coordinated international action with regard to Nepal. They also propose that the European Parliament appoint a special rapporteur to monitor the situation. Parliament welcomes the UN initiative of deploying a Special Rapporteur and a UN Office of Human Rights in Nepal, which will carefully monitor the human rights situation and calls for a follow-up to the 2002 London International Conference, to be organised by the Contact Group of key partners, which should set out the principles and values needed to underpin a peace process in Nepal and bring together all major players from the international community, as well as King Gyanendra, the Maoist rebel groups and the main political parties.
MEPs call on the Council and the Member States for suspension of military aid to continue. They ask that all aid to Nepal be monitored and that smart sanctions be imposed in order to maintain pressure on the royal government to restore democratic governance and explore all avenues to peace talks. They call on the Commission and the Member States to scrutinise closely all development assistance to Nepal and to make sure that it serves its prime purpose of poverty alleviation and addresses the underlying causes of conflict in the country.
MEPs note that municipal elections are to be held in April 2006. The House calls for parliamentary elections to be held at the same time. Parliament calls for the EU to send an election observation mission to monitor these elections, MEPs calls for all political parties to be able to participate fully in the elections. They strongly condemn violence in all forms and by all parties. They stress that basic human rights and freedoms must be upheld in Nepal, and therefore ask that both the King and the Maoists sign human rights accords to curb abuses. They note the release of some political prisoners, but remain deeply concerned that other political leaders, students and human rights activists are still being detained in prison.
Parliament stresses that any restrictions on media freedom should be lifted immediately and that all political prisoners in detention should be either released or charged. It asks the King to provide rehabilitation for the 30 000 Kapilvastu villagers displaced by violent conflict.
Finally, Parliament calls firmly once again on the Nepalese Government to re-establish the Tibetan Refugee Welfare Office (TRWO) in Kathmandu and to allow the representative office of the Dalai Lama to resume operations in providing relief services to Tibetan refugees as an implementing partner of the UNHCR.
Vojvodina
In its resolution on Vojvodina, adopted with 88 votes in favour, none against and 2 abstentions, Parliament expresses its deep concern at the repeated breaches of human rights and the lack of law and order in that province. It calls on the authorities in the Republic of Serbia and the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro to acknowledge these violent acts as criminal acts according to the legislation in force, and insists on the importance of immediate and effective action, so that similar events are not left unremedied and are prevented in the future. Parliament intends to continue its monitoring of the situation in Vojvodina, in particular with regard to the content and principles of the Stability and Association Agreement, requesting regular consultations with the Commission and Council during this procedure.
MEPs support the initiative taken by its Inter-parliamentary Delegation for relations with the countries of South-East Europe for a public hearing on the minority and political situation in Vojvodina. They reaffirm their willingness to use their budgetary powers both to assist and to bring pressure to bear on Serbia-Montenegro, in order to encourage respect for fundamental human rights and freedoms, including minority rights.
Parliament calls on the authorities in the Republic of Serbia and the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro to reinstate the autonomy Vojvodina enjoyed until 1990 and to reinstate the real powers of the regional parliament of Vojvodina in the field of education and the media, so as to enable the regional parliament to develop adequate policies in this multi-ethnic region.
They urge the Commission, the Council and the High Representative to monitor closely developments in Vojvodina, paying closer attention to the high security risk which the harassment of minorities in Vojvodina represents and calls, therefore, for EU monitors (EUMM) to be sent to the province.
Parliament finally reminds the Government of the State Union of Serbia and Montenegro and the Government of Serbia that the principles of liberty, democracy, respect for human rights, fundamental freedoms, the founding elements of the Stabilisation and Association process and the rule of law are prerequisites for the European Parliament's assent to the conclusion of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement and any future partnership with the European Union in general.
20050926IPR00726
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
