MEPs debate current problems relating to immigration
Immigration
2005-10-12 - 18:09
The first debate of the session was on current issues relating to immigration policy. This gave MEPs the chance to air their views on the recent developments on the EU's borders at Ceuta and Melilla in Spain, the situation on the Italian island of Lampedusa and in Malta, as well as wider issues of migration
Douglas ALEXANDER , the UK's Europe Minister, spoke for the Council. He said the unprecedented level of illegal migration across the Mediterranean had sharply brought into focus the problem of managing migration flows. The countries on the Mediterranean faced a disproportionate burden in dealing with this. He did not directly comment on the situation in Ceuta, Melilla, Malta or Lampedusa, instead calling for a firm but fair approach which meets Europe's international commitments. Mr Alexander spoke of progress made by the EU in developing common standards on asylum and immigration, and joint action to improve border controls. Cooperation was also essential with source and transit countries, and the EU was providing substantial technical and financial support. A readmission agreement had been reached with Russia and progress was being made on the same subject with Morocco. He highlighted progress in wider discussions with the African Union and through the Euro-Med Barcelona process, and stressed the improving contacts with Libya on immigration matters. He also spoke about developing regional protection programmes, allowing refugees to settle and integrate closer to their countries of origin. " Public support for managed migration and protection of migrants depends on firm action against illegal immigration and the organised crime which often accompanies it ," he said.
Commissioner Ján FIGEL, speaking on behalf of Vice-President Franco FRATTINI , recalled that since 1999 and the Tampere Summit, the European Commission had taken a balanced view on immigration which was further built on with The Hague declarations. The Commissioner recalled that the Commission, on 1 September 2005, had published its position on how to improve the status of legal migrants in the EU. The Commission, he said, was also working on how to deal more effectively with illegal immigrants whilst preserving human rights and civil liberties. The Commission, Mr Figel announced, would come forward before the end of the year with its action plan on legal migrants.
Turning to the tragic events in Ceuta and Melilla, the Commission, he said, was preparing a comprehensive response and Vice President Frattini had already sent a technical mission to Spain and Morocco to fully assess the situation. Commissoner Frattini, he said, would be appearing on Thursday at the European Parliament's Civil Liberties Committee to further explain the Commission's position. Mr Figel recalled that Mr Frattini could not participate in the debate as he was at the Justice and Home Affairs Council in Luxembourg.
Mr Figel said that a comprehensive approach was needed and that building fences was not enough. It was also important to examine reception centres in several Member States so as to ensure they provide adequate standards. Finally, Mr Figel welcomed that Parliament would be sending further delegations to check conditions of reception centres and welcomed the recent visit to the centre in Lampedusa.
Political Group Speakers
Speaking for the EPP-ED group, Ewa KLAMT (DE) said the images from Ceuta and Melilla were terrible, but they were just the tip of the iceberg. There were invisible influxes too, with eastern European regions also having larger numbers of illegal immigrations. She called for action on the root causes of the continuing high immigration pressure. " Transporting people into deserts is inhumane and a signal of capitulation in our policy ." There was no single solution for the 4.6 million people who, according to the UNHCR, were fleeing their homes. The EU needs agreements with countries of origin and transit, but all the issues needed to be resolved together.
Martine ROURE (FR) spoke for the Socialist group, drawing attention to the human dramas on the borders of Europe. There had been alarming information from Lampedusa and many had been moved by the abandonment or asylum seekers in the deserts of Morocco. Men, women and children were fleeing misery and violence in their own countries, and our policies were unable to meet the challenge, while respecting human dignity as demanded by Article I of the Charter of Fundamental Rights. " We must work to consolidate peace and eliminate poverty. This problem will not be solved until there is a fair distribution of resources. Fortress Europe is a chimera, only action for peace and security will be effective."
The leader of the ALDE group, Graham. WATSON (UK), said thousands of people were massing just fifteen kilometres south of his Gibraltar constituency, suffering hunger, disease and exploited by criminal gangs. " Now they are dying at the fence separating poverty and prosperity, dying in the desert. It is like a scene from Bible studies, but it needs political action to solve it ." He said Africa was Europe's backyard and we could not " shut the gates of mercy ." These events upset our cost calculation that inequality could be maintained without cost, he said. " The poor vote with their feet. Either we accept their produce or we will have to accept their migrants ." All this showed the importance of getting a wider consensus on economic policy in the Doha round at Hong Kong in a few weeks time.
Kathalijne BUITENWEG (NL) for the Greens/EFA group agreed with much of Mr Watson what had said and underlined the dramatic nature of the problem. She said it was important to examine the Algeria/Morocco border area as that was the area where many migrants were being left. She criticised the conditions that migrants had to suffer whilst being deported and questioned the legality of such deportations.
Giusto CATANIA (IT) for the GUE/NGL group said it was hypocritical for the EU to talk about migration while it was building barriers. He said that many migrants were in fear of their lives and it was wrong to talk about free movement people in Europe whilst many countries were building barbed- wire fences. He criticised both the Italian and Spanish governments for their positions on dealing with migrants and in particular the decision of the Italian government to send migrants back from the reception centre in Lampedusa. He also criticised the EU's position towards Libya.
Mario BORGHEZIO (IT), for the IND/DEM group, on the other hand, said that it was necessary to close Europe's borders in order to reduce the incentive for people traffickers to operate. He said that he had many people describe the Lampedusa reception centre as " too clean " and said that the EU should pay tribute to the Italian government for the money it had spent on the reception centre.
Romano LA RUSSA (IT) for the UEN group stated that illegal immigration was a European-wide problem that needed a European response and that appropriate resources should be dedicated to solving the problems. He therefore called for more money for the boosting of the European refugee fund and for the patrolling of the EU's external borders. He also stated that more money needed to be spent on upgrading reception centres.
Frank VANHECKE (BE), a non-aligned MEP said that Spain and other European countries were responsible for the current crisis. He said the governments pampered too much to migrants' needs and this acted as a magnet to others " trying to seek their fortune ". He also that more should be done in the country of origin and a policy of mandatory return should be considered.
Responses to the debate
Responding to the debate for the Council, Douglas Alexander stated clearly that it was unacceptable for migrants to be abandoned in the desert, and that this underlined the need for cooperation with and assistance for third countries on migration matters. He agreed with speakers who had stressed the importance of Africa to Europe, and spoke of his pride at Europe's achievements in increasing support for Africa both before and at the Gleneagles G8 summit and in the progressive agenda of the UN summit in New York. He said comprehensive engagement with Libya was the best way to deal with its human rights record. Finally, he repeated that this was a problem for Europe as a whole, for its neighbours and for sub-Saharan Africa, not just Italy, Spain and Malta. Long term partnership with third countries was where the solution lay. He was pleased Europe was beginning to engage his collective weight in cooperation with countries of origin and transit.
Commissioner Figel in his response to the debate said that the issue of immigration would be an issue for "today, tomorrow and the days after". It was closely linked to development and external relations issues. He recalled that migration had several causes and the aim of the EU was to address these causes. Europe had become over the last 60 years a more "attractive place." Commissioner Figel underlined the importance of mainstreaming of human rights in other areas of relations with third countries. He recalled that today, the Commission, had launched its new policy for Africa and underlined that the EU gave 60% of total development aid to Africa.
20051012IPR01374
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
