Competitiveness the priority for 2006 budget
Budget
2005-10-07 - 10:16
MEPs had to vote on around 800 amendments
The Budgets Committee this week sent a clear message about Parliament's ambitions for the EU when it voted at first reading to restore much of the 2006 budget cut by the Council. Areas set to benefit include research, education and youth programmes, which were reduced by the Council in July, as well as external policy.
"This budget is important because it acts as a bridge to the next financial perspective", said Janusz LEWANDOWSKI (EPP-ED, PL), who chairs the Budgets Committee. "The funding of European policies in 2006 could, depending on the outcome of negotiations on the next financial perspective, have a major impact on 2007. An ambitious draft budget for next year is thus doubly justified".
The general rapporteur on the budget, Gianni PITELLA (PES, IT) believed the Budgets Committee had done its duty to the public. "We have upped the funding for policies related to the Lisbon strategy, with the emphasis on research and education. This reflects the public's wishes as we think that these headings, which were cut by the Council, should receive more generous funding". With this vote, he went on, "we have sent a firm signal to the Council about the policies for which extra funding must be found at the conciliation in November if we are to wind up the 2006 budget procedure successfully and coherently".
A shot in the arm for the Lisbon strategy
MEPs want to add no less than €200 million in payment appropriations to a range of budget headings for the Lisbon strategy which the Council reduced at first reading. The main boosts to competitiveness include increases for programmes to support small and medium-sized companies but above all for the 6th framework research programme. The payments for education programmes are also increased, by €35 million for Socrates, €20 million for Leonardo da Vinci and €3 million for e-learning.
Another key feature of the vote is the funding allocated to the European Commission's information policy. MEPs voted for more resources for the debate on the future of Europe, public information via the media and the euro. They tied this funding to one condition: the Commission must first publish its White Paper on information and communication policy. Parliament also wants an explanation for the Commission's underspending of its information budget in 2005.
EU external policy: in search of a solution
A heading which causes problems year after year is "external action" (support for projects outside the EU's borders). Here the Budgets Committee wants to exceed the available funding ceiling, partly to boost its traditional priorities such as regional programmes and promoting human rights around the world.
To finance more recent priorities - such as the reconstruction of Iraq (€200 million for 2006) and tsunami-hit regions (€180 million) plus expenditure linked to the EU's international commitments - the committee proposes exploring all options available under the interinstitutional agreement linked to the financial perspective. Any agreement on extra expenditure must be reached at the negotiations with the Council ahead of the second reading of the 2006 budget.
On other budget categories, the Budgets Committee is keen to raise payments for structural measures (the financial basis of regional policy). This increase partly takes account of the forecasts of the Member States' (40%), who have already announced that the funding levels proposed for 2006 will be inadequate. As to the pre-accession strategy, MEPs suggested no changes in the funding for Turkey (€470 million in commitments, €155 in payments). Lastly, MEPS adopted an amendment which aims to scrap the billion euro subsidy for tobacco growers; a part of the money saved should be used for EU anti-smoking campaigns, according to the Budgets Committee.
The full Parliament will examine the first-reading budget amendments at its plenary session in Strasbourg later this month (debate 26 October, vote the next day).
The Budgets Committee's vote on the 2006 draft budget has not been completed. An update of this press release will be publshed next week together with a table of figures.
2005-10-03 Committee on Budgets In the chair of the Committee on Budgets Janusz Lewandowski EPP-ED PL Committee on Budgets General rapporteur on 2006 budget Giovanni Pittella PES IT
20050929IPR00910 The full set of documents relating to the 2006 budget is available from the site of the Budgets Committee.
EN
1
PHOTO
20051005PHT01131.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/comparl/budg/budg2006/2006_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
