Summary of various debates and results of votes from Brussels plenary (12-13 October 2005)
Institutions
2005-10-14 - 12:55
12-13 October 2005
Guaranteeing the highest standards of university education
MEPs debate current problems relating to immigration
Action needed to tackle poverty among women
MEPs urge an end to persecution of Ethiopian opposition
Parliament urges Iran to restart talks with UK, France and Germany
20051013BKG01429
Opening of the Session
Parliament voted 189 votes in favour, 157 against with 10 abstentions to invite both Commission President Barroso and Commissioner for Internal Market and Services, Charlie McCreevy, to appear before Parliament this session. The request was put forward by the Socialist Group and supported by the Greens/EFA and EUL/NGL groups following alleged comments made by Commissioner McCreevy on the "compatibility of the Swedish social model with the European model." The ALDE and UEN groups opposed the motion whereas the EPP-ED group would have favoured that only Mr McCreevy come before Parliament.
Minute of silence for victims of the earthquake in South Asia and Hurricane in Guatemala
EP Vice-President Alejo VIDAL-QUADRAS ROCA (EPP-ED, ES) underlined the grief felt due to the tragedies of the earthquake in Pakistan as well as Hurricane Stan which hit Central America. The earthquake, he recalled, had caused thousands of deaths, in particular in Kashmir. He also recalled that Parliament's President Josep BORRELL immediately expressed the Parliament's solidarity to the authorities concerned. He underlined that the EU had responded quickly to both tragedies offering aid for reconstruction.
Minute of silence for Jürgen Zimmerling
Parliament also held one minute of silence for Jürgen Zimmerling who died on 8 October. Mr Zimmerling was a Member in both the previous and current Parliament and he served on the Committee on Development and on the Delegation for Relations with the Gulf States, including Yemen.
Guaranteeing the highest standards of university education
MEPs approved a legislative report aiming to guarantee the quality of higher education in the EU and encouraging the mutual recognition of national evaluation systems. The issue at stake is extremely important. Knowledge is fundamental to European society. Students from Europe and elsewhere must be certain that the education they receive in the EU is of the highest quality.
Parliament approved a package of 18 compromise amendments to the Commission proposal of 30 September 2004 on ensuring the quality of university education. The compromise amendments were brokered by rapporteur Ljudmila NOVAK (EPP-ED, SI) in talks with Council and Commission ("informal trialogue") after her report had been adopted by the Education and Culture committee on 30 August.
The deal aims at concluding the co-decision dossier in first reading. Parliament agrees with the Commission proposal that "there is still a need to improve the performance of European higher education", adding that this particularly applies to quality.
A Council Recommendation from 1998 called for quality assurance systems to be based on a series of essential features, including evaluation of programmes or institutions through internal assessment, external review and involving the participation of students, publication of results and international participation.
More needs be done to make higher education in Europe a more trustworthy brand, not only for European students but also for students from other continents seeking a higher education in Europe. To achieve this goal the Commission is proposing an updated Recommendation to encourage and facilitate the concept of "mutual recognition" in higher education. In addition, the recommendation should act as a tool, which encourages the creation of European quality assurance systems and assessments. The adoption of the regulation would give a strong impulse to the establishment of a coherent European system of quality assurance in higher education and would also enhance quality, facilitate recognition of qualifications and promote student mobility.
A common set of general standards and guidelines for quality assurance in the European Higher Education Area, as proposed by the European Network for Quality Assurance in Higher Education (ENQA), was adopted by Ministers of Education from 45 countries during their meeting in Bergen, Norway on 20 May 2005 in the context of the Bologna process.
Instead of being required, as the Commission proposed, quality assurance or accreditation agencies should now be encouraged by Member States to be independent in their assessments. For assessment purposes, the agencies should apply common features of quality assurance agreed in Bergen, "in such a way as to protect and promote diversity and innovation".
In addition to agencies and universities, representatives of national authorities together with social partners are encouraged to set up a European Register of Quality Assurance and Accreditation Agencies "based on national review".
For licensing purposes, the proposal calls on Member States to enable universities to choose an agency from the Register. However, MEPs insist on compatibility with national legislation or permission by national authorities. MEPs also demand to delete a call on Member States to accept the assessments by all registered agencies as a basis for decisions on licensing or funding of higher education institutions, including eligibility for student grants and loans.
With a view to boosting their international reputation, Member States should also allow universities to seek a complementary assessment by another agency in the Register. Member States should promote cooperation between agencies in order to build up mutual trust and the recognition of assessments. Text adopted
MEPs debate current problems relating to immigration
The first debate of the session was on current issues relating to immigration policy. This gave MEPs the chance to air their views on the recent developments on the EU's borders at Ceuta and Melilla in Spain, the situation on the Italian island of Lampedusa and in Malta, as well as wider issues of migration.
Douglas ALEXANDER, the UK's Europe Minister, speaking on behalf of Council, said the unprecedented level of illegal migration across the Mediterranean had sharply brought into focus the problem of managing migration flows. The countries on the Mediterranean faced a disproportionate burden in dealing with this. He did not directly comment on the situation in Ceuta, Melilla, Malta or Lampedusa, instead calling for a firm but fair approach which meets Europe's international commitments. Mr Alexander spoke of progress made by the EU in developing common standards on asylum and immigration, and joint action to improve border controls. Cooperation was also essential with source and transit countries, and the EU was providing substantial technical and financial support. A readmission agreement had been reached with Russia and progress was being made on the same subject with Morocco. He highlighted progress in wider discussions with the African Union and through the Euro-Med Barcelona process, and stressed the improving contacts with Libya on immigration matters. He also spoke about developing regional protection programmes, allowing refugees to settle and integrate closer to their countries of origin. "Public support for managed migration and protection of migrants depends on firm action against illegal immigration and the organised crime which often accompanies it," he said.
Commissioner Ján FIGEL, speaking on behalf of Vice-President Franco FRATTINI, recalled that since 1999 and the Tampere Summit, the European Commission had taken a balanced view on immigration which was further built on with The Hague declarations. The Commissioner recalled that the Commission, on 1 September 2005, had published its position on how to improve the status of legal migrants in the EU. The Commission, he said, was also working on how to deal more effectively with illegal immigrants whilst preserving human rights and civil liberties. The Commission, Mr Figel announced, would come forward before the end of the year with its action plan on legal migrants.
Turning to the tragic events in Ceuta and Melilla, the Commission, he said, was preparing a comprehensive response and Vice President Frattini had already sent a technical mission to Spain and Morocco to fully assess the situation. Commissoner Frattini, he said, would be appearing the next day at the European Parliament's Civil Liberties Committee to further explain the Commission's position. Mr Figel recalled that Mr Frattini could not participate in the debate as he was at the Justice and Home Affairs Council in Luxembourg.
Mr Figel said that a comprehensive approach was needed and that building fences was not enough. It was also important to examine reception centres in several Member States so as to ensure they provide adequate standards. Finally, Mr Figel welcomed that Parliament would be sending further delegations to check conditions of reception centres and welcomed the recent visit to the centre in Lampedusa.
Political Group Speakers
Speaking for the EPP-ED group, Ewa KLAMT (DE) said the images from Ceuta and Melilla were terrible, but they were just the tip of the iceberg. There were invisible influxes too, with eastern European regions also having larger numbers of illegal immigrations. She called for action on the root causes of the continuing high immigration pressure. "Transporting people into deserts is inhumane and a signal of capitulation in our policy." There was no single solution for the 4.6 million people who, according to the UNHCR, were fleeing their homes. The EU needs agreements with countries of origin and transit, but all the issues needed to be resolved together.
Martine ROURE (FR) spoke for the Socialist group, drawing attention to the human dramas on the borders of Europe. There had been alarming information from Lampedusa and many had been moved by the abandonment or asylum seekers in the deserts of Morocco. Men, women and children were fleeing misery and violence in their own countries, and our policies were unable to meet the challenge, while respecting human dignity as demanded by Article I of the Charter of Fundamental Rights. "We must work to consolidate peace and eliminate poverty. This problem will not be solved until there is a fair distribution of resources. Fortress Europe is a chimera, only action for peace and security will be effective."
The leader of the ALDE group, Graham. WATSON (UK), said thousands of people were massing just fifteen kilometres south of his Gibraltar constituency, suffering hunger, disease and exploited by criminal gangs. "Now they are dying at the fence separating poverty and prosperity, dying in the desert. It is like a scene from Bible studies, but it needs political action to solve it." He said Africa was Europe's backyard and we could not "shut the gates of mercy." These events upset our cost calculation that inequality could be maintained without cost, he said. "The poor vote with their feet. Either we accept their produce or we will have to accept their migrants." All this showed the importance of getting a wider consensus on economic policy in the Doha round at Hong Kong in a few weeks time.
Kathalijne BUITENWEG (NL) for the Greens/EFA group agreed with much of Mr Watson what had said and underlined the dramatic nature of the problem. She said it was important to examine the Algeria/Morocco border area as that was the area where many migrants were being left. She criticised the conditions that migrants had to suffer whilst being deported and questioned the legality of such deportations.
Giusto CATANIA (IT) for the GUE/NGL group said it was hypocritical for the EU to talk about migration while it was building barriers. He said that many migrants were in fear of their lives and it was wrong to talk about free movement people in Europe whilst many countries were building barbed- wire fences. He criticised both the Italian and Spanish governments for their positions on dealing with migrants and in particular the decision of the Italian government to send migrants back from the reception centre in Lampedusa. He also criticised the EU's position towards Libya.
Mario BORGHEZIO (IT), for the IND/DEM group, on the other hand, said that it was necessary to close Europe's borders in order to reduce the incentive for people traffickers to operate. He said that he had many people describe the Lampedusa reception centre as "too clean" and said that the EU should pay tribute to the Italian government for the money it had spent on the reception centre.
Romano LA RUSSA (IT) for the UEN group stated that illegal immigration was a European-wide problem that needed a European response and that appropriate resources should be dedicated to solving the problems. He therefore called for more money for the boosting of the European refugee fund and for the patrolling of the EU's external borders. He also stated that more money needed to be spent on upgrading reception centres.
Frank VANHECKE (BE), a non-aligned MEP said that Spain and other European countries were responsible for the current crisis. He said the governments pampered too much to migrants' needs and this acted as a magnet to others "trying to seek their fortune". He also that more should be done in the country of origin and a policy of mandatory return should be considered.
Responses to the debate
Responding to the debate for the Council, Douglas Alexander stated clearly that it was unacceptable for migrants to be abandoned in the desert, and that this underlined the need for cooperation with and assistance for third countries on migration matters. He agreed with speakers who had stressed the importance of Africa to Europe, and spoke of his pride at Europe's achievements in increasing support for Africa both before and at the Gleneagles G8 summit and in the progressive agenda of the UN summit in New York. He said comprehensive engagement with Libya was the best way to deal with its human rights record. Finally, he repeated that this was a problem for Europe as a whole, for its neighbours and for sub-Saharan Africa, not just Italy, Spain and Malta. Long term partnership with third countries was where the solution lay. He was pleased Europe was beginning to engage his collective weight in cooperation with countries of origin and transit.
Commissioner Figel in his response to the debate said that the issue of immigration would be an issue for "today, tomorrow and the days after". It was closely linked to development and external relations issues. He recalled that migration had several causes and the aim of the EU was to address these causes. Europe had become over the last 60 years a more "attractive place." Commissioner Figel underlined the importance of mainstreaming of human rights in other areas of relations with third countries. He recalled that today, the Commission, had launched its new policy for Africa and underlined that the EU gave 60% of total development aid to Africa.
Action needed to tackle poverty among women
Poverty and social exclusion among women infringe on their human rights. This is one of the conclusions in a report adopted by the European Parliament. The report by Anna Záborská (EPP-ED, SK) draws attention to the wage and employment gender gap. It also highlights the number of single-parent households (85%) which are headed by women and that two thirds of the over 65s in the EU are female. Both groups are disproportionately prone to poverty.
The European Parliament adopted the report the which looks at four main areas:
- the development of gender-based indicators and methodology, so as to measure the differing impact of poverty and social exclusion on women and men;
- the importance of involving poor women and families at all levels of decision-making;
- measures to improve the balance of family life and work in a disadvantaged environment;
- the contribution of civil society.
MEPs emphasise that "poverty has various manifestations" and that "new forms of poverty and marginalisation exist". Poverty is not only about lack of income, it can also be related to ill-health, limited or non-existent access to education, unsafe environments and social discrimination and exclusion. A job is not in itself enough protection against extreme poverty.
MEPs call on Member States to take targeted action to ensure that disadvantaged women have access to "fair access to public health systems - in particular to primary health care (including the protection of mothers and children) as defined by the World Health Organisation - and also to gynaecologic and obstetric health care, decent housing, justice, education, training, life-long learning, sport and culture. They also draw attention to serious consequences of poverty, stressing that extreme poverty situations are "conducive to trafficking in women, to prostitution and to violence".
The EP argues that "extreme poverty is more prevalent among women", saying that in seventeen of the Member States the risk of extreme poverty amongst women greatly exceeds the risk of extreme poverty amongst men. The majority of single-parent families, who run a greater risk of falling into poverty, are headed by a woman. A study of six EU Member States showed that female-headed households earn between 9% and 26% less than their male counterparts, the biggest disparity being in the UK (26%), followed by Sweden (14%), France (12%), the Netherlands (11%), Germany (10%) and Italy (9%). Moreover, the wage gap between men and women in Europe is still on average between 16% and 33%. More working women (30%) than men (6.6%) have a part-time job - a choice often forced upon women by a lack of affordable childcare facilities. In view of all this, MEPs call on the Member States to take practical steps to address pay differentials and promote working conditions that will enable both women and men to participate fully in the labour market.
On Tuesday, 11 October, four European Parliament committees organised a hearing to raise awareness on the effectiveness of microcredit for fighting poverty and empowering women. Access to information technologies and micro financing for poor women is also highlighted in the report adopted. Text adopted
Integrating immigrant communities through education
Parliament adopted an own-initiative report on immigrant communities' integration in Europe through multilingual schools and education, which looks at the rights of children in the school system and the duties of the Member States, and also examines the role of the Union in promoting good practice.
The report, drawn up by Miguel PORTAS (GUE/NGL, PT), stresses that, even when the children and/or descendants of immigrants are proficient in the language of their host country, they should be given the opportunity to familiarise themselves with their mother tongue and the culture of their country of origin, without ruling out public funding for that purpose. It also says that primary and secondary schools should provide educational support to immigrant children, especially when they are not proficient in the language of their host country, to enable them to adapt more easily and prevent them being placed at a disadvantage.
Among its recommendations, Parliament urges the Member States to encourage educational establishments to "take measures making for linguistic diversity whereby the choice of alternatives to the official language would not be limited to the most widely spoken European languages".
MEPs also advocate using different methods of promoting integration through multilingualism, such as the "Content and Language Integrated Learning" (CLIL) method, and want the Commission to provide increased support for specific training in this and other methods. Under the Leonardo da Vinci, Youth and Socrates programmes, the range of target languages should be widened to cover immigrants' mother tongues.
Parliament also wants to see an EU network of schools employing different methods to promote integration through multilingualism and recommends that funding for this and other initiatives be provided under the horizontal lifelong learning programme. Lastly, MEPs call for special attention to be paid to the dissemination of cultural works from immigrants' countries of origin.
Text adopted
New challenges for the circus as part of European culture
In adopting a report on the challenges facing the circus, MEPs highlight the fact that cross-border mobility is a key feature of circuses and that circus activities, which are currently regulated at national level, could be the subject of EU measures. Parliament also urges the Commission to introduce specific measures "to ensure that the circus is recognised as forming part of European culture".
The report also addresses the problem of schooling for children from travelling communities and calls on the Commission to set up pilot projects to determine appropriate models for the education of such children. MEPs suggest that the projects should include developing and supporting e-learning and distance learning, developing concepts for independent/self-reliant learning, introducing pedagogical monitoring tools, developing a teacher profile for tutoring children from travelling communities, and the establishment of temporary measures to remedy the academic difficulties facing children of itinerant people.
Parliament also recommends that a mandate be conferred upon the European Committee for Standardisation (CEN) to prepare a comprehensive set of standards for mobile circus facilities and finalise current work on the Safety Standard for Temporary Structures (such as tents). This would result in harmonised standards, making it easier for circuses to move among the Member States, and thereby contribute to the conservation of the European classical circus as well as ensuring public safety.
Lastly, the Commission is urged to draw up a European regulation governing the issue of visa and work permits for peripatetic artists in order to eliminate existing conditions which are hard for artists with short-term contracts to meet (e.g. the requirement to prove that there is a lack of equally-qualified people within the EU). The report suggests that the new legislation should make it possible to issue short-term visas/residence permits valid for up to 12 months, while taking "due care" to ensure that these provisions are not abused for the purposes of human trafficking. Text adopted
Urban policy in the EU of 25 - opportunity and challenge
In adopting an own-initiative report with 540 votes in favour, 29 against with 36 abstentions on the urban dimension in the context of enlargement, Parliament is convinced that towns and cities and urban agglomerations or areas, including small and medium-sized ones, have a central role to play in achieving the revised Lisbon and Gothenburg objectives.
As to urban policy in the ten new Member States, MEPs recall that urban policy development priorities must continue to be reinforced at Member State and regional level after enlargement, to include housing and revitalisation of urban areas, infrastructure, transport, tourism, the environment, waste disposal, water supply, culture, training, education, social care and health.
Parliament also points out that there are great disparities in terms of urban policy between the 25 Member States, particularly as a result of the enlargement to include 10 new Member States. The new Member States, says the House, often have no clear and comprehensive urban policy at national or regional level.
MEPs point out that cities and urban agglomerations or areas represent 78% of the European Union population and considers that urban areas are:
– the place where both the most complex and the most common problems are concentrated (social exclusion, spatial and ethnic segregation, housing shortage, insecurity, drugs, pollution, contaminated former industrial sites, traffic, unemployment, lack of competitiveness, poverty, demographic changes, etc.)
– the place where the future is built: universities, research centres etc.
"Owing to the renegotiation of the rules linked to the Structural Funds, the urban dimension must be better taken into account", stated Mr Beaupuy following the vote. "The Commission must orientate itself towards a horizontal application of the urban dimension and towards a coordination of its services which work directly or indirectly on urban questions," he concluded. Text adopted
Combating €uro counterfeiting across the EU, not just in the euro area
EU funding to combat euro counterfeiting under the 'Pericles' programme should be available to all Member States and not just the twelve who have the euro as their currency. This is the substance of a proposal from the Council approved by MEPs.
Parliament adopted a non-binding report from drawn up by Agustín DIAZ DE MERA GARCIA CONSUEGRA (EPP-ED, ES) which approved the decision without amendment. Text adopted
MEPs urge an end to persecution of Ethiopian opposition
The European Parliament is seriously concerned that the political dialogue between the Ethiopian government and the opposition has broken down due to the ruling party's stance. It urges all parties to resume the talks immediately and work towards a functioning democracy with the rights of the opposition fully respected.
In a resolution adopted, it also calls on the Ethiopian government to end the persecution and intimidation of opposition parties and to release immediately thousands of people who were arrested at an opposition demonstration in June. MEPs praise the opposition for having called off a demonstration on 2 October that could have led to serious clashes.
Parliament refers to the findings of the EU Election Observation Mission that the elections of 15 May, the first that were freely contested, were marred by serious irregularities, although the run-up to the elections was peaceful. It asks its president to write to the speaker of the Ethiopian parliament expressing its strong concern over the refusal to opposition members to take the floor, over the bill to strip parliamentary immunity from all elected opposition MPs who did not take their seats and over the bill to extend the previous administration of municipalities, in disregard of electoral results. Parliament also calls on the government to provide the opposition with access to the media and expresses its concern at a measure pushed through by the government which requires an absolute majority in parliament for introducing topics for debate.
Parliament asks the EU and the international community to stay vigilant and to continue support for the democratic process. If necessary, the European Commission should step up its humanitarian policy towards Ethiopia and adjust its non-humanitarian aid.
Adopted resolution
Trade with China
Parliament is calling for rapid action by China to address the many concerns of EU industry, especially Intellectual Property Rights enforcements, national treatment, transparency and environmental, social and health standards. The call comes in an own-initiative report drawn up by Caroline LUCAS (Greens/EFA, UK) and adopted by 567 votes in favour to 19 against with 49 abstentions.
While welcoming China's implementation of some of its WTO obligations, MEPs want the Commission to offer effective backing to European companies regarding the "numerous cases of inadequate implementation or application by China" of other WTO obligations. Parliament calls for measures to protect the intellectual property of EU firms. It calls on China not to put up bureaucratic barriers to trade, and to award public contracts in a transparent and fair manner.
MEPs welcome the Commission's Memorandum of Understanding with China limiting textile exports but are concerned at the disruption caused to European retailers by the way it was initially implemented. Looking ahead, they says the challenges currently being faced by the textile, clothing and footwear sectors will soon be experiences by others, such as the bicycle, automobile and iron and steel industries, and that these are systemic in nature, requiring a longer term strategy for the EU's international trade policy. Parliament calls on the Commission to monitor and regularly report on the extent to which Chinese competition is affecting EU industry, as well as on trends in outsourcing. MEPs note that relocations to China primarily affect the most vulnerable and least qualified workers, and call for "strong social solidarity to be shown with these workers" notably through support for training and retraining. It asks the Commission to investigate the introduction of a European labelling scheme that would indicate country of origin, as well as social and environmental standards.
The report notes China's success in extricating over 300 million people from poverty over the last 20 years, but states MEPs' concern at the continuing extreme poverty facing a quarter of China's rural population. Noting with concern the lack of workers' rights in China, notably inadequate health and safety rules, the report calls for China to permit independent trades unions to be established, and for swift action against the use of child labour and forced labour.
MEPs express their serious concern at the high levels of pollution caused by China's industries and the growing consumption of natural resources such as timber from unsustainable sources. They urge the Chinese government to play a full and positive role in promoting sustainable development , while welcoming recent signs that China is taking serious measures to protect the environment.
The report calls for the EU to carry on a more intensive political dialogue with China, ranging from human rights matters to regional and global security issues. It calls for the establishment of a clear and effective policy of human rights conditionality with regard to the EU's general trading policy with China. Text adopted
Parliament urges Iran to restart talks with the EU 3
The European Parliament wholeheartedly supports the attempt by the three EU member states France, Germany and the UK to find a solution to the nuclear dispute with Iran through negotiations. It urges the IAEA to make full use of its control and inspection capacities and urges Iran to restart talks with the "EU 3"
Parliament calls on the US government to support the negotiations by giving security guarantees to Iran and says it welcomes the statement by UK Foreign Secretary Jack Straw that neither the US nor Europe is considering military action against Iran.
In a resolution adopted by 499 votes in favour, 43 against and 89 abstentions, MEPs also deplore the double-standards applied to nuclear and non-nuclear weapon states and recognise Iran's right to develop a nuclear programme for civil and peaceful use. Nevertheless, Iran should fully suspend all activities relating to the enrichment of uranium, as the IAEA made clear that there is no confidence that Iran's nuclear programme is meant for peaceful purposes only. Parliament also urges Iran to reconsider the construction of a heavy-water research reactor.
MEPs urge Iran to cooperate fully with the IAEA inspectors, reminding it that it has signed the Non-Proliferation Treaty, which allows the IAEA to verify if signatories to the treaty comply with the treaty's provisions.
They also voice grave concerns over Iran's human rights performance. They strongly condemn the death sentences against minors, which frequently concern sexual acts and sexual orientation, the treatment of minorities such as the Kurds, the arrest of women for 'improper veiling' and the arrest of cyberjournalists. They call for the immediate release of journalist Akbar Ganji, and his lawyer Abdolfattah Soltani.
Iran is urged to resume the EU-Iran Human Rights Dialogue. In the framework of this dialogue, the Council should closely monitor the human rights situation in Iran. The Commission is asked to use the European Initiative for Democracy in order to intensify contacts with Iranian civil society and independent media.
Adopted resolution
Other Votes adopted
Accounting officers of executive agencies Szabolcs FAZAKAS (A6-0271/2005) Report adopted
Exceptional market support measures Niels BUSK (A6-0266/2005) Report adopted
EU-Switzerland Association agreement Timothy KIRKHOPE (A6-201/2005) Report adopted
Conservation of fishery resources in the Baltic Sea, the Belts and the Sound Zdzislaw Kazimierz CHMIELEWSKI (A6-0265/2005) Report adopted with amendments
Waiver of Mr Zelezny's parliamentary immunity (3 requests) Maria BERGER (A6-0289/2005, A6-0290/2005 and A6-0291/2005) Reports adopted - in all three cases, this means Mr Zelezny's immunity is waived
Education as the cornerstone of the Lisbon process Guy BONO (A6-0245/2005) Report adopted
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta.do?language=EN
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta.do?language=EN
EN
3
LINK
/activities/expert/ta.do?language=EN
EN
4
LINK
/activities/expert/ta.do?language=EN
EN
5
LINK
/activities/expert/ta.do?language=EN
EN
6
LINK
/activities/expert/ta.do?language=EN
EN
7
LINK
/activities/expert/ta.do?language=EN
EN
8
LINK
/activities/expert/ta.do?language=EN
EN
9
LINK
/activities/expert/ta.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
