Split over how to improve EU financial management
Budgetary control
2005-10-06 - 14:01
Ideas for managing EU funds more responsibly were given a thorough airing at a hearing on Tuesday organised by the Budgetary Control Committee. However, there was strong opposition to the suggestion of making Member States liable when they manage EU money jointly with the Commission.
When it adopted the 2003 budget discharge, the European Parliament called for the Member States' finance ministers to sign a "statement of assurance" to guarantee that EU money had been lawfully spent and managed, something that cannot be ascertained with the current system. This proposal has met with " considerable resistance" from the Member States, rapporteur Terry WYNN (PES, UK) acknowledged. But what can no longer be ignored is that there is a " very negative perception of financial management in the EU after the European Court of Auditors issued a negative Statement of Assurance (a certification saying whether EU funds were managed and spent in a lawful way) ten years in a row ". Mr Wynn therefore rejected " any excuses for inaction " and warned that " if a solution cannot be found in time, it could be an obstacle on the way to an interinstitutional agreement on the financial perspective for 2007-2013".
" Member States do not support the idea of having the national political authorities sign off for the management of EU accounts" , said Siim KALLAS, Vice-President of the European Commission in charge of audit and anti-fraud. However, in his view the bottle is " more than half full ": Mr Kallas thinks that Member States could strike an agreement in November when they look at the proposal, especially given the constructive approach of the UK Presidency.
Vitor da SILVA CALDEIRA, Member of the European Court of Auditors, also opposed the idea of having the finance ministers sign off for the management of EU funds in the Member States. " This could cause a potential conflict of interest, when the same finance ministers meet at Council level to dicuss the discharge to the Commission ", Mr Caldeira argued. " The real issue here is to establish sound and efficient financial management in the EU ", he said. In his view, this can be achieved within the single audit concept, if all the players work together to create a truly transparent and effective control system.
Yet accounting experts present at the hearing all agreed that the EU would be benefit if responsibility and transparency in its audit systems were strengthened.
The fiercest criticism towards the current system came from Ian BALL, Chief Executive Officer of the International Federation of Accountants. He believed the European Union's accounts system was designed " as if there was no willingness to have any transparency at all" . The EU, he argued, ought to be leading through example by reporting according to the same international standards as those required by corporations in the private sector. The system would draw benefits from having the most senior individuals responsible, both in the EU and the Member States, to sign statements of assurance, Mr Ball added, which is something Parliament requested as part of the 2003 discharge. " As we have seen in the American private sector, the obligation to formally sign off the accounts is a powerful incentive to change behaviour ", he concluded.
" It would only be reasonable to expect the highest national political authorities to sign off regarding the national control procedures" , said Jules MUIS, former EC Internal Auditor. He expected " strong resistance from Member States to this proposal " but urged Parliament " not to throw in the towel before the gloves have even been put on ". He noted that, among the efforts to improve financial management in the EU Commission, the silver bullet had proven to be the results-based assurance statements provided by the individual directors-general.
As for national audit institutions, they are by definition not part of the EU control framework, said Saskia STUIVELING, President of the Dutch Court of Auditors. She warned that the " national audit institutions are likely to resist any attempt to integrate them into the EU framework in a subordinate role in relation to the European Court of Auditors ". In her view, however, they could play an important role in strengthening the internal controls of EU funds in the Member States.
2005-10-04 Committee on Budgetary Control Chair Szabolcs FAZAKAS PES HU
Public hearing on "EU financial management: facts, fiction and future"
20050929IPR00909
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
