Constitution of Bosnia-Herzegovina needs to be changed
External relations
2005-10-12 - 15:12
The constitution of Bosnia-Herzegovina, which was written as part of the Dayton Peace Agreement, needs to be changed drastically and the office of the UN and EU Representative will have to be phased out, concluded MEPs and others at a public hearing on Tuesday. Starting negotiations on an Association and Stabilisation Agreement with the EU should help the country further on the road to urgently needed political and economic reform.
Although the Dayton Peace Agreement was crucial to put an end to the bloody conflict in Bosnia-Herzegovina, it would now seem to have outlived its purpose and is preventing the peoples of Bosnia-Herzegovina assuming responsibility for further political and economic development. These were the conclusions shared generally at a hearing held by the Foreign Affairs Committee on Tuesday assessing the current situation in Bosnia-Herzegovina and the prospects for reform. "The situation is extremely complex, there is still a lot of mutual distrust and ethnic identity still plays too big a role," said Doris Pack (EPP-ED, DE), who chairs Parliament's delegation for relations with the countries of South East Europe. The three peoples of Bosnia-Herzegovina - Serbs, Croats and Bosniacs - do seem willing to change the constitution but that is something they will have to do themselves and cannot be done for them, she stressed. Representatives of the three peoples acknowledged the need for constitutional reform, although each with a different emphasis. Branko Dokic, minister of transport and telecommunication and vice-president of the Party of Democratic Prosperity of the Republika Srpska, told the hearing that he opposed changing the Dayton Agreement itself, as it had been accepted by the people and changes to it would create political uncertainty. For him, the main thing to be changed was the role of the international community, i.e. of the UN High Representative and EU Special Representative, currently Lord Paddy Ashdown. He added that a working group of the Srpska parliament had started deliberations four months ago on constitutional reform. All speakers agreed that the powers of the Office of High Representative were too far-reaching, thus preventing the peoples of Bosnia-Herzegovina from taking responsibility for conducting their own affairs and pre-empting the need for them to achieve consensus. Achieving consensus on constitutional reform will not be simple, however. Where Dokic advocated further decentralisation, Seada Palavric, a Bosniac representative in the Bosnia-Herzegovina federal parliament, advocated a further strengthening of the federal state. She felt that too many policy areas had been devolved to the two entities making up the federal state - the Bosniac-Croat Federation and the Republika Srpska - and too few remained at a federal level. "Many citizens do not see Bosnia-Herzegovina as their state", she said. Martin Raguz, the Croat deputy speaker of the federal parliament, feared there would be further fragmentation of Bosnia-Herzegovina and stressed that the country should adopt EU standards, whereby a balance between individual and collective rights must be found. He also favoured a "recantonisation". Edward Llewellyn of the Office of the High Representative defended the measures taken so far by Lord Ashdown but agreed that it was time to phase out "the intrusive role of the OHR". Starting talks on an Association and Stability Agreement should open up a whole new chapter for Bosnia-Herzegovina, he said. Llewellyn hoped that this would pave the way for ending the function of the High Representative by the end of next year. In her concluding remarks, Doris Pack welcomed the federalisation of the armed forces and the police, the introduction of a federal VAT and other measures. "But it is not enough," she said. In the heavily decentralised Bosnia-Herzegovina of today, there are 200 ministries and 14 parliaments. These all need to be paid for and that is hardly acceptable. The EU should make better use of the possibilities that the incentive of future EU membership create. "But it is now up to the politicians in Sarajevo, Banja Luka and Mostar to act on this," she said.
2005-10-11
Emma Nicholson (UK) - ALDE - In the chair
Committee on Foreign Affairs and Delegation for relations with the countries of South-East Europe Public hearing on the Dayton Agreement - Ten years after
20051012IPR01372
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
