Breast cancer: screening programmes can cut mortality rates
Public health
2005-10-18 - 14:23
In the European Union, a woman is diagnosed with breast cancer every two minutes and a woman dies from the disease every six minutes. Breast cancer is the most frequent cause of death among women between 35 and 55 in the EU. The chances of a cure increase substantially if the cancer is detected early. In 90% of cases the condition is curable - if detected in time and treated appropriately.
The European Parliament (EP) is at the forefront of awareness-raising and the promotion of quality-assured screening in accordance with EU guidelines. In connection with the Breast Cancer Awareness Campaign, held every October, MEP Karin Jöns (PES, DE) has arranged for Tuesday 18 October 2005 to be ‘Breast Cancer Day’ at the European Parliament. EP President Josep Borrell will take part.
The focus of Breast Cancer Day at Parliament will be the opening of the exhibition on ‘Breast Cancer in the EU-25’ by Markos Kyprianou, the EU Commissioner for Health (18.30 - 20.00). The Commissioner is to present the fourth updated version of the EU Guidelines on Mammography Screening (the first edition was published in 1992). This new version includes for the first time guidelines on digital screening and multidisciplinary breast units.
The day will close with the illumination of parts of the European Parliament in pink, the international colour of the fight against breast cancer, by Mr Borrell. Female Members of the Commission and the Commissioner responsible for equal opportunities, Vladimir Spidla, are expected to attend the event at the EP to demonstrate the solidarity of Parliament and the Commission with all women in Europe.
20051017BKG01551
Breast cancer mortality rates to be cut by a quarter by 2008
Breast cancer survival rates, for instance, vary by up to 25% between the old and new Member States. In some new Member States the breast is almost always removed, even with cancer is in its early stages, whereas in the old Member States only one in every two to four women undergoes a mastectomy.
Parliament has drawn attention to the seriousness of the problem of breast cancer on several occasions. In June 2003 the House adopted a resolution (A5-0159/2003 [i] ) drafted by MEP Karin Jöns (PES, DE) calling for the fight against breast cancer to be given priority in EU health policy. The resolution calls on the Member States to set themselves the target of creating, by 2008, the conditions required for a 25% reduction in average breast-cancer mortality rate in the EU and of reducing to 5% the disparity between the Member States in the five-year survival rate.
The resolution followed on from a public hearing on breast cancer organised in late 2002 by the Committee on Women's Rights and Equal Opportunities [ii] , at which MEPs discussed different aspects of the disease with doctors, nurses and academics. The main concern was the need to reduce the mortality rate of women with breast cancer, improve their quality of life and inform women about the risks of, and the availability of treatment for, breast cancer. An expert at the hearing stated "Prevention is pointless as long as there are no specialist centres geared to quality treatment and psychological support" .
Taking this into account the 2003 resolution calls for all women suffering from breast cancer to have the right to be treated by a multidisciplinary team. It therefore calls on the Member States to establish multidisciplinary breast centres nationwide, where the entire team should be specialised in breast cancer treatment, which cover the entire population and fulfil a number of criteria: for example each breast centre should perform a minimum of 150 primary breast cancer operations per year; multidisciplinary pre-operative and post-operative case conferences should be held at least once a week; and physicians and paramedical staff should regularly attend further training courses and be required to pass a test at regular intervals to show that they have sufficient up-to-date knowledge and skills. In addition, follow-up and aftercare examinations should be carried out in close cooperation with the relevant multidisciplinary breast centre. The need for such multidisciplinary teams is expected to be included in the fourth updated version of the EU Guidelines on Mammography Screening.
[i] Report on on breast cancer in the European Union [ii] Hearing report:
Make mammography screening available for all women aged 50-69
Mammography screenings is a chance to detect breast cancer early. It allows for prevention and successful cure and consequently improves a woman's chance of survival.
Every woman, irrespective of place of residence, social status, occupation and education, should have access to high-quality screening for treatment and aftercare in the event of cancer, believes the European Parliament. In the 2003 resolution MEPs insisted on making mammography screening available for all women aged 50-69, free of charge, every two years. Regular screening can reduce breast cancer mortality by up to 35% among women in this age group. High-quality population based screenings are not yet available throughout the EU. Comprehensive screening programmes in accordance with EU guidelines exist in only nine Member States (Belgium, Finland, France, Spain, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Sweden, Hungary and the United Kingdom). Even among those countries the quality varies. " Implementation of screening is not very expensive, just €1.25 per inhabitant " according Karin Jöns. She adds that " structural funds of the EU can also be used to implement screening on the national level ".
Patients' rights
If cancer is suspected, further action is needed: in future, says the EP, patients should be given their diagnosis within five working days. If breast cancer is detected, then treatment must start not more than four weeks later and should be provided by expert teams in specialist breast centres. MEPs also want more rights for patients, believing they should be given comprehensive information, have a say in their treatment and be able to seek a second medical opinion.
The European Parliamentary Group on Breast Cancer
In September 2001 the European Parliamentary Group on Breast Cancer (EPGBC) was formed to raise awareness of breast cancer issues in the EP and to ensure that breast cancer is a part of the European healthcare agenda. It is a non-partisan all-party group and membership is open to all MEPs interested in breast cancer issues. The EPGBC works in cooperation with EUROPA DONNA - The European Breast Cancer Coalition - an independent, non-profit organisation whose members are affiliated groups from countries throughout Europe. The Coalition works to raise awareness of breast cancer and to mobilise support of European women in pressing for improved breast cancer education, appropriate screening, optimal treatment and care and increased funding for research.
The EPGBC has produced a website designed to provide the tools needed to push for equal breast cancer care across Europe, by enabling access to key documents, background information and news updates. It serves as a common outlet to share efforts and successes in ensuring that every woman in Europe, regardless of her place of residence, social status and education, receives high-quality early detection, treatment and aftercare for her breast cancer. EPGBC's website
Cancer is the leading cause of death in Europe
Cancer is the leading cause of death in Europe. According to, Annals of Oncology [iii] , there were nearly 2.9 million new cases of cancer and more than 1.7 million cancer deaths in Europe 2004. Most deaths are caused by lung, colorectal, breast and stomach cancer. Breast cancer is the most common form of cancer among women, and the most lethal. In 2004 275,100 women in the EU-25 will contract breast cancer and 88,400 women will die from the disease (estimated figures).
Several factors can influence a woman's risk of getting breast cancer, such as genes, family history and lifestyle. The risk of breast cancer increases with the woman's age. Most women with breast cancer are between 40 and 50, but young women can get breast cancer too. Breast cancer also occurs in men, although much less commonly.
In the 2003 resolution MEPs call on the EU and the Member States to invest more in research into the causes of cancer and into new therapies. Parliament wants national cancer registers, which not all Member States yet have, to be organised in future throughout the EU and to help researchers in compiling data.
[iii] Boyle, P. and Ferlay, J. "Cancer incidence and mortality in Europe: 2004" in Annals of Oncology 16:481-488, 2005 The monthly journal of the European Society for Medical Oncology.
EN
2
LINK
/hearings/20021001/femm/compte_rendu_en.pdf
EN
3
LINK
www.epgbc.org
EN
4
LINK
http://annonc.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/reprint/16/3/481?maxtoshow=&HITS=10&hits=10&RESULTFORMAT=1&author1=boyle&author2=ferlay&andorexacttitle=and&andorexacttitleabs=and&andorexactfulltext=and&searchid=1&FIRSTINDEX=0&sortspec=relevance&resourcetype=HWCIT
EN
5
LINK
www.esmo.org
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A5-2003-0159 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
