Code on arms exports must be binding
Security and defence
2005-10-04 - 18:12
The Foreign Affairs Committee is urging the Council to make the code of conduct on arms exports legally binding as soon as possible. In a report adopted on Tuesday, the committee welcomes the likelihood that Member States will have to align their legislation with the code as this becomes a so-called "common position." EU Foreign Ministers this week acknowledged the need for binding standards for trade in conventional arms. However, MEPs still have some concerns.
MEPs in the committee call on the Member States to agree on a list of countries to which arms exports should be banned because they are involved in armed conflicts or violate human rights. They also say the quality of national reports needs to be improved and that minimum standards should be applied. The denial notification system - whereby Member States declare that a certain transaction does not involve the export of sensitive dual-use goods - also needs improvement.
Other issues raised by the Foreign Affairs Committee include the need for stronger controls on exports to countries against which an arms embargo has been lifted; licensing of arms brokering abroad and the setting up of a national registry of arms brokers; and an international system for marking and tracing small arms as a tool to combat their illicit manufacture and proliferation. MEPs voice particular concern over recent cases in which EU arms manufacturers have transferred their production facilities overseas - they call for regulatory measures in this field.
MEPs reiterate their " strong conviction that the embargo on China should not be lifted" until the human rights situation has clearly improved. Adherence to the arms embargo against China should, they say, be included in negotiations about the EU's Neighbourhood Policy and Partnership Agreements.
The own-initiative report by Raül Romeva i Rueda (Verts/ALE, ES) on the Council's Sixth Annual Report on the EU Code of Conduct on Arms Exports was adopted by 36 votes in favour, none against and 2 abstentions.
The report will be voted by the full House during Parliament's November session in Strasbourg.
2005-10-04 in the chair of the Foreign Affairs Committee Elmar Brok EPP-ED DE 20051003IPR00966
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
