Ban on fluorinated gases in fridges and cars
Environment
2005-10-12 - 17:19
Members of Parliament's Environment Committee want to see a crackdown on fluorinated greenhouse gases. This is the significance of two reports adopted on Tuesday, one on a general regulation on fluorinated gases and the other on car air conditioning systems. The two reports were drafted by Avril DOYLE (EPP-ED, IE).
We now know that fluorinated gases can have a far more harmful and lasting impact on the atmosphere than even carbon dioxide. The global warming potential (GWP) of some fluorinated gases, can be several thousand times greater than that of CO2 (where CO2 has a GWP of 1, HFC-152a has a GWP of 120, etc., with sulphur hexafluoride (SF6) reaching a peak GWP of 22,200). It is estimated that some fluorinated gases could remain in the atmosphere for up to 50,000 years. Signatories to the Kyoto Protocol have undertaken to cut back these gases too. It is against this background that the two draft EU laws examined today must be considered (co-decision, second reading).
A speedier timetable
In their recommendation on the general regulation, adopted by 54 votes with one abstention, MEPs seek to tighten up the substitution principle. They say "fluorinated greenhouse gases shall only be used where other safe, technically feasible and environmentally acceptable alternatives do not exist" . They urge the EU Member States to promote alternatives through fiscal and other measures. They call for products with a GWP of less than 50 to be used for phones, refrigeration products and equipments and air conditioning products other than those contained in motor vehicles (the latter being dealt with in the accompanying directive).
The regulation also gives a list of fluorinated gases whose sale should be banned in accordance with a detailed timetable. MEPs wish to add to this, on dates which would be binding, a ban on hydrofluorocarbons in certain aerosols (in 2006) in certain types of foam (in 2009), in domestic refrigeration systems with less than 150g of refrigerant charge (four years after the entry into force of the regulation), in stationary air conditioning and commercial and industrial refrigeration systems (2010). SF6 should be banned from any form of use by 2008.
The other amendments introduced by the Environment Committee are chiefly aimed at tightening up the requirements regarding professional training and the certification of companies which handle these gases. They include provisions to protect against the risk of fire and tighten up the labelling requirements for apparatus containing fluorinated gases. Lastly, MEPs call on the European Commission to propose further legislation on air conditioning systems (other than those in motor vehicles) by the end of 2008.
Cleaner cars from 2011
Turning to the directive on car air conditioning systems, MEPs overwhelmingly approved the Council's common position with two minor amendments. This second recommendation by Avril Doyle was adopted by 43 votes in favour and 6 abstentions. There is thus no further obstacle to the aims of this directive: the elimination of fluorinated gases with a GWP greater than 150 in new models from 2011 and in all types of vehicle from 2017.
Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety Chair Karl-Heinz Florenz EPP-ED DE
Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Protection
Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety Chair Karl-Heinz Florenz EPP-ED DE
20051010IPR01191
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
