EU Constitution: seeking a way forward
Constitutional affairs
2005-10-14 - 13:15
The Constitutional Affairs' Committee resumed its debate on the future of the EU constitutional process at a symposium on Thursday and Friday with academic experts and representatives of national parliaments. The future of the Constitution, the need for a public debate, the direction of European integration and the role of the European Parliament were among the topics debated.
Most participants agreed with Renaud DEHOUSSE, professor at the Centre d'etudes Européennes de Science Po in Paris, when he said that the European integration process needs clear objectives to be understood by the public and to achieve a consensus. He said "It is more difficult to agree on abstract principles than on concrete ones: defining the objectives would make it easier for citizens to understand". A debate on the purpose of the EU is also essential, according to Professor Sonja PUNTSCHER REIKMANN, of the University of Salzburg, who said the EU must have "an 'idée directrice' to be explained to citizens".
Another major topic was how to interpret the negative outcome of the Dutch and French referenda before launching another constitutional initiative. Christian FRANCK, professor at the University of Louvain la Neuve, said there is a "desire for citizens to take control of the integration process" . A weakness of the draft constitution was that the market economy seemed to occupy a more important place than social solidarity, he said. Johannes VOGGENHUBER (Greens/ALE, AT), co-rapporteur for the Constitutional Affairs Committee, disagreed with Mr Franck, saying "it is impossible to have a single, clear, interpretation of the referenda" . He stressed that there had been different reasons for the Dutch and French No votes, while at the same time all citizens were agreed on several matters, e.g. the need for more transparency and more coherence in the EU decision-making process.
On the Dutch rejection, Jan ROOD, Head of the European studies programme at Clingendael, Netherlands, maintained that the Dutch people had changed their view of the EU. From full support in the past they had shifted to a strongly critical attitude. The explanation, he felt, could be "an uprising by a large part of the population against political leaders: the EU is perceived as an elite-driven project". He also criticised the national politicians' habit of stressing only the negative aspects of European integration. Mr Voggenhuber strongly agreed, saying "We are talking of a clash between the people and their national leaders, rather than between the people and Europe" .
On the French No vote, Gaëtane RICHARD-NIHOUL, Secretary General of the French organisation "Notre Europe", shared the view of her Dutch colleague, saying "the EU integration process is not perceived as being under people's control" . Florence DELOCHE, Secretary General of the Centre for European studies at Science Po in Paris, proposed, as a long term solution, that EU politics and policies be taught at school to improve the very low level of knowledge about the European Union.
Discussing concrete facts, rather than constitutional arrangements, was one proposal for finding a way out of the political crisis. Jo SHAW, Salvesen Chair of European institutions at the University of Edinburgh, said the EU was moving towards a widening and a deepening process simultaneously and that a possible solution was to have a debate on issues of substance, such as the social system, immigration, terrorism and security. Monica FRASSONI, (Greens/EFA, IT) disagreed, saying it was essential to talk about the Constitution itself, as it was indispensable for tackling the concrete problems.
Andrew DUFF (ALDE, UK), second co-rapporteur, raised the issue of whether or not the draft Constitution could be rescued. He argued that "there is an interest in salvaging the Constitution" . He added "the Constitution is a good first draft on which we can build and improve" , but the consensus behind the text needed to be consolidated. By contrast, Marios MATSAKIS (ALDE, CY) argued that the negative outcome of the referenda must be respected and said "the Constitution is dead" . Janis EMMANOUILIDIS, from the Centre for Applied Policy Research of Munich, said that the salvation of the Constitution was unlikely to happen and he therefore suggested the implementation of certain reforms by amending the Treaty of Nice.
On a more technical and constitutional side, different solutions were proposed. According to Professor Dehousse, if a constitution is to be approved, the requirement for ratification by all Member States must be dropped. Antonio MISSIROLI, chief policy analyst at the European Policy Centre in Brussels, said "the constraint of unanimous ratification, plus the difficulty of the text and the unpredictability of national voting behaviour, create a permanent threat to EU integration" . They proposed a system of qualified majority voting for ratifying and amending treaties.
Professor Bruno DE WITTE, of the European University Institute of Florence, proposed adding an explanatory memorandum to an amended Constitution. The aim would be to clarify the purpose of the new treaty in simple language, so that public debate would focus on clear political issues, rather than difficult legal concepts. Paul MAGNETTE, professor at the Université Libre of Brussels, took a more political approach, suggesting ways of improving the effectiveness of any new Convention. Firstly, it should be more representative, by including a fair number of euro-sceptics. Secondly, the new Convention should not take its decisions unanimously and, finally, the discussion should focus exclusively on the ultimate objectives of European integration.
In their closing remarks, both co-rapporteurs as well as the chair of the Constitutional Affairs Committee, Jo LEINEN (PES, DE), agreed that four or five years will be needed before a constitution can be agreed. According to Mr Duff, "The Parliament should be at the centre of the debate but we need the partnership and collaboration of colleagues from national parliaments and political parties" . He also announced that the own-initiative report drafted by himself and Mr Voggenhuber on the period of reflection is to be published by the beginning of next week. Mr Leinen said "This crisis is an opportunity to allow EU democracy to be reborn". He added: "let's discuss all possible options, without providing any answer at this stage, since it would be premature" .
2005-10-13 Committee on Constitutional Affairs Chair of Committee on Constitutional Affairs Jo Leinen PES DE
Symposium on the future of the constitutional process of the European Union
20051010IPR01195
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
