Conciliation agreement on bathing water
Environment
2005-10-19 - 10:29
For years the European Union has struggled to replace its existing directive on bathing water, which dates from 1976. Today, Wednesday 12 October, at the end of the first conciliation meeting on the proposed new directive, an agreement was reached between MEPs and representatives of the EU Member States.
The provisions of the old directive and the parameters it required to be measured had been overtaken by scientific developments. But the European Parliament and the Council, in their efforts to strike a balance between health standards and the need to avoid administrative and financial burdens, had stuck to their different positions at the end of the second reading of the co-decision procedure. This meant conciliation was needed, i.e. direct negotiations between 25 Council representatives and 25 MEPs. The two sides had a maximum of six weeks to reach a deal but they achieved an agreement at the first meeting of the official negotiations.
Jules MAATEN (ALDE, NL), rapporteur for the Environment Committee on this directive, believes the new legislation brings three key improvements: "firstly, this new directive will be less bureaucratic than the last one". he says. "From now on, instead of 19 parameters for analysis, of which many had become obsolete or unnecessary, inspections will focus on the two parameters most important for health. Secondly, we have achieved a major reduction in the risks to the health of bathers. At present a swimmer on average runs a 12% risk of falling ill" (chiefly digestive or respiratory ailments). "This average will fall to 7.5% and the cost of achieving this will be acceptable". Lastly, information for the public will be greatly improved. Currently, when anyone manages to find information on the internet it is usually already a year old. Information will henceforth be provided almost instantly. It will be easier to find on the internet and will also be available and visible at bathing sites".
Antonios TRAKATELLIS (EPP-ED, EL), Vice-President of the EP and head of the Parliament delegation in the negotiations with the Council, said "this, the first conciliation embarked upon and completed since the elections, has been a great success. The starting positions of Parliament and Council were far apart. But we worked in a highly constructive spirit on both sides and the European Commission played a key facilitating role. This is thus a victory as much for the citizens of Europe as for their shared Institutions. My medical background was also of help in convincing the Council to raise the quality standards. The outcome of our work is a directive which is far better than the last one and will protect the health of our fellow citizens far more."
Final obstacles removed
The main obstacle in the final round of talks was the question of the standards to be applied to a new category of intermediate quality - known as "sufficient quality" - which would be lower than "excellent quality" and "good quality". Parliament had accepted this new suggestion from the Council provided the standard required was raised. The negotiations produced an agreement on tougher reference values than those proposed by the Council, both for inland waters and coastal waters. From now on, in the "sufficient" category, the parameters for intestinal enterococchi will be 330 (inland waters) and 185 (coastal waters), measured at 90 percentiles. The values for the bacterium Escherichia coli were not changed. Overall, this represents a reduction in health risks to bathers from 12% to around 8%.
Once MEPs had obtained satisfaction on tightening up the standards, their demand to make this category a transitional one was no longer necessary. The report to be submitted later by the Commission to Parliament has been brought forward from 2018 to 2008 and, at the insistence of MEPs, will have to include an analysis of viruses. On the basis of this report, the Commission will have to review the directive by 2020. At that point it is envisaged that the "sufficient" category may disappear.
During the negotiations, Parliament also obtained a commitment from the Member States that constantly updated information should be provided to bathers. New standard signs will be devised in the near future and must be placed at all bathing sites to indicate the quality of the water. The findings of regular tests will also be made available swiftly, in particular on the internet.
The directive is scheduled to be implemented within two years after it has entered into force, namely at the start of 2008.
2005-10-12 Chair of EP Delegation Antonios Trakatellis EPP-ED EL
20051014IPR01486
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
