An EU approach to economic immigration?
Fundamental rights
2005-10-05 - 17:52
Immigrants contribute to the prosperity of Member States, they have a beneficial effect on the EU labour market and they should be granted similar rights to EU citizens, the Civil Liberties Committee said on Wednesday in a hotly contested report aimed at defining for the first time an EU strategy on economic migration. The committee heavily amended the original text by Ewa Klamt (EPP-ED, DE) in an effort to place more emphasis on the integration of legal immigrants.
Should the EU adopt a Green Card system to regulate the flow of immigrants from outside Europe? Would this help to solve the economic problems caused by Europe's ageing population? Answering these and other questions was the purpose of Ms Klamt's own-initiative report, which was drafted in response to a Commission green paper on economic migration. In its report as adopted, the committee highlighted "the need to adopt a common immigration policy in order to end the exploitation of (illegal) workers" and said that "economic migration is a positive human phenomenon" . Yet MEPs emphasised that this was only "part of the solution" to Europe's demographic problems and economic difficulties. Problems within the EU labour market should also be tackled by stimulating innovation and encouraging the employment of older workers.
Integration of migrants
MEPs called on Member States to promote the integration of economic migrants residing legally in Europe by granting them the same rights as EU citizens, including the right to vote in local and European Parliament elections for those who have been resident in the EU for at least five years.
In a controversial amendment supported by Socialist, Liberal and Green members, the Civil Liberties Committee voted for a European Green Card system as being a good solution to manage legal economic migration. This would create a single administrative procedure for issuing an employment and residence permit for an economic migrant. However, the admission of a third country national for economic reasons should in principle be linked to the existence of a specific job, MEPs added.
Unable to reach a consensus, MEPs finally decided not to comment on the Commission's suggestion that priority be given to citizens from all Member States before looking for non-EU nationals to fill any job vacancy (the principle of "Community preference"). Rapporteur Ewa Klamt had backed this idea in her draft report. The paragraph in her report stipulating that economic migration measures should not be used until EU citizens from new Member States are guaranteed the right to freedom of movement was deleted from the final text.
Security issues
Any common policy to manage legal migration in Europe is inevitably linked to security issues and to the need to fight illegal immigration effectively. All members of the committee agreed that it must be up to each Member State to decide how many immigrants it can accept on its territory and on what conditions. However, the system chosen to manage legal and illegal migration in an EU country has a clear effect on other Member States. In that connection, MEPs pointed out that the mass regularisation of illegal immigrants carried out by countries such as Spain "is no substitute for substantial policies for dealing with illegal immigration or an effective means of recruiting economic migrants" .
On the question of the return of illegal immigrants, MEPs called for clauses on compulsory readmission to be included in all association and cooperation agreements signed with non-EU countries. They also urged the Commission "to define a return policy, based on the promotion of voluntary return, including possibly supportive measures in the country of origin" .
With more than 80 amendments approved, the resulting text differed so much from the draft report put forward by rapporteur Ewa Klamt that her political group (EPP-ED) decided to vote against the report as a whole. However, the amended text won the support of the Socialist, Liberal and Green groups and was finally adopted by 27 votes in favour, 20 against and 1 abstention.
(*)The green paper adopted by the Commission could be followed in the future by concrete legislative proposals on legal migration measures. The Parliament has only a consultative role in this field, which is regarded as sensitive for national sovereignty. The Council would need unanimity to adopt any specific rule in this legislative area. So far each Member State has had its own national policy on legal migration and the integration of migrants.
2005-10-04 Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs Chair Stefano Zappalà EPP-ED IT
20050929IPR00912
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
