Trade with China
External/international trade
2005-10-13 - 13:32
Parliament is calling for rapid action by China to address the many concerns of EU industry, especially Intellectual Property Rights enforcements, national treatment, transparency and environmental, social and health standards. The call comes in an own-initiative report drawn up by Caroline LUCAS (Greens/EFA, UK) and adopted on Thursday by 567 votes in favour to 19 against with 49 abstentions.
While welcoming China's implementation of some of its WTO obligations, MEPs want the Commission to offer effective backing to European companies regarding the " numerous cases of inadequate implementation or application by China " of other WTO obligations. Parliament calls for measures to protect the intellectual property of EU firms. It calls on China not to put up bureaucratic barriers to trade, and to award public contracts in a transparent and fair manner.
MEPs welcome the Commission's Memorandum of Understanding with China limiting textile exports but are concerned at the disruption caused to European retailers by the way it was initially implemented. Looking ahead, they says the challenges currently being faced by the textile, clothing and footwear sectors will soon be experiences by others, such as the bicycle, automobile and iron and steel industries, and that these are systemic in nature, requiring a longer term strategy for the EU's international trade policy. Parliament calls on the Commission to monitor and regularly report on the extent to which Chinese competition is affecting EU industry, as well as on trends in outsourcing. MEPs note that relocations to China primarily affect the most vulnerable and least qualified workers, and call for " strong social solidarity to be shown with these workers " notably through support for training and retraining. It asks the Commission to investigate the introduction of a European labelling scheme that would indicate country of origin, as well as social and environmental standards.
The report notes China's success in extricating over 300 million people from poverty over the last 20 years, but states MEPs' concern at the continuing extreme poverty facing a quarter of China's rural population. Noting with concern the lack of workers' rights in China, notably inadequate health and safety rules, the report calls for China to permit independent trades unions to be established, and for swift action against the use of child labour and forced labour.
MEPs express their serious concern at the high levels of pollution caused by China's industries and the growing consumption of natural resources such as timber from unsustainable sources. They urge the Chinese government to play a full and positive role in promoting sustainable development , while welcoming recent signs that China is taking serious measures to protect the environment.
The report calls for the EU to carry on a more intensive political dialogue with China, ranging from human rights matters to regional and global security issues. It calls for the establishment of a clear and effective policy of human rights conditionality with regard to the EU's general trading policy with China.
20051010IPR01210
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
