Services directive
Free movement of services
2005-10-17 - 15:02
The marathon vote on the services directive (often known as the "Bolkestein directive" after the Commissioner who first proposed it), which was scheduled for 4 and 5 October, has been postponed to 21 November. This means that the first-reading plenary vote due at the end of October is also put back and will probably now take place in January, under the Austrian presidency of the EU.
It was the Internal Market Committee which was due to vote this week, on a report drafted by Evelyne GEBHARDT (PES, DE). What happened? A series of meetings behind closed doors was held by the committee and the political groups to try to reduce the record number of amendments (at least 1600) and hammer out a compromise on key points. The main bones of contention are still unchanged. First, there is the country of origin principle (proposed by the European Commission and defended by the ALDE and EPP-ED groups) by which a firm can provide a service in a Member State other than its own on the basis of the rules applicable in its country of origin. Second, there is the distinction between the general right for a firm legally established in its country of origin to provide a service in a Member State other than its own and the actual provision of such a service (the latter would be subject to the legislation of the country where the service is provided); this distinction was proposed by the rapporteur as part of a compromise package. And last but not least, there is the question whether services of general economic interest should be excluded from the scope of the directive, an idea which covers public services provided in accordance with market rules (broadly speaking, by a profit-making private company which is subject to the rules on competition).
A "last chance" meeting on 3 October failed to produce a consensus. Two rival compromise proposals were on the table: the first by Ms Gebhardt, which had already been discussed, and the other by the ALDE, EPP-ED and UEN groups. According to Parliament's Rules of Procedure it is up to the chair of the lead committee to decide whether amendments are admissible. The chair of the Internal Market Committee, Philip WHITEHEAD (PES, UK), decided that the amendments put forward by the three political groups were tabled too late for the rapporteur and other MEPs to take them on board. He therefore concluded that the proposals could not serve as the basis for a compromise and that it was better to delay the vote "so as not to discredit our committee" . Mr Whitehead argued that a postponement would enable the political groups to prepare their compromise proposals better and thus reduce the number of amendments. The groups have until 12 October to put forward new proposals. This decision was accepted by an overwhelming majority of members of the committee (40 in favour, 2 against, 1 abstention).
2005-10-04 Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection Chair Phillip Whitehead PES UK
20051004IPR01036 Web page of Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection Documents to help understand the services directive
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/committees/presentation.do?committee=1241&language=EN
EN
2
LINK
/comparl/imco/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
