Olli Rehn tells MEPs: Turkey negotiating framework is clear and balanced
External relations
2005-10-05 - 13:08
The negotiating framework regarding Turkey agreed by EU Foreign Ministers in Luxembourg is clear, balanced and paves the way for rigorous accession negotiations, Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn told the Foreign Affairs Committee on Tuesday evening. He added that he actually welcomed the lengthy discussions, as they provided a solid basis for the negotiations.
Mentioning the decision to start accession negotiations with Croatia and negotiations on a stabilisation and association agreement with Serbia and Montenegro as well, Commissioner Rehn said he felt the outcome of the Council meeting was particularly important for Europe as a whole, as it showed that the EU was still capable of taking decisions, even after the recent 'no' votes. He was also happy that work on bringing stability and prosperity in south eastern Europe could continue: " Ten years after Srebrenica it is time to turn a new page. This is a new dawn for the Western Balkans ." Commissioner Rehn will go to Belgrade next Monday to attend the ceremony at the start of these negotiations.
Answering a question from José Ignacio Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra (EPP-ED, ES) on the next steps in the process and the duration of the negotiations, Mr Rehn said that first Turkish laws will be screened for their conformity to EU legislation. Although this will take about a year, the first chapter in the negotiations can be opened earlier, as soon as the legislation related to it has been screened. How long the negotiations will take will depend on their pace, on reforms in Turkey and on the implementation of these reforms. It will also depend on the EU's absorption capacity. " But the most important thing now is to get started and to give Turkey the chance to prove that it can fulfil the criteria ," he said.
Regarding the protocol to the customs union between the EU and Turkey - the ratification of which Parliament postponed last week - Mr Rehn said that he will demand rapid ratification by the Turkish parliament and full implementation, including the extension to Cyprus. " This means that Turkey will have to open its ports, " he said. He had already raised the issue during the meeting in Luxembourg and will do so again when he visits Turkey next week. He will also ask for details of the Turkish ratification process, but pointed out that there are limits to what a government can do to guide its parliament.
Replying to Hannes Swoboda (PSE, AT), the commissioner said that instead of speculating on the date of Croatia's entry, Croatian politicians would do better to get to work and put in place the necessary political and economic reforms. In reply to a question from Joost Lagendijk (Verts/ALE, NL), Mr Rehn said the Commission will continue to support UN efforts to achieve a settlement of the Cyprus question, but that this will also require the political will of all parties concerned.
Answering remarks from Tobias Pflüger (GUE/NGL, DE), the commissioner said that full compliance with the political criteria had not been a condition for starting negotiations with Turkey and that the Council decision of last December had been based on the Commission report that Turkey fulfilled these criteria " sufficiently ". The start of negotiations would encourage those in Turkey who were working for reforms and give the EU leverage to ensure these reforms take place. " Had the EU slammed the door, I would have had no right to address Turkey on its women's rights or its trade unions rights ," he said.
Finally, Mr Rehn rejected the suggestion that a deal had been struck with the chief prosecutor for the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, praising her integrity.
Elmar Brok (EPP-ED, DE) concluded the debate by saying he will be very interested to see how the Commission will define the EU's absorption capacity, also in the light of the reflection on how to proceed with the EU constitution.
2005-10-04 Committee on Foreign Affairs Chair Elmar Brok EPP-ED DE
Committee on Foreign Affairs
20050929IPR00904
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
