Delivering on Doha -- MEPs discuss the challenge of global development
External/international trade
2005-10-12 - 15:49
The Doha Development Agenda: Challenges and Opportunities
MEPs from the Committee on International Trade met experts and stakeholders on Tuesday to discuss progress in the WTO Doha Round negotiations, against the backdrop of Trade Commissioner Peter Mandelson's recent proposal to reduce the EU's trade-distorting subsidies by 70 percent.
With this pledge, and with the December WTO ministerial conference in Hong Kong approaching, discussions about the global development agenda are beginning to intensify. As Trade Committee chairman Enrique BARÓN CRESPO (PES, ES) put it, "Things are heating up."
Committee of Professional Agricultural Organisations (COPA) President Rudolf SCHARZBÖCK said talks on agriculture had entered a critical phase: "What is at stake is the future of European agriculture." He said that while COPA supports agreement on fair trade rules and understands the need to open up markets, it insists on protecting European farmers and the European countryside: the right solution is thus, "a question of balance". EU trade negotiators, he said, were "afraid of being blamed for failure", and seemed so keen on an agreement in the Doha Round that they are willing to sacrifice the interests of European farmers.
Josie RIFFAUD, a member of the International Coordination Committee of Via Campesina (an international group of small scale agricultural and rural organisations), made her views clear: "Our message is the same: the WTO is a failure," given its impact on farming in developing countries. 840 million people are suffering from malnourishment, she said, and 600 million of them are farmers and rural workers. With her focus not on opening of EU markets to agricultural products from developing countries, but rather on protecting developing markets from cheap EU foodstuffs, Ms Riffaud stressed "the right of all countries to be protected from low-price imports" -- imports, which, she said, destroy local production. "We want the WTO to get out of agriculture," she said.
Georgios PAPASTAMKOS (EPP-ED, EL) disagreed. "The international system we have at the moment", he said, " is one where rules are lacking". Without rules, as imperfect as they may be, we cannot have a balanced global system, he argued.
Philippe DE BUCK, Secretary General of UNICE (the European business organisation), had similar views, stating his belief in a rules-based scheme that, he said, gives all countries, rich and poor, big and small, a chance to contribute to a global system: "The WTO is not perfect, but at least it gives everyone a chance to identify problems and negotiate solutions." Emphasizing the importance of the upcoming Hong Kong summit, he said: "Before we condemn the organisation and the system, we need to look at what it can achieve."
Martin KHOR, Director of the Third World Network spoke about the significance of the non-agricultural market access (NAMA) negotiations at the WTO: should their outcome prevent developing countries from protecting their domestic industries, he warned, we will have failed to live up to our development goals. NAMA negotiators must realise that over-liberalisation has led to severe de-industrialisation in numerous countries, he said. Mr Khor argued that the developing world must be given the chance to protect its local industries -- by way of tariffs. The WTO must see to it that poor countries "are not forced to make obligations that go against their development interests". Responding to Caroline Lucas (Greens/EFA, UK), who argued that twenty years of trade liberalisation had seen little, if any, improvement for most developing countries, Mr Khor said part of the answer should be to increase such countries' decision-making power within the WTO.
Liberalisation of trade and services is essential to growth in Europe, according to Christopher ROBERTS, Chairman of the Policy Committee of the European Services Forum, who focussed on the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS). The services sector, he said, is of fundamental importance to the EU economy in terms of wealth creation. Liberalisation is also in the overall interest of developing countries -- and yet, all this taken into account, "very little new liberalisation has been offered". The Commission, argued Mr. Roberts, should press for further movement on this issue, ensuring, "that services are not held hostage by agriculture."
Lori WALLACH, director of Public Citizens' Global Trade Watch, took a completely different approach: "Decisions about service sector liberalisation should be made domestically with the full involvement of impacted workers and consumers. They should not be made in the context of a one-size-fits-all global trade pact negotiated behind closed doors."
2005-10-11 Committee on International Trade Chair, Committee on International Trade Enrique Barón Crespo PES ES
Public Hearing: The Doha Development Agenda: Challenges and Opportunities
20051010IPR01189
EN
1
PHOTO
20050907PHT00058.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
