Women and micro-credit day
Women's rights/Equal opportunities
2005-10-13 - 11:49
Small loans known as "micro-credits" are an effective tool for fighting poverty and empowering women. This was the key message of a hearing organised by four European Parliament committees on 11 October to mark International Year of Micro-Credit 2005.
The term micro-credit is used to describe a small amount of money lent to a low-income client by a bank or other institution. And micro-credits can be particularly important for women: in a world where most poor people are women, studies have shown that access to such loans can improve the status of women within the family and the community. Women become more assertive and confident, they come to own assets, including land and housing, play a stronger role in decision-making and take on leadership roles in their communities.
" Living in poverty is a breach of human rights. Simple access to loans can help women out of poverty" , said the chair of the Committee on Women's Rights, Anna ZABORSKA (EPP-ED, SK) when she opened Tuesday's hearing. Jamila MADEIRA (PES, PT), vice-president of the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly, added " Micro-credit has achieved good results in reaching the poorest people, who do not have access to banks ". However, further resources are needed because, in the words of Sabine MISSISTRANO of the Microfinance Networking Facilitators, "According to the World Bank only 10% of credit needs are covered. European lending is still lagging behind ".
Representatives of civil society and micro-financing institutions from Morocco, Jordan, Palestine, Lebanon and Egypt described their experience as well as their expectations of micro-credit. According to Khaled AL GAZAWI (Jordan) " Micro-finance can help the poor, especially women, to increase income, build viable businesses, reduce their vulnerability to external shocks and play an important role in the fight against many aspects of poverty ". Wafaa KHALIL (Egypt) stressed that the poor need more than credit: " To really help them become entrepreneurs, a whole package of services including training is needed ". Other speakers also stressed the need for further resources, technical assistance, capacity- and institution-building and ways to increase the take-up of funds. In Lebanon NGOs could not participate in an EU-funded tender because of difficult terms and conditions, explained Youssef SHAWAZ.
Emma NICHOLSON (ALDE, UK) suggested that " micro-financing could be even more useful when it is tied into education and health measures ". The chair of the EP Development Committee, Luisa MORGANTINI (GUE-NGL, IT), concluded the morning session by saying " Micro-credits have a lot to do with ethical financing. However, I wonder how much this small instrument can change the ethics of general financing from banks and other financial institutions ".
Most contributors in the afternoon session were women who spoke about the role of micro-credits in various parts of the world such as Latin America, Africa, Afghanistan and Asia.
Brigit HELMS, of the Consultative Group to Assist the Poor, described the development of micro-finance over the last thirty years. " From being a marginal phenomenon, next to or parallel to the traditional banking system, finance for the poor is now becoming the chief form of finance in many poor countries ". She cited the case of Mexico, where Compartamos , which in 1991 was a small NGO, had become a self-sufficient, regulated institution and then a bank with 365,700 clients which even managed to issue loans in local currency. Indeed, the problem of exchange rates was mentioned several times. When institutions and lenders provide loans in foreign currency, local firms are exposed to the risk of exchange rate fluctuations. Felippo VETTORATO (ETIMOS Consortium, Italy) believed that the European Commission had a key role to play in risk cover.
Andreas SCHWARZ, representing the Commission, confirmed that this was one of the priorities of the "new approach" advocated by Development Commissioner Louis MICHEL: "to become more professional in this area, especially after a report by the CGAP which claimed that the EC lacked staff specialised in banking" .
Ana GOMES (PES, PT) wound up the meeting by saying there was clearly an opportunity for the EU to make its development aid more effective by improving the current state of affairs.
2005-10-11 Committee on Women's Rights and Gender Equality Chair Anna Záborská EPP-ED SK Luisa Morgantini GUE/NGL IT
Procedure: Public Hearing
20051010IPR01194 Click here:
EN
1
LINK
http://www.yearofmicrocredit.org
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
