First steps towards a blacklist of unsafe airlines
Transport
2005-10-11 - 15:07
The Transport Committee called on Tuesday for the introduction of a Community blacklist of operating bans or air traffic rights restrictions on air carriers which do not meet international aircraft safety standards. These carriers should be named and shamed throughout the Community, say MEPs. The list should cover not only EU aircraft but also aircraft chartered from companies in non-EU countries.
There was an overwhelming majority in the committee (43 votes for, 1 against and 1 abstention) for the first-reading report by Christine DE VEYRAC (EPP-ED, FR), which says the European Commission should compile the list on the basis of common inspection criteria. EU air travellers would then have easy access to information on the safety of the airlines on whose planes they are due to travel. The list would be published on the Commission's website, in the EU Official Journal and on websites of bodies such as national civil aviation authorities and airports. Ticket sellers will also be required bring the list to the attention of the passengers, both at their premises and via their websites. MEPs believed that such information should be easily accessible at all times, in particular when people are purchasing tickets and at the time of departure.
Under the new regulation, air carriage contractors will also have to notify passengers immediately if the operating carrier changes after they have made their reservations, irrespective of the reason for the change. Passengers will have a right to compensation if, after a reservation has been made, the designated carrier turns out to be included on the blacklist or is replaced by another carrier on that list.
MEPs pointed out that this regulation was part of a legislative process designed to reinforce the Community's air safety and that this justified further measures, including an extension of the powers of the European Air Safety Agency.
2005-10-11 Committee on Transport and Tourism Chair Paolo Costa ALDE IT
Procedure: Co-decision, first reading
Plenary vote: November, Strasbourg
20051010IPR01202
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
