Coordination the key to fighting organised crime
Enlargement
2005-10-06 - 20:45
EP Hearing on Crime in the Western Balkans
A lack of coordination is hampering the fight against organised crime in the Balkans. That was the message when the European Parliament hosted several parliamentary delegations from the Western Balkans on 3 and 4 October. Among those attending were MPs from Albania, Bosnia Herzegovina, the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (FYROM) and Serbia and Montenegro.
In a forum organised by the Parliament, they gathered to discuss ways of coordinating measures to combat drug trafficking, illegal immigration, smuggling and trafficking in human beings. This type of activity has flourished amid the political and economic chaos created by the collapse of Yugoslavia in 1991.
A central theme often repeated was the need for greater cooperation between the EU and the Western Balkans. In her opening remarks, the German Christian Democrat MEP Doris Pack told delegates that "your situation is ours. As long as you have problems then we have problems." She welcomed the fact that from 2007 the EU's "lifelong learning" program would be open to students in the Balkans.
Albanian MP Leonard Demi said that recent cooperation with the EU and other countries had shown "the will exists to tackle organised crime." However, he warned that the main problem "remained coordination" and that the EU's institutions should be more attentive in avoiding "overlapping initiatives which waste money."
Liljana Ivanovska, an MP from the FYROM Parliament said that people there were asking "when and how" concerning the next enlargement. She said that courage is the only way to proceed. Ms Ivanovska also called for EU visas to be made free of charge to allow people on low incomes to apply.
The conference also heard from several experts in the field. André Heinrich, a representative of the Council of the EU said that "at present no overall strategy exists to fight crime in the Western Balkans, resulting in duplication." He said the EU should "set up a platform for intelligence and information."
Ben Llewellyn-Jones, an official at the UK's Permanent representative to the EU, said that Europol was in the process of negotiating agreements with the countries of the Western Balkans to share information and criminal intelligence. This would allow them to make "forward threat assessments" on future developments.
Patsy Sorensen, head of a counter trafficking NGO, warned that the "the victims are younger and younger." She also said that in her experience "human traffickers in your countries must have very good links with people in Western Europe in order to carry out their businesses. They are supported in the countries of destination."
20051006STO01134 Website of the European police office. Europol The EU's Agency for reconstruction in the Western Balkans The European Parliament's Committee on Foreign Affairs Link to information on EU Parliamentary cooperation
EN
1
PHOTO
20051005PHT01113.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.europol.eu.int/
EN
3
LINK
http://www.ear.europa.eu/home/default.htm
EN
4
LINK
/committees/afet_home.htm
EN
5
LINK
/eucoop/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
