Opening of the Session and highlights of the week
Institutions
2005-11-15 - 15:52
EP President Josep BORRELL opened the session with a statement on the bomb attacks on hotels in Amman.
"On 9 November, terrorism struck again in all its horror, this time in Jordan. On behalf of the whole house, I immediately conveyed our sorrow to the authorities in Amman and asked that our condolences be passed on to those affected. We will have the opportunity to debate terrorism and how we should react to it during the meetings planned to mark the tenth anniversary of the Barcelona process. Terrorism is not just a matter for Europe. It affects both shores of the Mediterranean; it is something we must face up to together - it will be on the agenda of both the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly meeting in Rabat and of the meeting of Heads of State or Government in Barcelona.
These barbaric acts show us that this is not a matter of attacks based on religion or the colour of peoples' skin. It shows that Europe must advance in an alliance of civilisations, and avoiding a clash of civilisations."
Agenda for the week - one minor change
The Agenda for the week was adopted as previously proposed by the Conference of Presidents, with one minor change: on Wednesday, the debate on Iraq will now come before the debate on climate change.
Highlights of the week
The November Strasbourg session sees MEPs dealing with a busy and varied agenda. On Monday, there will be a Commission Statement and a debate on alleged CIA "detention centres" without a resolution. The House will also discuss the issue of the EU's preparedness for the digital switchover scheduled for 2012.
On Tuesday morning, MEPs will hear from the President of the Court of Auditors, who will present his Institution's annual report for 2004 on the EU's financial management. After this the Commission will present its legislative and working programme for 2006 to Parliament. This will be followed by a debate, with Parliament due to adopt a resolution on the subject in December.
The debate on the dominant issue of the session - the REACH package on chemicals regulation - is scheduled for Tuesday afternoon and the vote for Thursday morning. There is a compromise between the three largest political groups on some of the parts of the registration issue. Nevertheless, there are still over one thousand amendments to be voted on Thursday.
On Tuesday evening, the House will debate the so-called Enlargement II package with the Commission due to announce its latest positions on the various countries aspiring to future EU membership. Also on Tuesday evening, the House will tackle the important issue of a potential EU blacklist of airlines companies not meeting safety standards to fly in Europe. Negotiations between Parliament, Council and Commission have led to a compromise which means that the blacklist could enter into force as early as Spring next year.
On Wednesday, the session opens with a debate on Iraq. UK Foreign Secretary Jack STRAW will take part in the debate on "Iraq after the referendum on the Constitution." MEPs will debate the issue of climate change after hearing statements from the Commission and Council. MEPs will also tackle the issue of EU defence procurement. There will also be Commission and Council Statements and a debate on recent statements on Israel made by President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad of Iran.
Wednesday afternoon is dedicated to the follow-up from the Hampton Court Summit, again with Jack Straw participating for the Council. The Parliament will also debate the controversial issue of criminal penalties for infringement of EU law
Thursday morning will be entirely taken up with the marathon voting session on the REACH package. Following on from this, MEPs will debate the issues of the EU development strategy, in particular for Africa. The session will end with three debates on human rights issues: access to humanitarian aid in Kashmir; the sentencing to death in the Philippines of Francisco Larranaga, an EU citizen and the situation in Burma.
20051115IPR02303
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
