Strasbourg Plenary - summary of debates and results of votes
Institutions
2005-10-28 - 11:12
Strasbourg Plenary - summary of debates and results of votes
Summary of debates and results of votes for Strasbourg plenary 24-27 October 2005.
20051024BKG01776
Opening of the Session
Parliament President Josep BORRELL opened the session with a short statement reflecting the sixtieth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations.
" This is a good time to ask what we have learned over those sixty years. The UN Secretary General, Kofi ANNAN , is right to say that the UN must reflect the times it lives in and the changes in the world since 1945. The September UN summit adopted reforms, and, while these did not met all our expectations, Parliament's resolution was borne in mind, and we should now closely follow the implementation of the reforms. We should stress the Parliament's determination that a Human Rights Council and a Commission on Peace Consolidation should become a reality before this sixtieth General Assembly ends ."
MEPs debate Europe's social models and free movement of workers
Parliament debated the so-called Vaxholm-Laval case. The case refers to Commissioner McCREEVY's apparent support for the Latvian company - Laval. It was seen by some as an attack on the whole Swedish approach of collective labour regulation by agreement between unions and employers. This led to a sharp reaction from Swedish industry minister Thomas OSTROS - and to a call from the Socialist group for the two commissioners to come before Parliament.
Welcoming the opportunity to debate the issue of the Vaxholm/Laval case, Commission President José Manuel BARROSO said that he would have been available immediately after the Parliament had invited the Commission to explain its position, but there was no appropriate slot on the agenda. Mr Barroso stated that the Laval case was a matter for the Swedish and European Courts. He said there were strong sensitivities on all sides and that he had discussed the issue with both the Latvian and Swedish Prime Ministers. " We are still waiting for the European Court's ruling " said Mr Barroso. The Commission, would as normal, submit its opinion after the Court after it had reached its position. There should be an equitable solution to the issue, he said, that combines the " four freedoms " with social markets of Member States.
" The Commission respects all social models ", he said. The Swedish social model has a record of high employment, flexibility and high levels of social justice. Indeed, Sweden did not request transition periods for the new Member States to access the Swedish labour market.
Mr Barroso recalled that the issue was being dealt with by the Courts. He said the " European Parliament is not the tribunal ", but there were political aspects associated with the case. The broader questions were whether the EU was in favour or against solidarity, economic and social cohesion, free circulation of workers and a European budget which promotes economic and social cohesion.
Issues similar to the Vaxholm case would occur again in an EU of 25. Mr Barroso ended by stressing the importance of a financial perspective that would boost social and economic cohesion.
Charlie McCREEVY said the Commission does not call into question the system of labour relations or collective bargaining in Sweden or in any other Member State. This was, he said, entirely a matter for Member States to decide. He recognised the importance of collective agreements in many Member States - in his own country he had been a strong defender of national partnership agreements.
During his visit to Sweden, he said, the press has asked about a case where the blockage of a site by a Swedish trade union had led to the cancellation of a contract won by a Latvian firm, leading it to go bankrupt. The case was before the Swedish labour court which had asked the EU Court of Justice for an opinion. " That the Swedish court has done this shows the situation is complicated. Whether the outcome was right will be determined in due course by the Swedish labour court in the light of the Court of Justice's ruling. The Commission will provide the Court with its opinion in due course, but it has yet to form a view ."
He said the internal market and the European social model were not in contradiction - they were mutually reinforcing. " It is my duty to ensure basic rights and freedoms are respected. I exercise that responsibility in an even-handed manner. I find it extraordinary that I have to defend my remarks when the issue was raised by a Swedish court. That this is a sensitive case in a Member State does not deprive me of my right to express a view, even if that upsets a Member State or some Members of this Parliament. The Commission's role is to enforce the rules. Latvia's rights are as important as any other Member State ." He said there was no single recipe for a social model or labour relations, it was a matter for political choice between the Member States. The issue was not a threat to a social system, he said, it was enforcing treaty rights for free movement of labour, freedom to provide services and the principle of non-discrimination.
Political Group Speakers
Hans-Gert POETTERING (DE), leader of the EPP-ED group said the issue was nothing to do with the services directive or the Swedish system of collective bargaining. It was to do with a case before the Court. Mr McCreevy had said the Commission would support a Latvian company in a dispute with a Swedish trade union. " It is the duty of the Commission to stand up for the freedom to provide services; he was simply making clear that we must all respect the Internal Market. The Swedish government wants to divert attention from its own failings ." He said no-one in his group wanted to use the services directive to change labour law or restrict collective bargaining. " The new Member States must have the same rights as the rest of us - we don't want first and second class citizens ."
The Socialist leader Martin SCHULZ (DE) said this debate was helpful as it showed Commissioners Barroso and McCreevy were not in the centre but on the right, following a neo-liberal agenda rejected by his group. " We want to achieve social progress in Europe, not play off one group of workers against another ." He asked three specific questions of the Commission: did trade unions have the right to strike and defend collective agreements? Can the Nordic social model be reconciled with the Internal Market? What would the Commission's position before the Court on this case be? " What is at stake is the direction we want the EU to go in ," he said. " People want jobs, but not Chinese wages and Asian labour standards. We want to defend the European social model. McCreevy wants the lowest standards for wages, labour standards and social protection. Workers must benefit from growth and progress ." He called on Mr Barroso to " put the brake " on Commissioners McCreevy and Kroes.
Graham WATSON , leader of the ALDE group, said that Europe's leaders were about to meet at Hampton Court to discuss whether Europe would in future be open, dynamic and competitive, or would attempt to shelter its industry and workforce from globalisation, slipping further into recession. " This is not an attack on the Swedish social model, it is a defence of the freedom of movement, freedom of establishment and freedom to provide services against the hypocrisy, xenophobia and protectionism of the Swedish Building Federation. Latvian workers are now out of a job thanks to Swedish trade unions. It is not by turning inwards and embracing protectionism that we will be able to compete with China and India. This is a sorry affair, which shows why liberal economic and social thought are in the ascendant, as it makes the alternatives painfully clear ."
For the Greens/EFA group, Carl SCHLYTER (SE) told Mr McCreevy he was responsible for a full frontal attack on the right to strike, and was using EU legislation to undermine the Swedish model of labour relations: " It is not a matter of protecting Swedish workers against Latvian ones. Without social protection, you can not have the security our system offers. We need to learn from each other, but to recognise that national law reflects national circumstances. We all need to play by the same rules, not pit one off against another ."
Francis WURTZ (FR), for the GUE/NGL group, stated that he supported the Socialist group's position on the matter. He questioned how Social Europe could be based on social dumping. The Union's current polices, he said, had led to a dragging down of social labour standards. Enlargement, he said, had increased social disparities in the Union. There were lessons to be learned from this case for the EU and in particular the implications for the services directive.
Nils LUNDGREN (SE), for the IND/DEM group, said the Vaxholm/Laval case was another example of the huge unnecessary risks that Europe was taking. He said it was wrong to put Sweden's system of collective agreements in jeopardy. National social standards should prevail and these were being undermined by comments and directives from Brussels.
Brian CROWLEY (IE), for the UEN group, said it was shame that the Parliament was not discussing the Commission's contribution to Europe's social model recently presented at the Conference of Presidents. He said the debate was, unfortunately, more about previous battles and future elections than on the best practice in Europe. Mr Crowley stated that those who defended archaic principles of protectionism had lost the argument and were now attacking the Commissioner personally. The Commission, he said, had made it clear that the type of social model applied is a matter for each Member State. The Commission's role, he recalled, was to defend the treaties. This debate, he said, did not bode well for the future. The Parliament should be discussing " real issues, not abstract principles ".
Jim ALLISTER (UK), a non-aligned MEP, said that it was rare for him to defend the Commission, but occasionally they were right. Mr McCreevy had the right to express his opinion, but a one-size-fits-all social model was wrong. " Europe's social models are plural by nature. What is right for Sweden is not necessarily right for other nations ", he said.
Irish Speakers
Kathy SINNOTT (IND/DEM, IE) said she was not surprised by Mr McCreevy's comments, since they reflected his record as the Finance Minister in Ireland who presided over one of the lowest social spends in the EU, despite Ireland's wealth: " The health system remains an under funded disgrace, children are denied special needs education they require, housing lists are growing. What is the point of a society if not to serve its people? What do we create the wealth for ?"
Proinsias DE ROSSA (IE) said that the comments made in Sweden were "vintage McCreevy". He warned that at European level there was a need to build consensus. Mr McCreevy would not achieve his aims " with bulldozer tactics ". Sweden, he said, spent €200 per person per year compared to Irelands €100 and yet Sweden was considered to be third in the world in terms of competitiveness as compared to Ireland at twenty six. Europe needed a high quality social model that did not set Latvian workers against Swedish workers. This case, he said, underlined the deep flaws in the Services Directive which needs to be changed.
Response to the debate
Responding to the debate, Commission President Barroso reacted directly to the three questions put by Mr Schulz: " Do trade unions have the right to strike ? Yes, that is a fundamental right and we fully respect it. Is the Internal Market compatible with the Nordic social model? Yes, I believe it is. What will the Commission's position be before the Court? That will depend on the question the Court puts to us, but our position will not be to attack the Swedish social model. It will be in defence of the treaties, to ensure they are strictly observed ." He said he wanted to avoid a perceived dichotomy between the Internal Market and social rights: " only if our systems are fully operational will be have the growth needed to match our social ambitions ." He called on those arguing for social protection to fight within their own Member States to get an EU budget able to support a more active cohesion policy, which would enable the EU to harmonise upwards, not put up artificial barriers between Member States.
Parliament wants to double Erasmus grant by 2013
MEPs endorsed a report calling for a doubling of student grants for the Erasmus exchange programme by 2013. At present students receive a basic rate of just €150 a month - a sum described by the report's author. German Christian Democrat MEP Doris PACK , as " particularly worrying " given that it has remained the same since 1993. Erasmus is the EU's flagship education programme with over 1 million students already having taken part - by 2013 that number will have doubled.
The report was adopted with 549 votes in favour to 47 against, with 23 abstentions. MEPs demand an increase in the monthly standard grant from €210 in 2007 to €300 in 2013, topping the Commission's figures of €200 and €250, respectively.
To increase cross-border university education and high school mobility, school exchanges and cross-border teacher mobility, Parliament also asks for an additional €757 million for the whole package over and above the multi-annual budget of €13.62 billion proposed by the Commission. The EP's Committee on Culture and Education originally asked for additional €980 million. The European Parliament figure for indicative appropriations now amounts to €14.377 billion.
The proposed increase is in line with the Parliament's position on EU's next long-term budget for 2007-13 which was enshrined in the report by Reimer BÖGE (EPP-ED, DE). Parliament points out that the appropriations indicated in the Commission proposal beyond the year 2006 are subject to the decisions to be taken on the next multiannual financial framework.
The new EU life-long learning programme package comprises Erasmus, Leonardo da Vinci, Comenius, Grundtvig and two other sub-programmes.
Parliament also agreed with the rapporteur to slightly cut back the budget share for the Leonardo sub-programme which supports vocational training. Ms Pack regarded the Commission target of 150,000 trainee placements in 2013 as " over-ambitious " and stressed the much higher monthly costs of a Leonardo placement (€3,644) compared to Erasmus (€1,775).
MEPs also want to increase the participation of pupils and teachers in the Comenius sub-programme, which is designed for schools, from 1 in 20 pupils to 1 to 15. Parliament also suggests a new sub-programme called Comenius-Regio to promote cross-border individual mobility of pupils and teachers, especially between adjacent regions. It should involve some 10,000 pupils and 10,000 teachers.
Other amendments focused on simplifying application and award procedures for grants, the teaching and learning of official, regional and minority languages, higher grants for disabled participants and support for sign languages and Braille.
Text adopted
Waste cannot be traded just like other goods
As well as free movement of goods and consumer products within the EU, there are also less savoury exchanges going on - shipments of waste. A new European regulation will soon enter into force to ensure this type of trade reduces its impact on the environment. On Tuesday 25 October, the European Parliament adopted a second reading report on this subject from Johannes BLOKLAND (IND/DEM, NL).
The main political groups with the exception of the Greens/EFA, GUE/NGL and UEN were able to agree on compromise amendments which are also acceptable to the Council, so the legislation should be adopted at this second reading stage. The new regulation should enter force a year after publication in the Official Journal, that is to say probably at the start of 2007.
In the debate ahead of the vote, the rapporteur spoke about the scale of the problem of illegal waste exports, which are growing, notably to developing countries. He gave the example of a British ship heading for China, which was intercepted in March with a cargo of sixty containers of illegal waste which had been declared as nothing more than paper for recycling. This was not an isolated case. According to the rapporteur, 75 per cent of waste shipments checked on their departure from the UK showed fraud or anomalies - and the situation is hardly different in other countries. For this reason, Mr Blokland was pleased that there was an agreement between Parliament and Council to allow the legislation swiftly to enter force.
A better organised hunt for fraudsters
The new text has its origin in a recognition of failure. A less ambitious regulation has been in place since 1993, but it has proved ineffectual. A revision was also needed in order to incorporate the standards adopted in 2001 by the OECD and in the 1998 revisions to the Basel Convention. The new regulation will impose stricter rules on notification and monitoring and should encourage Member States to cooperate more in tracking down fraudsters.
The rapporteur also called for greater monitoring on ships being exported for dismantling. " Many single hulled vessels are soon to be demolished, and there will be a great temptation to export them to countries with lower environmental standards, in Asia, for example ," he warned, while welcoming the Council's plans to increase EU capacity for this task. The new regulation itself does not deal with this point in detail, but instead refers to the efforts currently undertaken by the International Maritime Organisation, the Basel Convention and other agencies to put in place binding global standards.
On the other hand, MEPs strengthened the rules aimed at guaranteeing public access to the decision making systems and to justice, in accordance with the Aarhus Convention. Reception facilities will need to keep proper registers and information on waste shipments will have to be published. To encourage local recycling of household waste, authorities in receiving countries will be able to object to imports, notably when it is mixed municipal waste collected from private households.
Opposition to "waste tourism"
Originally, the Commission had proposed two parallel legal bases for the proposed regulation, both environment policy (Article 175 of the EC Treaty) and trade policy (Article 133). At first reading, Parliament had decided the legislation should be based only on the treaty's environment provisions, and the Council agreed. Many MEPs who spoke in the debate supported this move, with the exception of Maria del Pilar AYUSO GONZALEZ (EPP-ED, ES) who said her group preferred the Commission's original plan.
On the other hand, Dorette CORBEY (PES, NL), Marios MATSAKIS (ALDE,CY) Jonas SJÖSTEDST (GUE/NGL SE) and Irena BELOHORSKA (NA, SK) felt that it was above all a matter for protecting the environment rather than organising trade in waste. Given the Commission's continued opposition, the Council will have to adopt a unanimous position on this point. MEPs seem confident that this can be achieved, thereby removing the doubts about timing of the rules entering force. The rapporteur warned anyone thinking of taking a challenge to the Court of Justice on this point that the Court's past rulings show it tends to give priority to the environment when there are two legal bases in competition.
While the EPP-ED group had its doubts about the legal basis, the Greens/EFA spokesperson Caroline LUCAS (UK) said they were disappointed with the whole package: " Waste should not be transferred except when it is absolutely unavoidable ," she said, adding that the Greens would abstain in the vote. Text adopted
Boosting EU support for cultural exchange and heritage
Parliament is demanding a massive increase in EU funding for cultural exchanges and preserving heritage of European significance. Whereas the Commission had suggested €408 million for the period 2007-13, Parliament asks for €600 million. This call is in line with the demands of the EP's Committee on Culture and Education. For 2000-2006, the EU funding in this field amounts to €236.5 million.
In adopting a co-decision report by Vasco GRAÇA MOURA (EPP-ED, PT) on the Culture 2007 programme in first reading with an overwhelming majority (553 votes in favour, 61 against with 29 abstentions), MEPs emphasise the importance of support for cultural heritage of European significance - alongside the objectives set out by the Commission (trans-national mobility of cultural players, trans-national circulation of art and intercultural dialogue).
Parliament also wants the programme to:
• strengthen a sense of European citizenship and awareness of a shared cultural
heritage;
• promote mutual understanding and tolerance within the EU;
• encourage the cultural awareness and strengthen the synergy between
education and culture;
• promote cultural and linguistic diversity.
However, Parliament wants to move the funding for "sites of memory" (Holocaust memorials, former Stalinist camps etc.) from Culture 2007 to the forthcoming Citizens for Europe programme.
Other amendments focus on simplifying the selection criteria and rules governing grants so as to foster participation by smaller and medium-sized projects. For instance, each multi-annual cooperation network eligible for funding should consist of at least six operators from four countries (instead of six as the Commission proposed) participating in the programme. And for shorter projects three operators from three countries are enough, say MEPs.
According to Parliament, Community support may not exceed 70% of any project budget - the Commission proposed a maximum share of 50%. Whereas the Commission's figure assumes 8% would be used for administration, Parliament wants this cut down to 6%. Lastly, MEPs proposed that the name of the programme be changed from Culture 2007 to Culture.
The proposed increase stays in line with the Parliament's position on EU's next long-term budget for 2007-13 which was enshrined in the report by Reimer BÖGE (EPP-ED, DE). Parliament points out that the appropriations indicated in the Commission proposal beyond the year 2006 are subject to the decisions to be taken on the next multi-annual financial framework.
MEP also want to include the countries covered by the European Neighbourhood Policy in accordance with the action plans to be drawn up. Text adopted
Strong support for European film and digitalisation
Parliament voiced its strong support for the European film industry. In adopting a co-decision report by Ruth HIERONYMI (EPP-ED, DE) on the Media 2007 programme in first reading, MEPs backed co-productions and a competitive digital market as a way to overcome fragmentation and under-capitalisation of the European audiovisual market.
Digitisation should make a decisive contribution to strengthening the audiovisual sector and should be a central feature of Media 2007, Parliament concluded, considering the support for digital services and European catalogues a priority.
MEPs also want to see new and innovative digital distribution platforms for European audiovisual works. These platforms should offer attractive digital catalogues of European films and facilitate access to European cinematographic and audiovisual heritage.
Ms Hieronymi also points out that American movies account for 71% of the film market in Europe, with the share of European movies at 26% (2003 figures).
The programme's aims include preserving and enhancing Europe's cultural diversity and its cinematographic heritage, better distribution of European films both within and outside the EU and boosting the competitiveness of Europe's film industry.
The rapporteur stresses that the budget of €1.055 billion for 2007-2013 proposed by the Commission is the minimum necessary to achieve these goals. Parliament stresses that the appropriations indicated in the Commission proposal beyond the year 2006 are subject to the decisions to be taken on the next multi-annual financial framework.
Further, amendments intend to streamline grant award procedures and facilitate access to loans for SMEs in the film industry, notably for independent productions. MEPs deplore the " almost complete lack of companies specialising in providing loan financing in the audiovisual sector ".
" In a Europe of 25 Member States cooperation is increasingly becoming a strategic response to strengthen the competitiveness of the European film industry ", says Parliament, pointing to the increasing importance of co-productions and cross-border projects.
Finally, MEPs demand more European film festivals and the establishment of a mobility scholarship for young filmmakers. Text adopted
MEPs keen to support exchanges of European youth
Parliament wants to promote active citizenship and mutual understanding among young people across Europe. By adopting a co-decision report by Lissy GRÖNER (PES, DE) on the draft Youth in Action programme for 2007-13 in first reading by overwhelming majority (542 votes in favour, 76 against 12 abstentions), MEPs also ask for more funding than proposed by the Commission.
Instead of a €915 million budget, Parliament is proposing the figure of €1.128 billion which was already suggested by the rapporteur and the EP's Committee on Culture and Education on the basis of Parliament's position on the next long-term budget for 2007-13 - which was enshrined in the report by Reimer BÖGE (EPP-ED, DE).
Parliament points out that the appropriations indicated in the Commission proposal beyond the year 2006 are subject to the decisions to be taken on the next multi-annual financial framework. MEPs also call for project funding to be paid by the Commission within four months as a rule.
The programme is intended for young people aged between 13 and 30. However, Parliament insists that the main target group should be young people aged 15-28.
MEPs backed the rapporteur's repeated calls for young people with disabilities to be included on equal terms " so as to prevent any form of discrimination ".
The programme should also promote sport and cultural activities as a means of fostering social integration, tolerance and non-discrimination, Parliament demands.
In view of the success of European Youth Week, Parliament says this event should become an established part of EU youth policy, focusing on:
- information on the work of the European institutions;
- activities enabling young people to inform MEPs of their concerns
- a prize-giving for the best youth projects promoted by the Youth programme.
Parliament also asks for the name of the Youth of the world action to be changed into Youth in the world. Text adopted
President of Chile Ricardo Lagos addresses the European Parliament
The President of Chile, Ricardo LAGOS , delivered an upbeat assessment of his country's progress in democratisation and reform when he addressed a formal sitting of the European Parliament on Tuesday 25 October.
President LAGOS - who was first elected in 2000 - contrasted his present visit with his first visit to the Parliament fifteen years ago. Then he came as a political opponent of the Pinochet regime; this time he was invited as the democratically elected President of Chile. He remembered the support the Parliament had shown him on that occasion and thanked MEPs, telling them that " our history would have been different without you ".
Mr Lagos said he was " honoured and moved " to be invited to speak to the Parliament. He stressed the similarities between Europe and Chile - and said that shared both a " common cultural heritage " and a " close historical bond ". He also thanked MEPs for unanimously approving the 2002 Association Agreement between the EU and Chile that covers trade issues.
He began his address by giving positive assessment of the social progress that Chile has achieved in the last fifteen years. He said that poverty decreased by 40 per cent and that one in four houses in Chile have been constructed during these years. He also noted that seven out of every ten children in Chile now attend high school. Mr Lagos said this was helping to improve social cohesion in the country.
Nevertheless, he acknowledged that " chronic inequality " still exists in Chile and that the country was striving to have a proper balance between social protection and a market economy. Mr Lagos said that while his country had followed the so-called "Washington consensus" of free markets and deregulation, it was also trying to wed this to a network of social protection. He warned that countries incapable of a minimum level of social cohesion will end up with internal conflict.
President Lagos went on to say that Europe offered an interesting paradigm and European society represents " the kind of society we want to create ". Regarding the debates over which type of social model to follow, he said that in Chile the arguments were similar. " Your debates are our debates ," he told MEPs. He also applied this to environmental policy - particularly as the south of his country is under threat from ozone depletion.
The President told the House that Chile was keen to play a role in a world dominated and governed by multilateral organisations. He drew particular attention to the Chilean mission to Haiti which was carried out under UN auspices.
Finally, President Lagos told MEPs the kind of Europe he wanted to see - a Europe committed to free trade, giving a human face to globalisation, promoting internal and external social cohesion, and an important part of the " alliance of civilizations ".
Tony Blair tells MEPs how Europe should face up to globalisation
Tony BLAIR , President-in-Office of the EU Council, told MEPs that it was necessary to get Europe moving again and get it moving in the right direction. There were three main aims: first, to get agreement at the Hampton Court summit on what was the right direction for Europe and its economy; second, to agree on a set of new priority areas reflecting that direction; third, to get a budget deal in December in the light of these priorities.
Mr Blair praised the Commission's paper for the summit, with what he called its stark but right analysis on the scale of the challenges of globalisation. He hoped the summit would agree that paper, then move on to look at six priorities for the future:
"Research, development and innovation should take a larger share of the EU budget, but there should also be a better coordinated approach between the Member States by setting up a European Research Council along the lines of America's National Sciences Foundation. This would give us a chance to form world beating companies in the technologies of the future."
Secondly, Mr Blair called for a real common EU energy policy to develop a proper integrated electricity grid and use Europe's combined weight in negotiations with energy suppliers elsewhere - all the more so since Europe would soon be importing 90 per cent of its oil and gas. Nuclear power should be included in the analysis. Thirdly, there needed to be a focus on the European university sector which, he said, was not competing well with the US and was not ready to meet the challenge of competition from China and India. He wanted to ask the Commission to draw up a report on how to improve the sector's competitiveness and increase links to the business sector.
A fourth priority was migration policy, both looking at better controlling illegal migration and bringing the benefits of controlled migration to Europe's economies. "Those countries which opened their labour markets to the 10 new Member States have benefited from it," he said. A fifth key area was demographic change and enhancing work life balance. He said the open method on coordination was the best way to work together in enhancing childcare provisions, pension arrangements and social security systems rather than new European regulation.
Finally, he offered support for the Commission's idea of a globalisation fund, not to protect failing companies, but to protect and help people made redundant or facing difficulties in adapting to change in the labour market.
Among other issues, he called for progress in developing a counter-terrorism policy, including exchange of information between police services and data retention, repeating his willingness to use the first pillar legislative method. He also called for political agreement on the services directive by the end of the year, even if legislative adoption was not a prospect.
He was hopeful of reaching a budget deal at the December summit, which was especially vital for the ten new Member States: "If we are to get agreement it will be better if we have agreed a direction for Europe and let that influence the deal, and get a forward perspective on a more rational way of organising the EU budget in future."
If agreement could be reached on a way forward, covering globalisation, climate change and security, that would be a start in getting Europe moving again, he concluded: "Council, Commission and Parliament should work closely together, if not always in agreement. Europe has much to be proud of - let us show our citizens the next 50 years can be as good as the last."
(Note: the full text of Mr Blair's opening speech is included at the end of this summary of the debate.)
Commission President José BARROSO said that the Hampton Court Summit would be an opportunity to face up to the economic and social challenges that Europe faces. The Commission has already published its position on the summit, and Mr Barroso welcomed the positive reaction from the Parliament. The Commission, he recalled, had also published its position on how to re-launch the financial perspective.
Europe needed to modernise in order to meet the challenges of globalisation. The status quo for Europe was not an option. Europe needs ambitious policies and Europe needed to avoid the false argument of those that believe that European is only a market. The EU needs to have a structure for social cohesion. Europe can not be built on 25 separate energy or service markets. It was about getting the right combination of action at European and national levels. The EU would also need to regulate and deregulate, where necessary, but without an agreement on future funding, no one could plan economic priorities. Europe, he said, is a good example of how group of nations could work together in a globalised world. The proposed creation of the globalisation adjustment fund would be not put in place to help failing firms. The fund would be there to help people and Europe needed to show that it cares. All the EU institutions needed to work together. The Hampton Court summit should also address Europe's place in the world. It should be about building a new consensus on Europe's economic and social model.
Political group speakers
For the EPP-ED group, Hans-Gert POETTERING (DE) reminded Mr Blair it was his duty to represent all EU citizens, not just the UK. He welcomed the fact that Parliament's President would be present for the whole summit at Hampton Court and hoped this would set a precedent for the future. On globalisation, he said this was more than just economic: "It means we are one world. This is a spiritual, cultural, economic and moral challenge." Countries like China and Cuba could not be allowed to go on claiming human rights were internal matters. He stressed the importance of the WTO negotiations, giving the example of Morocco with its large proportion of young people: "If we do not open our markets to their products, including agriculture, progressively, not, of course, overnight, those young people will be knocking on the doors of Europe." Finally, he urged Mr Blair to ensure the Commission was included in all the work ahead planned by the Council.
The leader of the Socialist group, Martin SCHULZ (PES, DE) began by recalling the 7th July 2005 attacks in London, which he said had been attacks on the civil society of the whole of Europe. On the European social model, he warned that many "so-called economists" were calling for lower wages, longer working hours and fewer trade union rights as the way to boost growth. "We do not accept the destruction of the European social model, the idea that economic and technological progress leads to social progress. We want free provision of services, but not social dumping." It was good, he said, if companies made profits, but their workers should share in that success with decent wages to feed their families.
Graham WATSON (UK), leader of the ALDE group, said it was sad that some people were unable to see beyond a simplistic debate between a liberal and a social Europe. He said ninety per cent of Europe's GDP came from countries with social costs that were too high. "The German welfare state model no longer works. It is 'kaput'. If the EU is to properly combine reform of its economic system... to provide the wealth needed to pay for social policy, we need a common response to the common challenge [of globalisation]," he said. With the answer being neither the American or Gallic model, perhaps what was needed was the third way? This would require leadership from the front - and it would be easier for the UK to lead if it were to join the euro, he said.
For the Greens/EFA group, Monica FRASSONI (Greens/EFA, IT) said Mr Blair had once again shown off his performance skills, but she wanted to know what, other than nuclear power, Mr Blair had in mind for the energy policy. She called for a focus of research and development spending to be renewable energy and environmental technologies. As for the European social model, "We should promote our principles of solidarity, democracy, rights and healthcare around the world." Europe could not be re-launched, she added without an adequate deal on the budget.
Francis WURTZ (FR), for the GUE/NGL group welcomed the fact that Mr Blair's speech to the Parliament in June had identified three main problems with today's European Union. Namely, crises of confidence, a need to change a Europe "that has delivered 20 million unemployed" and that a substantive debate on the future of Europe is needed. Mr Wurtz went on to cite August's "Gate Gourmet" industrial dispute in Britain (where a US company made staff redundant), as an example to warn against the dangers of market dominance. He said that it was the conviction of his group that the European social model was "too precious" to be tampered with. He warned MEPs that the "chilly winds of the market" are too cold for Europe.
Nigel FARAGE (UK), for the IND/DEM group, welcomed the European Commission's initiative to withdraw proposals for European legislation saying this was "music to euro-sceptics' ears". However, he doubted whether the Commission would implement this legislative rollback as envisaged by the European Commissioner for Enterprise and Industry Gunter Verheugen. Referring to the venue of the informal summit due to be held on 27 October, Mr Farage claimed that King Henry VIII (whose palace it was) was "the first eurosceptic".
Irish MEP Brian CROWLEY for the UEN group stated it was important that Europe met the challenges of globalisation. He said that the deliberations of European leaders should be guided by the following four principles; solidarity so that the social model is protected, generosity towards the new members of the European Union, responsibility towards others and finally the capacity to implement policy. On the last point Mr Crowley warned that the real test of legislation is in improving peoples life's on a daily basis".
Roger HELMER (UK), representing the non-attached (NI) Members of Parliament, said Mr Blair had disappointed pro-Europeans by not living up to the expectations they had of his pro-European intentions when he was first elected in 1997. Mr Helmer then went on to suggest that the Mr Blair's British Labour MEPs should defect to the EPP group in the European Parliament as they consistently failed to support the policies of the Prime Minister and his government.
Mr Blair's response to group leaders
Responding to the group leaders' comments, Mr Blair began with an ironic welcome for Roger Helmer's suggestions, saying that if he was the future of the Conservative Party, Labour could look forward to a long period in office.
He told Hans-Gert Poettering that he agreed on the importance of the WTO, and that the CAP needed to have "a perspective of future change" rather than an overnight transformation. To Martin Schulz, he said, "We do not want to destroy social solidarity but to make it relevant to today's world." Responding to Graham Watson, he said he hoped the ideas he was putting forward would show the way out of the narrow liberal/social Europe debates. To Monica Frassoni, he said he wanted research to focus on biotechnology, where Europe should be a world leader. He also pointed to the example of Airbus to show how Europeans working together could achieve the scale needed to compete on a global market. For Francis Wurtz, he listed his government's social achievements, such as the minimum wage, the New Deal for the unemployed and the Working Families Tax Credit, before adding that often some on the left joined the right in attacking progressive governments. He told Nigel Farage that he very much welcomed Commissioner Verheugen's plans on simplifying EU legislation, saying that there was a case for both good regulation where it was needed and deregulation where that was needed. Finally, he repeated to Brian Crowley that he was not seeking to abolish the CAP all at once, but there needed to be a perspective for reform.
In a more general conclusion he said: "There is a danger if citizens see globalisation as a threat, when it could really be an opportunity. Yes, China and India are scaling up their economy in a striking way, and are competing on top-end products as well. Other countries like Vietnam are also coming up fast. This is a huge competitive challenge and an opportunity. They will need financial services and technology and will start importing our goods."
Mr Blair said there was no question of abandoning social solidarity, he supported the social dimension for Europe, but it must also enhance Europe's competitive position. The EU had been set up to meet a desire to change from the past, and it should be an instrument of change for the future. "Are we really incapable of modernising our social model in the way we want? No, we can do it if we listen to our people. They are not saying they don't want Europe; they say that want Europe to answer the concerns they have on globalisation, terrorism and the environment. Pro-Europeans must lead the case for change - it is Eurosceptics who want no change in the EU as this will allow their nationalist agenda to gain ground. Let's act together to make Europe relevant to our citizens."
British speakers during the debate
Timothy KIRKHOPE (UK) leader of the British Conservatives in the Parliament, said the Prime Minister had outlined a second "shopping list" in his speech. He wanted to know when the "goods would be delivered". He wanted to know the Prime Minister's position on a common energy policy, calling his decision to support "a reversal". Mr Kirkhope stated that the Presidency had stalled. He welcomed progress made on Turkey. What were the concrete plans to face up to the challenges of India and China? There had been no progress on reaching a deal on future financing. It was still unclear as to whether the British Prime Minister would negotiate on the rebate and there was no progress over the Constitution. Mr Blair would have to live up to his rhetoric.
Ian HUDGHTON (Greens/EFA, UK) regretted that Mr Blair had left the chamber before the end of the debate. There was still no budget for 2007. The UK government was making proposals that would cost Scotland £1 billion in structural funds. There was also concern in rural areas, given the UK government's position to withdraw funding for European programmes. There had been no progress as regards the Constitution or to reaching a deal on December summit.
Ashley MOTE (NA, UK) wanted to know what the UK government was doing about the "institutional looting of funds by the EU". Mr Mote said that the Court of Auditors says that €600 billion had gone missing since 1973 when the UK entered the Union. He called for the EU's accounting systems to be reformed so that they meet international standards.
Jean LAMBERT (Greens/EFA, UK) said she hoped Mr Blair had got the message that the services of general interest should be left out of the services directive. She wanted to know what the presidency would do to encourage eco-efficiency projects and called for renewable energy to get at least as much funding as nuclear power. "We need to link the Lisbon strategy to tackling climate change, and we need to find ways of driving up environmental and labour standards globally," she said.
Gary TITLEY (PES, UK) welcomed progress under the UK presidency on a range of fronts, including energy policy and development in Africa. He said the best way to restore confidence in the EU would be for Member States to respect the commitments they entered into, thus curing the EU's "delivery deficit."
Douglas ALEXANDER , UK Minister for Europe, responded to the debate stressing, in particular, the UK Presidency's commitment to trying to reach a fair budget settlement in December, and arguing that this would be more easily achieved if a new general direction for Europe had been settled first.
Commissioner Margot WALLSTRÖM , in her response to the debate, said that after recently meeting with the Africa Commission, Europe's perceived problems seemed very manageable. The only regret she had was that the debate had not focused enough on how to regain citizens' confidence and democratic legitimacy.
Full transcript of speech given by Tony Blair to the European Parliament:
Mr President, Colleagues. It is a very great pleasure to be with you here this afternoon in the European Parliament in Strasbourg, and let me add my word of welcome to our colleagues from the Ukraine. If at any point in time we should ever feel lacking in confidence about Europe and its values, then the interest of people such as our Ukrainian friends should tell us that the values of Europe are strong and are much envied by so much of the rest of the world.
Mr President, my purpose in coming here today is, as I explained I would, to report back on what we intend over these coming weeks to be the basis of the UK Presidency, and I have with me Douglas Alexander, who is our Europe Minister, and after I have left he will stay to answer more questions – especially the difficult questions. However I shall be here, I am pleased to say, for at least an hour and a half to hear both your comments and to answer some of those questions myself.
Can I also say, just at the very outset, to explain how we want to take forward the Presidency over these coming weeks. On 23 June in Brussels we set out an essential vision as to how we combat the challenge of globalisation, and I think it is agreed generally in Europe that we need to get Europe moving and we need to get it moving in the right direction. The question is how we do that? We now have an opportunity, both in the informal summit, which is tomorrow, and then in the formal summit in December, to set out that direction and put in place the specific policies to match it. So over these two summits our idea is first to agree the right direction for Europe economically; then secondly to set out some new priority areas for European action; and then thirdly, on the basis of that and in the context of that, to get a budget deal in December at the formal Council.
Now let me first of all come to the informal summit. This is what I want to come out of this informal summit. The first thing is that I want to get that informal summit to agree effectively the Commission paper presented by President Barroso and the European Commission. That Commission paper is an analysis of the challenge of globalisation and how we meet it, how we meet it both as member states and how we meet it as the European Union. It is, I have to say, a stark analysis, but it is the right analysis. It shows just how great a competitive challenge we have from the emerging economies such as China and India, never mind the United States and others; it shows how important it is we deal with the 20 million people – almost 20 million – unemployed in the European Union; it shows how we must make our labour markets less restrictive, how we have to make sure in research and development, and innovation and other areas, we catch up with the best practice in the world; it shows how in areas like energy, where after all we are going to be importing within the next few years something like 90% of our oil and gas needs, that Europe has to up its game considerably; and it shows also the enormous demographic challenge that we will have, that we will have fewer people of working age, more people in retirement, more people therefore needing to work, and therefore issues such as work-life balance and how we allow people both to raise their family and to work in the workplace is all the more crucial.
So the first thing that we want to do at this informal summit is to get that paper agreed and make that the basis then for the discussion we have about Europe, its social model, its economic future. However, in addition to that we also want to add some specific areas of future priorities for European work, and I just want to go through some of those, if I may. In respect of these areas of future work, we are in addition, as the Presidency, publishing some papers today from academics within the European Union on certain aspects of the challenge we face in each of those areas, and those will be published and available for people, Members of Parliament and of course for people attending the summit tomorrow.
But what are these areas, what are the new priority areas that we should be thinking of? First of all, there is research and development and innovation. We need both to make sure that more of the European budget is spent on those priority areas if those are the future areas for the European economy, and we also need to co-ordinate better how we do the work in these areas. We propose specifically a European Research Council that is the equivalent of the American National Science Foundation, that will support the funding of research and development projects and gives us the chance in Europe to be forming the world beating companies in the technologies of the future. So one major area for future priority work is research and development.
The second area is energy and energy policy. I believe it is time that we developed within Europe a common European energy policy. For far too long we have been in the situation where, in a haphazard and random way energy needs and energy priorities are simply determined in each country according to its needs, but without any sense of the collective power we could have in Europe if we were prepared to pool our energy and our resources. This should focus, not on new regulatory barriers, but rather on obtaining a genuinely open energy market. It should deal with, for example, a properly integrated European Union grid. Already this is done on a bilateral basis between countries. Think of how much greater economic power and competitiveness we could have if we were prepared to make sure that that was integrated on a European-wide basis. Secondly, we like other major countries in the world, should be prepared to enter into dialogue at a European level with key suppliers of energy, use our collective weight to make our voice heard; and thirdly, we need to be developing … coming to some common views at least about the possibilities and perspectives on issues to do with areas like nuclear power - I thought certain things might have a mixed reception! But these are areas into which we need to be putting future work.
The third area – universities. Let’s be absolutely clear about the situation in Europe today. Our university sector is not competing in the way it needs to with America. You have got China and India developing their university sector in an extraordinary way, and yet if you look at the overall, not just the spending on our university sector, our tertiary education sector, but also where we are getting the value added in the connection between business and university, we don’t have anything like the same possibilities in Europe that they have in other parts of the world. Our proposal is that we task the Commission specifically on coming back and reporting to the European Council next year on the challenge facing European universities, how we compete with the United States, how we get more public-private partnership into sustaining them, and more graduate schools, linking business and the academic world across the European Union.
There is a fourth area I would like to suggest for priority work, and that is how we both control migration, but use migration to boost the effectiveness and competitiveness of the European economy. We need both to make sure that we have the proper controls on illegal immigration, at the same time as recognising that controlled migration can actually bring a benefit to our European economies. One of the papers that we publish today is a paper from a French academic, Patrick Weil, and he has also been an advisor to politicians in France, which points out how ironically those countries that have opened their labour markets to those from the accession countries, the accession ten, have actually benefited economically from that opening up. Now I think we need to take those lessons further.
The fifth area is where we need to make far greater progress on what I might call the demographic or work-life balance issues. Now here it is not appropriate for the European Union to be engaged in substantial bouts of extra regulation and so on, but here is where the open method of co-ordination could work properly – in things like work-life balance, in childcare, and provision for people to be able to raise their family and work at the same time, in how we get the best practice in pension and social security systems across Europe. This would be sensible if we were looking at how we modernise the European economy.
And then the final part of priority work is in relation to what was called by the European Commission, the Globalisation Fund. And I just want to make one thing very clear about this idea, the important thing about the Globalisation Fund is this, it should not be a fund that protects companies that need to restructure, or failing companies, or bails out companies that can’t succeed. What it should be however is protecting and helping people in circumstances where restructuring has made them redundant or given them difficulties within the labour market. Now to take an example from the UK recently where we had the Rover works, where thousands of people were made redundant, we didn’t stop the restructuring because it was necessary I am afraid economically, even though tragic for the individuals involved, but we did provide real help with retraining, reskilling, finding new jobs around the workforce in order to protect, not the job, but the individual. I think such a fund, if it is done in the proper way, helps us meet the challenge of globalisation, rather than hinders us.
So at the informal Council tomorrow, what we want to propose is that we agree the basic direction in the Commission paper, and then in the six areas of work I have just set out, that we set out how we can make progress on each of those in order to enhance the competitiveness of the European Union, and also its social solidarity in helping people adjust to the challenge of globalisation.
In addition tomorrow, arising out of the special Council that we had on 13 July, we want to propose measures for a counter-terrorism strategy in order that we get agreement to those measures at the December Council. Those should focus on things like the radicalisation of people inside the European Union, the protection of our infrastructure, and in particular how we exchange information and protection better, how we retain that, how we get cooperation between the different security and police services inside the European Union in order to protect our people better, and as the Home Secretary, Charles Clarke, said to you I think when he was here at the European Parliament, we are happy to deal with this in the first pillar so that that can be part of the co-decision-making process. Now if we can agree that tomorrow, then I believe that we have the beginnings at least of the right context in which we can get a financing deal.
In addition to these other issues, there are outstanding dossiers, and let me just say a word about those at the moment. On the Working Time Directive, I hope we can reach agreement under the UK Presidency, we will certainly try to do it. In respect of the Services Directive, we know the position taken by the European Parliament, I still however hope that it is possible to get political agreement on the right way forward here, because I say this in all sincerity to you, the Services Directive is a necessary part of completing the single market and it is important for Europe. I would also like – you know I decided to come to the European Parliament today, and was unable to attend the British Parliament, this is a kind of reminder, so thank you for that. Can I also say I would like - and this may get me into further trouble - but specifically say to the President of the Commission, who I congratulate on the work that he has done over the past few months, and say that Commissioner Verheugen’s proposals on deregulation are an important indicator that Europe is prepared to regulate where it is in the interests of its citizens, but prepared also to deregulate where it is necessary for our competitiveness. I think colleagues, this will be giving our Ukrainian colleagues an excellent example of what a modern democracy is all about.
When we then come to the December Council, it is our intention to do our level best to reach a financing deal, and I want to make it quite clear, I know this particularly from conversations I have had with members from the accession countries, obviously for all of us the European budget is important, and as we know in Britain there are major issues that arise in connection with it. However I think we should remember – that is we, the 15 members of the European Union as was some time ago – that for the accession ten countries this is of fundamental importance to them. And what I want to say to you is I acknowledge our responsibility as the Presidency to do our level best to reach agreement. I hope we can do that, whatever the particular level the budget may be.
Also can I just make one other point, which is that if we are to get a budget agreement, however, and I know that people want that, they want it in the European Parliament, they want it in the European Council too, we are going to be in a better position to get that agreement if we have agreed an economic direction, new priorities for work, and if those can then influence the outcome of that budget debate. That budget debate has got to make a start in this financing deal in re-ordering the priorities, and it has got, through the review process, to be able to give us a forward perspective of a more rational way to spend the European budget in today’s world. If we want our economy to meet the future challenges, at some point we have got to make sure that the budget is aligned with the economic priorities of our citizens, of our business and of our workforce.
Now finally on the external relations. In respect of climate change you will know that we have successful agreements both with China, India, and also with Russia, on the issue of how we take forward a proper dialogue on climate change. And in particular I would commend to you the coal demonstration plant, with near zero emissions, that we have agreed with China for Europe to build. I think this could be an important signal for the future, and I am perfectly happy, in response to questions, to say more about climate change in a moment. In December also we hope we can get agreement at the December Council on an Africa strategy. I think Europe can be proud of what we have done in respect of development, but the truth is we need to do more, and we also need incidentally for these reasons to have a successful outcome to the WTO negotiations in Hong Kong. In defence, it is just worth pointing out that when we began the process of European defence, people were very sceptical. Today we have 9 different European missions round the world, undertaken by European forces, and that shows that European defence can indeed work. And of course we have had the accession negotiations with Turkey and Croatia opening.
Now our aim therefore is to get the following things done: a new economic direction agreed; new priorities for European work, in areas like research and development, energy, universities, migration, demography and so on; a future financing deal that is fair, that makes us start on addressing those priorities and gives the perspective in the future of being able substantially to re-order the European budget; of getting a justice and home affairs set of conclusions that allows us to combat terrorism and illegal immigration, whilst taking the benefit of proper managed migration; to take forward our defence, particularly common defence policy in areas like strategic airlift and air-to-air refuelling; to get clear December conclusions on a development strategy for Europe in respect of Africa; and to make sure that we keep to a strong process of change in order to combat greenhouse gas emissions and the environmental challenge we face.
We came to the point a few months ago where as a result of the No votes in the referendums, there was a sense that Europe was in paralysis. If we want to get Europe moving again, and in the correct direction, then we have to agree both what that direction is and the specific measures to get us there. If we are able, through the course of these next few weeks, to offer at least some explanation and answer to our citizens of how we meet the challenge of globalisation, how we give greater security in the era of global terrorism and mass migration, how we have a foreign policy that uses Europe’s collective weight for the benefit of the citizens of Europe, if we are able to do that then we will at least have made a start on putting Europe back together again, on the right track and moving forward.
No one Presidency can achieve all of that, but if we can achieve what we have set out here, I think it will be significant. I came here today in order to report back, both on what we have done and what we intend to do over the next few weeks. I can tell you we intend to report back again and make sure that you are kept constantly in touch with the deliberations within the Council. And if I may end on this point, Mr President, it is important that we make sure that in addressing these challenges, the European Commission, the European Parliament, the European Council, work together and work together closely. That is our desire. As is obvious from the debates you have, and the debates we have with you, we are not always in agreement, but to return to the point I made at the very beginning, it is also obvious from those up in the gallery watching our proceedings, that Europe has an immense amount to be proud of, but it is time we showed our citizens that the next 50 years could be as good as the last.
An EU approach to economic immigration?
Immigrants contribute to the prosperity of Member States and have a beneficial effect on the EU labour market, according to MEPs who adopted a hotly contested report drawn up by Ewa KLAMT (EPP-ED, DE) aimed at defining for the first time an EU strategy on economic migration. The main points of disagreement were the type of rights which should be granted to legal immigrants and the possibility of creating a Green Card system.
Should the EU adopt a Green Card system to regulate the flow of immigrants from outside Europe? Would this help to solve the economic problems caused by Europe's ageing population? Answering these and other questions was the purpose of Ms Klamt's own-initiative report, which was drafted in response to a Commission green paper on economic migration. MEPs highlighted "the need to adopt a common immigration policy in order to end the exploitation of (illegal) workers" and said that "economic migration is a positive human phenomenon". Yet MEPs emphasised that this was only "part of the solution" to Europe's demographic problems and economic difficulties. Problems within the EU labour market should be also solved by stimulating innovation and encouraging the employment of older workers in the EU.
Integration of migrants
MEPs called on Member States to promote the integration of economic migrants. They stressed that "the right to vote is a matter of Member State competence", while saying that to encourage the social and political integration of migrant workers Member States should recognise "the right of migrants who have been continuously resident in the Union for at least five years to vote in local and European Parliament elections."
MEPs rejected a controversial paragraph calling the European Commission to present a proposal on the creation of a Green Card system for economic migrants, although they did support the setting up of a single administrative procedure for issuing an employment and residence permit for economic migrants. In any case, the admission of a third country national for economic reasons should in principle be linked to the existence of a specific job, MEPs added.
Unable to reach a consensus, MEPs finally decided not to comment on the Commission's suggestion to give priority to citizens from all Member States before looking for non-EU nationals to fill any job vacancy (the principle of "Community preference"). Rapporteur Ewa Klamt had supported this idea in her original report.
Security issues
Any common policy to manage legal migration in Europe is inevitably linked with security issues and with the need to fight illegal immigration effectively. All members of the committee agreed that it must be up to each Member State to decide how many immigrants it can accept on its territory and under what conditions. However, the system chosen to manage legal and illegal migration in an EU country has a clear effect on other Member States. In that sense, MEPs pointed out that the mass regularisation of illegal immigrants carried out by countries like Spain "is no substitute for substantial policies for dealing with immigration or an effective means of recruiting economic migrants".
On the question of the return of illegal immigrants, MEPs finally urged the Commission "to define a return policy, based on the promotion of voluntary return, including possibly supportive measures in the country of origin".
The resulting text differed so much from the draft report initially proposed by rapporteur Ewa KLAMT that many members of her political group decided to abstain in the final vote on the text as a whole. The report was adopted by 259 votes in favour, 85 against and 176 abstentions.
Immigrants contribute to the prosperity of Member States and have a beneficial effect on the EU labour market, according to MEPs who adopted a hotly contested report drawn up by Ewa KLAMT (EPP-ED, DE) aimed at defining for the first time an EU strategy on economic migration. The main points of disagreement were the type of rights which should be granted to legal immigrants and the possibility of creating a Green Card system.
Should the EU adopt a Green Card system to regulate the flow of immigrants from outside Europe? Would this help to solve the economic problems caused by Europe's ageing population? Answering these and other questions was the purpose of Ms Klamt's own-initiative report, which was drafted in response to a Commission green paper on economic migration. MEPs highlighted "the need to adopt a common immigration policy in order to end the exploitation of (illegal) workers" and said that "economic migration is a positive human phenomenon". Yet MEPs emphasised that this was only "part of the solution" to Europe's demographic problems and economic difficulties. Problems within the EU labour market should be also solved by stimulating innovation and encouraging the employment of older workers in the EU.
Integration of migrants
MEPs called on Member States to promote the integration of economic migrants. They stressed that "the right to vote is a matter of Member State competence", while saying that to encourage the social and political integration of migrant workers Member States should recognise "the right of migrants who have been continuously resident in the Union for at least five years to vote in local and European Parliament elections."
MEPs rejected a controversial paragraph calling the European Commission to present a proposal on the creation of a Green Card system for economic migrants, although they did support the setting up of a single administrative procedure for issuing an employment and residence permit for economic migrants. In any case, the admission of a third country national for economic reasons should in principle be linked to the existence of a specific job, MEPs added.
Unable to reach a consensus, MEPs finally decided not to comment on the Commission's suggestion to give priority to citizens from all Member States before looking for non-EU nationals to fill any job vacancy (the principle of "Community preference"). Rapporteur Ewa Klamt had supported this idea in her original report.
Security issues
Any common policy to manage legal migration in Europe is inevitably linked with security issues and with the need to fight illegal immigration effectively. All members of the committee agreed that it must be up to each Member State to decide how many immigrants it can accept on its territory and under what conditions. However, the system chosen to manage legal and illegal migration in an EU country has a clear effect on other Member States. In that sense, MEPs pointed out that the mass regularisation of illegal immigrants carried out by countries like Spain "is no substitute for substantial policies for dealing with immigration or an effective means of recruiting economic migrants".
On the question of the return of illegal immigrants, MEPs finally urged the Commission "to define a return policy, based on the promotion of voluntary return, including possibly supportive measures in the country of origin".
The resulting text differed so much from the draft report initially proposed by rapporteur Ewa KLAMT that many members of her political group decided to abstain in the final vote on the text as a whole. The report was adopted by 259 votes in favour, 85 against and 176 abstentions.
Parliament highlights dangers of Avian Flu pandemic
Better to plan than to panic in the face of avian flu - that was the conclusion of a debate at the European Parliament and the resolution adopted by MEPs. While the risk of a pandemic remains elevated in Europe, production capacity of vaccines and anti-virals is limited and some countries still lack emergency plans. MEPs advocate improved information and the coordination of efforts at EU level and on an international plan.
Parliament adopted a resolution calling on the Commission to step up its efforts in preparing for a possible bird flu pandemic affecting Europe. MEPs note the possibility that the avian flu virus could spread into humans, mutate or recombine with a seasonal influenza virus, and thus pose a serious health risk to European citizens. The resolution therefore urges the Commission to "strengthen its coordinating role" of preparedness plans in Member States, and to undertake the "necessary steps for the production of new vaccines in the shortest possible time." In addition, the EP suggests the "possibility of using the EU Solidarity Fund as a precautionary instrument allowing for pre-emptive action to be taken in preparation for an influenza pandemic."
The resolution contains recommendations for the Member States as well. It calls on EU governments to "increase influenza vaccination coverage," and insists "that workers in and around the poultry sector be vaccinated as a matter of priority." The Parliament also asks the Member States to update their preparedness plans according to "WHO [World Health Organization] and ECDC [European Centre for Disease Control] recommendations." National authorities are urged to acquire "advanced purchase agreements to ensure adequate supplies of vaccines and antivirals to meet pandemic demand as well as antibiotics to treat secondary infections."
Finally, the resolution "points out that the principal source of infection still remains in the countries of South-East Asia." It therefore calls on both the Commission and Member States to "make available funds for assistance to South Asian countries in combating the disease in terms of expertise and finance."
The resolution follows a debate based on an oral question by Karl-Heinz FLORENZ (EPP-ED, DE) on Tuesday. Health and Consumer Protection Commissioner Markos KYPRIANOU stressed that all Member States had provided the Commission with contingency plans, although some of them were only provisional. He noted that the Commission lacks the authority to stockpile vaccines at the Community level - the Council must first give it a mandate to do so. The Commissioner also underlined that it was indispensable to "create incentives for industry" to manufacture more vaccines and antivirals.
Caroline LUCAS (Greens/EFA, UK) and other Members called for a ban on the import of live birds into the EU. John BOWIS (EPP-ED, UK) urged the Commission and the wider public not to confuse a sense of urgency with a sense of panic. He emphasized the need for clarity, information and full disclosure by Member States. On the other hand, Françoise GROSSETÊTE (EPP-ED, FR) warned that prevention and precaution were crucial in the fight against avian flu. "No one will ever reproach you for having saved lives," she told the Commissioner.
Legal protection of biotechnological inventions
By approving a joint resolution on the patenting of biotechnological inventions, Parliament confirmed its support for biotechnology, but only within an appropriate framework guaranteeing the respect of ethical, environmental and health aspects. Although there was consensus on this general principle, political groups were divided on some important aspects, such as therapeutic cloning and the limit of the patent protection. On the question of patents including the use of human DNA, MEPs stressed that germ cells are part of the human body and therefore are not patentable. Moreover, they took up the case of a patent issued by the European Patent Office (EPO) that includes a method of selection of human germ cells. Since this patent could violate the EU Directive on the legal protection of biotechnological inventions, the Parliament asked the Commission to file an objection to the EPO.
The question of a correct interpretation of the Directive with regards to the level of protection granted by a patent on DNA was also raised. According to the MEPs, "it is unclear whether a patent on DNA covers only the application in this function or whether other functions are also covered by the patent." During yesterday debate, Commissioner Charlie McCREEVY said, "On examination of the technical provisions of the directive, it can be seen that none of these articles explicitly addresses the concept of a restricted scope of protection." Nevertheless, he added that "the restrictive interpretation should not be incompatible with the directive." While the Liberal and Socialist Groups were in favour of not taking a position now and waiting for more research on this issue, Parliament opted for the restrictive interpretation. The approved amendment, tabled by the UEN and the EPP-ED, provides, indeed, that patents can be granted only "in connection with a concrete application" of the invention.
Finally, the MEPs addressed the issue of the distinction between therapeutic and reproductive cloning. According to Commissioner McCreevy, the directive is clear that reproductive cloning involving the creation of new human beings is excluded. On the other hand, he said "The term ‘therapeutic cloning’ covers a wide range of different possibilities and research may be permitted in some Member States and not in others." Again the Parliament was divided. Liberals and Socialists defended therapeutic cloning arguing that there is no ethical reason for a complete ban on patenting of inventions relating to stem cells. This was not the majority view, however, and Parliament instead approved an amendment that explicitly rejects the cloning of the human being in all phases of his life, including research on human embryos.
Greenhouse effect: fluorinated gases in the dock
Fluorinated gases are less well known than CO2 but they are responsible for at least 5 per cent of the greenhouse effect. The EU - and Parliament in particular - are planning rules drastically to reduce their use. This is the implication of two second reading reports by Avril DOYLE (EPP-ED, IE) which were adopted by MEPs on 26 October 2005..
Fluorinated gases are widely used in air conditioners, refrigerators and insulating foam. They are even present in the soles of some trainers. If they escape into the atmosphere, their damaging effects can last for hundreds, if not thousands, of years. Their harmfulness or "global warming potential" (GWP) is measured on a scale from 1 (equal to CO2) to more than 20 000 for sulphur hexafluoride (SF6).
The first of the two reports adopted by Parliament deals with a directive which aims to regulate the use of these gases in vehicle air conditioning systems. Parliament opted for a ban on fluorinated gases with a GWP of more than 150 in new models planned from 2011 onwards and in all vehicle from 2017. This threshold would eliminated some gases currently used by manufacturers, notably HFC-134a, but will allow continued use of HFC-152a, which has a lower GWP (120) and should encourage technical innovation. Just one amendment was adopted to this directive: it allows Member States to promote other air conditioning systems through tax incentives. A second reading agreement with the Council therefore seems likely.
A highly political decision on the legal base
The second report, dealing with a general regulation covering all fluorinated gases, was the subject of much more lively debate, in particular when it came to the legal base for the legislation. This is not a minor quibble for punctilious lawyers, but political choice with serious implications. The Council, in its common position, had chosen a double base: the internal market (Article 95 of the EC Treaty) and the environment (Article 175).
MEPs were divided on the issue and it took up most of the debate on Monday evening. The rapporteur, Avril Doyle, with the backing of the Environment Committee, wanted a single legal base, Article 175. The difference is that article 95 favours harmonisation to a single standard, according to internal market logic, while Article 175 makes it easier for Member States wishing to impose stricter limits to do so, as is presently the case for Denmark for example. "My main priority has been to achieve greater legal certainty for industry," said Mrs Doyle during the debate.
Despite this, some industrialists, who produce refrigeration or fixed air conditioning units, are concerned that Article 175 would lead to a fragmentation of the European market. To reassure them, the rapporteur said that regardless of the legal base used, "The internal market will still be protected from unjustified trade barriers." A double base might lead some Member States to challenge the legislation in the Court of Justice, which, according to the rapporteur, was likely to rule in favour of Article 175 after an unnecessary period of uncertainty.
This was a fierce debate. Horst SCHNELLHARDT (EPP-ED, DE) and Alessandro FOGLIETTA (UEN, IT) for example, both argued in favour of the double legal base, condemning the risks to the internal market. "There's no point putting obstacles in the way of harmonisation," said Mr Foglietta. On the other hand, Richard SEEBER (EPP-ED, AT) and Dorette CORBEY (PES, NL) were in favour of Article 175: "It is not for the European Union to prevent the Member States pursuing ambitious environmental policies." This view was shared by Johannes BLOKLAND (IND/DEM, NL), Jonas SJÖSTEDT (GUE/NGL, SE) and Caroline LUCAS (Greens/EFA, UK), the last two of whom both condemned the heavy lobbying of industrial interest groups on this point. The ALDE group and a large number of EPP-ED members were in favour of a single base too, but for them it should be the internal market provisions, according to amendments put down by Holger KRAHMER (ALDE, DE) and Vittorio PRODI (ALDE, IT) on the one hand, and Malcolm HARBOUR (EPP-ED, UK), Anja WEISGERBER (EPP-ED, DE) and Karl-Heinz FLORENZ (EPP-ED, DE) on the other.
In the end, no single amendment reached the necessary qualified majority of 367 votes in favour. The regulation will therefore continue to have a dual legal base as formulated in the Council's common position.
The Environment Committee had put forward a number of amendments aimed at eliminating fluorinated gases from a number of products: domestic and industrial refrigerators, fixed air conditioning units, insulating foam, aerosols etc. All these amendments were rejected by the plenary, in line with the advice from Commissioner Stavros DIMAS who said impact assessments should be carried out before taking any such decisions. MEPs nevertheless asked the Commission to develop new legislative proposals by the end of 2008 to deal with non-vehicle air conditioning systems and refrigeration systems in modes of transport.
MEPs also strengthened the provisions regarding labelling of appliances, and regarding monitoring, professional training and certification of businesses dealing with fluorinated gases. In addition, to help small and medium sized businesses, MEPs called for a European register to be available to them, with details of all the restrictions imposed in different Member States on different products. Finally, several amendments were adopted with a view to allowing those Member States who wish to do so the possibility of imposing stricter measures, in particular if these are part of their policies for implementing the Kyoto protocol.
Food additives and sweeteners under review
The European Parliament approved a report which scrutinizes various kinds of substances which may be added in foodstuffs or which should be restricted in the light of recent technical and scientific developments. This report by Mojca DRCAR MURKO (ALDE, SI) was adopted with 556 votes in favour, 98 against and 8 abstentions.
Two years ago the Commission announced its intention to propose a general revision of the legislation on food additives but since it is not ready yet, some interim corrections are needed. The report adopted today deals with the updating of two former directives :
- Directive 95/2/EC on food additives other than colours and sweeteners (amended five times since 1995);
- Directive 94/35/EC on sweeteners for use in foodstuffs (amended twice since 1994).
These revisions deal, in particular, with authorisation of new substances and revision of the positive list of permitted additives. The residual levels of nitrites and nitrates for instance will be revised. The European Food Safety Agency recommends that the levels of nitrite and nitrate are set down in the legislation as “added amount”. EFSA is of the opinion that monitoring of residual levels of nitrite and nitrate in the final products is of limited value. MEPs shared this view.
Many national exemptions for traditional products have been endorsed by MEPs, under detailed conditions, in order to facilitate an agreement at the first reading stage. In order to protect people suffering from allergies, restrictions are introduced for soybean hemicellulose which should not be permitted for unprocessed food in which it is not expected to be found. On the other hand, some products are added to the positive list of authorised additives like pullulan (a new polysaccharide), TBHQ (an antioxidant) and starch aluminium. The new Directive modifies provisions regarding the use of sulphites in cooked crustaceans, table grapes and lychees. Amendments asking for a re-evaluation of aspartame and of two antibiotics used as food supplements were rejected.
The fight against organised crime - strengthening Europol
Parliament call on Member States to ensure that Europol’s role as a criminal intelligence body is strengthened to allow it to fulfil its task of providing Member States with information and intelligence leading to more effective results in preventing and combating organised crime. First, however, Europol should be made into an EU body, democratically accountable to Parliament.
The consultative report on a proposed Council decision was drawn up by Bill NEWTON DUNN (ALDE, UK) and adopted by MEPs on 26 October 2005.. Its states that each Member State should establish a Serious and Organised Crime Unit and an Asset Recovery Unit, to ensure coordination at national level and to act as a single contact point and to be based on recent and successful introduction of such units in the UK and Ireland.
MEPs call on the Member States to collect statistics on relevant offences and forward those statistics to the Commission, which should draw up harmonised and comparable statistics as from 2006. Each Member State should adopt the necessary measures to ensure that persons who supply information useful for the prevention, uncovering and/or punishment of crimes committed by criminal organisations, whether they are witnesses or perpetrators of crimes, are adequately protected against the risks of retaliation, threats or direct intimidation targeting themselves or their relatives.
The EU has taken a lead in the fight against organised crime since the Treaty of Amsterdam and the Amsterdam European Council of 16 and 17 June 1997, which adopted the first action plan to combat organised crime. In 1998, the Council adopted a Joint Action on participation in a criminal organisation. However, it is now seen as necessary to provide the Union with a more powerful and ambitious instrument to approximate more closely Member States' criminal legislation and improve cooperation in order to combat organised crime more effectively, inter alia by harmonizing the minimum thresholds of criminal penalties.
This particular proposal for a Council Framework Decision aims at harmonising the definition of what constitutes a criminal organisation. Such an organisation is understood to be a structured association of at least two persons who, for material gain, commit serious crimes punishable with at least four years of imprisonment, such as trafficking in weapons, drugs or human beings, economic crimes or money laundering.
It also proposes to punish leaders of such organisations with an imprisonment of at least ten years and participation, including supportive activities for the organisation, with five years of imprisonment. The proposal envisages lowering of the sentence of those members of criminal organisation who cooperate with the authorities with a view to avoiding criminal activities to assist in identifying and bringing to justice other offenders. It stipulates that Member States must cooperate and consult each other to coordinate their action and decide which Member State will prosecute the alleged offenders.
MEPs call for €1 and €2 notes
The European Parliament is calling for 1 and 2 euro banknotes to be issued. A majority of MEPs signed up to a written declaration to this effect and this was formally adopted during present plenary session in Strasbourg.
Some 371 MEPs put their names to a written declaration drawn up by Amalia SARTORI (EPP-ED, IT) which argues that many European citizens are still unhappy about the euro, and that the absence of 1 and 2 euro banknotes has an effect on people's perception of how much the equivalent coins are worth and an adverse effect on the perceived value of cents. They say the issuing and circulation of 1 and 2 euro banknotes would have a positive effect on inflation and keeping the cost of living under control, and that this change is all the more necessary in view of the forthcoming introduction of the single currency in the new Member States. In view of what Parliament says are unquestionable advantages for all Member States, it calls on the Commission, the Council and the European Central Bank to recognise the need to issue 1 and 2 euro banknotes.
A written declaration is deemed adopted by Parliament without debate if more than half the MEPs sign up to it in the three months after it is submitted by its authors.
EU budget 2006 - more money for research and youth programmes
Parliament's ambitions for the EU will be translated into figures as the Plenary voted at first reading to restore much of the 2006 budget cut by the Council. Areas set to benefit include research, education and youth programmes, which were reduced by the Council in July, as well as external policy. The grand total after today's vote is €121.4bn in commitment appropriations and €115.4bn in payments, equalling 1.04% of the EU's Gross National Income.
Heading 1: agriculture and rural development
Parliament wants to re-establish the level of payments set by the Commission but cut by Council after its first reading in July. Council has the last say on most of Heading 1, as they are regarded as "compulsory expenditure". The amendment proposing to scrap the one billion euro subsidy for tobacco growers; a part of the money saved should be used for EU anti-smoking campaigns has been rejected. Otherwise MEPs welcome the "modulation" transfer of €655m to the rural development sub-heading, which continues the process of reforming the Common Agricultural Policy.
Heading 2: structural actions
Parliament confirmed the Budgets Committee's willingness to raise payments for structural measures (the financial basis of regional policy). This increase partly takes account of the forecasts of the Member States who have already announced that the funding levels proposed for 2006 will be inadequate. This proposed increase amounts to €3.7bn roughly and covers all the main structural instruments.
Heading 3: internal policies
MEPs want to add no less than €200 million in payment appropriations to a range of budget headings for the Lisbon strategy which the Council reduced at first reading. The main areas which would boost EU competitiveness include increases for programmes to support small and medium-sized companies, but above all for the 6th framework research programme. The payments for education programmes are also increased, by €35 million for Socrates, €20 million for Leonardo da Vinci and €3 million for e-learning.
Another key feature of the vote is the funding allocated to the European Commission's information policy. MEPs
voted for more resources for the debate on the future of Europe, public information via the media and the euro. They tied this funding to one condition: the Commission must first publish its White Paper on information and communication policy. Parliament also wants an explanation for the Commission's under-spending of its information budget in 2005.
Heading 4: EU external policy
A heading which causes problems year after year is "external action" (support for projects outside the EU's borders). Here Parliament opted to exceed the available funding ceiling, partly to boost its traditional priorities such as regional programmes and promoting human rights around the world.
To finance more recent priorities - such as the reconstruction of Iraq (€200 million for 2006) and tsunami-hit regions (€180 million) plus expenditure linked to the EU's international commitments - Parliament proposes exploring all "options available" under the inter-institutional agreement linked to the financial perspective. Any agreement on extra expenditure must be reached at the negotiations with the Council ahead of the second reading of the 2006 budget and flexibility is seen as a must by a large number of MEPs.
On another note, Parliament and Council agreed yesterday to pledge €93m for the victims of the Asian quake, of which €73m are freed up for the current year and €20m in 2006. Finally, Parliament is supporting the €40m transitory aid to the ACP sugar producers to absorb the shock of the EU's pending Sugar CMO reform.
Other headings
For Heading 5, the 46 posts requested by the Commission which had been cut by the Council in July are re-entered submit to conditions. As for the pre-accession strategy, no changes in the funding for Turkey (€470 million in commitments, €155 in payments) is proposed nor for the other countries lined up for enlargement.
EU Institutions Budget 2006 - more money for information strategy
With its report on the budgets of the "other institutions" (all of them except the Commission), MEPs mostly focused on the Parliament and its targets for the coming year.
20% of the European institutions' administrative resources are dedicated to the European Parliament. With an estimated maximum of €1,341 million at its disposal, the Parliament decided to further limit its spending with a proposed cut of €20m to €1,321m.
As 2006 marks a pause in Parliament's successful buildings policy (i.e. the early repayment of interests taken on its purchases of buildings), MEPs look for ways to use the available appropriations to fulfil the needs of the institution.
€20 million will be put in an "information and communication reserve". This amount is available for new projects currently examined by Parliament, MEPs regard improving communication between the EP and the citizens as a priority. Finally, the House wants, in addition to the amount of €13,8 million entered in its estimates, to make available further appropriations totalling €9,726 million in connection with preparations for Romanian and Bulgarian accession.
For more information, see the budgets committee page, where the adopted amendments and figures will be published in detail : Report by Valdis Dombrovskis on draft general budget for 2006 - other sections
MEPs call for common code of good administrative behaviour for all EU institutions
Through the European Ombudsman, EU citizens can obtain redress for cases of maladministration by Community institutions and bodies. The Ombudsman is elected by the European Parliament in a procedure in which the Petitions Committee plays a central role.
Parliament adopted a report by 426 votes in favour, 3 against, with 9 abstentions on the European Ombudsman's activities in 2004. MEPs call on the EU institutions to adopt a harmonised code of good administrative behaviour.
The resolution welcomes the efforts to give the Ombudsman's work a higher media profile, believing this could help reduce the number of complaints received which fall outside his remit. In 2004, almost 75% of complaints lodged fell outside the Ombudsman's remit as they did not concern a Community institution or body. The current Ombudsman, Nikiforos DIAMANDOUROS , is thus urged to continue his efforts to raise public awareness of his functions and responsibilities.
This year, which marks the tenth anniversary of the establishment of the Ombudsman's office, 3,726 complaints were received. This represents a sharp increase on the previous year (+53%), half of the extra cases being accounted for by complaints from citizens of the ten new Member States. The cases of maladministration meriting investigation by the Ombudsman can be categorised as follows: lack of transparency or refusal to provide information (22%), discrimination (19%), avoidable delays (12%), procedural errors (9%), injustice or abuse of power (7%), failure to fulfil obligations (7%), negligence (6%) and errors in law (5%).
Parliament wants all EU institutions to interpret, as broadly as possible, the provisions of Regulation No 1049/2001 governing public access to documents. It also approves of the efforts by the Ombudsman to persuade the institutions to meet shorter deadlines for dealing with this type of complaint.
A common code of conduct for all European institutions
MEPs particularly support the Ombudsman's efforts to provide all Community institutions and bodies with a harmonised "code of good administrative behaviour" and urge the Commission to end the current situation.
In addition, the House calls on the Ombudsman to define more precisely the concept of "maladministration", drawing up a strict and exhaustive list of institutions and bodies covered and categorically excluding all complaints which fall under the responsibility of the Member States’ authorities.
The resolution also backs a review of the Ombudsman's statute and the extension and strengthening of the system of non-judicial appeal which it says "provides citizens with an alternative to legal action whose decisions and recommendations are not legally binding and do not constitute coercive measures". The Ombudsman is also called on to seek amicable solutions wherever possible in the cases he deals with.
Finally, MEPs commend the good working relationship developed between the Ombudsman's Office and the Petitions Committee, including the process for the mutual transfer of cases, and they stress that they value the close cooperation established by the European Ombudsman with his national, regional and local counterparts, although they would like to see greater cooperation with the petitions committees of the national parliaments.
Analysis of complaints examined in 2004
The statistics for the year 2004 show that the institution has already reached maturity: 3,726 complaints were received in 2004 (an increase of 53% over 2003), of which 3536 were from individual citizens and 190 from companies and associations. The sharp rise in the number of complaints is not just a result of enlargement: 657 complaints came from the new Member States, equivalent to 51% of the rate of increase for 2004, while the remaining 49% were accounted for by complaints from the 15 old Member States and from third countries.
The most numerous complaints came from citizens of the following countries: 482 from Spain (12.9%), 464 from Germany (12.4%), 303 from France (8.1%), 285 from Poland (7.6%), 269 from Italy (7.2%), 268 from Belgium (7.2%) and 195 from the United Kingdom (5.2%). In terms of the EU’s population, however, the geographical distribution of complaints is slightly different: Germany (18%), France (13.5%), United Kingdom (13%), Italy (12.6%), Spain (9.2%), Poland (8.3%) and the Netherlands (3.5%). Text adopted (Report by Manolis Mavrommatis (EPP-ED, EL)
Human Rights resolutions: Western Sahara, Uzbekistan and Tenzin Delek Rinpoche
As usual, the plenary session ended with three debates on human rights issues around the world. This time the focus was on Western Sahara, Uzbekistan and the case of Tenzin Delek Rinpoche, a Buddhist Lama imprisoned by China. A resolution was adopted in each case.
Western Sahara
In the resolution on Western Sahara adopted with 98 votes in favour, none against and 1 abstention, the European Parliament welcomes the release by the Polisario Front of all Moroccan prisoners of war. It calls on the Moroccan authorities to immediately release the human rights supporters Aminattou Haidara and Ali Salem Tamek, and 35 other Sahrawi political prisoners, and to shed light on the fate of more than 500 missing Sahrawis, including those who disappeared during military campaigns. It further calls on the two sides to cooperate fully with the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) with a view to ascertaining what has happened to the people who have disappeared since the conflict began.
MEPs call for the protection of the Sahrawi population, respect for their fundamental rights, including freedom of expression and freedom of movement, and express their support for a just and lasting solution to the conflict in Western Sahara, based on the rule of law and on international law, and the relevant resolutions of the UN Security Council, particularly Resolution 1495.
Parliament calls on the Council and Member States to actively support the UN’s efforts in calling for the preservation of the natural energy resources of Western Sahara as a non-autonomous territory, the subject of a decolonisation process as stipulated in the legal opinion (2002) by the UN’s Deputy Secretary-General for Legal Affairs, Hans Correl. It welcomes the appointment by the UN Secretary-General of his Personal Envoy to Western Sahara, Ambassador Van Valsum, and the designation of Francisco Bastagali as Special Representative responsible for the UN Mission for the referendum in Western Sahara (Minurso), which should help to re-activate the peace process in Western Sahara.
Parliament calls on the Moroccan authorities to facilitate access to the territory of Western Sahara for independent observers and representatives of human rights defence organisations and the international press. It deplores the expulsion of several European delegations. Finally, MEPs consider that the planned visit of a EP delegation to the region will provide the European Parliament with fresh information regarding the situation there. They say they are confident that the delegation will be able to carry out its mission unobstructed and on schedule, that is to say in January 2006.
Tenzin Delek Rinpoche
Parliament's resolution on the case of Tenzin Delek Rinpoche was adopted with 95 votes in favour to 3 against with no abstentions. Tenzin Delek Rinpoche an influential and respected Buddhist lama, who was sentenced to death by China in 2002, along with his assistant, Lobsang Dhondup. Lobsang Dhondup was executed in 2003, while Tenzin Delek Rinpoche's sentence was commuted to life imprisonment.
Parliament is deeply concerned about the state of health of Tenzin Delek Rinpoche and calls on the responsible authorities to take all possible steps to improve his living conditions and state of health. It demands that the Chinese Government allow Manfred Nowak, the UN Special Rapporteur on Torture, during his inspection visit to China from 21 November to 2 December 2005, to visit Tenzin Delek and report on his state of health.
MEPs reiterate their support for the rule of law, and appreciate the commutation of the death sentence handed down to Tenzin Delek. Parliament urges the Chinese Government, nonetheless, to cancel all sentences against Tenzin Delek and to release him immediately. It affirms its call for the abolition of the death penalty and an immediate moratorium on capital punishment in China.
MEPs regret the lack of concrete results as regards the EU-China Human Rights Dialogue, and call once more on the Government of the People’s Republic of China to improve the inhuman conditions of imprisonment in their jails, to cease and abolish torture of detainees, to stop the continued violation of the human rights of the Tibetan people and other minorities, and to ensure that it respects international standards of human rights and humanitarian law. They call on the Council and the Member States to maintain the EU embargo on trade in arms with the People’s Republic of China and not to weaken the existing national limitations on such arms sales.
Finally, Parliament calls on the Chinese government to step up the ongoing dialogue with the representatives of the Dalai Lama so as to reach a mutually acceptable solution to the Tibet issue without further delay.
Uzbekistan
In their resolution on Uzbekistan, adopted with 99 votes in favour to none against with no abtentions, MEPs urge the Commission to place the annual European Union budget for 'national projects and institution-building' in Uzbekistan in the reserve, without prejudice to humanitarian aid. They condemn the refusal by the government of Uzbekistan to provide transparency and its withdrawal from external contact, and stress how important it is for an international committee of inquiry to have the opportunity to clarify immediately the circumstances surrounding the events of May 2005 in the Andijan region and to freely attend the trials which are under way.
Parliament reiterates the importance of EU-Uzbekistan relations and continued dialogue, and recognises the crucial role of Uzbekistan in the Central Asia region, but stresses that those relations must be based on mutual respect for the principles of democracy, the rule of law and human rights as clearly laid down in the EU-Uzbekistan Partnership and Cooperation Agreement. It welcomes and supports the decision taken at the General Affairs and External Relations Council meeting on 3 October 2005 to introduce an embargo on the export of arms and military equipment and other equipment that might be used for internal repression to Uzbekistan, to implement restrictions on admission to the EU of Uzbek individuals directly responsible for the Andijan events and to suspend sine die all scheduled technical meetings under the PCA and the Commission’s reorientation and reduction of its TACIS programme in order to support an increased focus on the needs of the population, democracy and human rights as well as fostering links with Uzbek civil society.
MEPs urge the government of Uzbekistan to release all human rights activists, journalists and political opposition members who are still in detention and allow them to work freely and without fear of persecution and to put an end to the harassment of NGOs. They call for freedom of the press to be restored, which entails the abandonment of the judicial measures taken against national media and NGOs which wish to promote diversity of information; condemns all obstacles to citizens' freedom of expression. They urge that the trial of the individuals accused of plotting to overthrow the Uzbek government fully comply with international law and be open to independent observers, who should be allowed complete access to the proceedings. Parliament notes the decision of the Uzbek authorities to allow OSCE observers to attend these trials.
Parliament expects the Uzbek authorities to facilitate a visit to Andijan and meetings between Members taking part in the 6th EU-Uzbekistan Parliamentary Cooperation Committee and the opposition, NGOs and the independent media. Finally, it calls on the Kyrgyz authorities not to deport arrested refugees as long as the Uzbek Government cannot guarantee an independent and fair trial and grant humanitarian organisations access to those under arrest.
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert.do#
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert.do#
EN
3
LINK
/activities/expert.do#
EN
4
LINK
/activities/expert.do#
EN
5
LINK
/activities/expert.do#
EN
6
LINK
/comparl/budg/budg2006/procedure/default_en.htm
EN
7
LINK
/activities/expert.do
EN
8
LINK
/activities/expert.do
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
