Strong support for European film and digitalisation
Culture
2005-10-25 - 13:04
The European Parliament has voiced its strong support for the European film industry. In adopting a co-decision report by Ruth HIERONYMI (EPP-ED, DE) on the Media 2007 programme in first reading, MEPs in particular back co-productions and a competitive digital market as a way to overcome fragmentation and under-capitalisation of the European audiovisual market.
Digitisation should make a decisive contribution to strengthening the audiovisual sector and should be a central feature of Media 2007, Parliament concluded, considering the support for digital services and European catalogues a priority.
MEPs also want to see new and innovative digital distribution platforms for European audiovisual works. These platforms should offer attractive digital catalogues of European films and facilitate access to European cinematographic and audiovisual heritage.
Ms Hieronymi also points out that American movies account for 71% of the film market in Europe, with the share of European movies at 26% (2003 figures).
The programme's aims include preserving and enhancing Europe's cultural diversity and its cinematographic heritage, better distribution of European films both within and outside the EU and boosting the competitiveness of Europe's film industry.
The rapporteur stresses that the budget of €1.055 billion for 2007-2013 proposed by the Commission is the minimum necessary to achieve these goals. Parliament stresses that the appropriations indicated in the Commission proposal beyond the year 2006 are subject to the decisions to be taken on the next multi-annual financial framework.
Further, amendments intend to streamline grant award procedures and facilitate access to loans for SMEs in the film industry, notably for independent productions. MEPs deplore the "almost complete lack of companies specialising in providing loan financing in the audiovisual sector".
"In a Europe of 25 Member States cooperation is increasingly becoming a strategic response to strengthen the competitiveness of the European film industry", says Parliament, pointing to the increasing importance of co-productions and cross-border projects.
Lastly, MEPs demand more European film festivals and the establishment of a mobility scholarship for young filmmakers.
20051020IPR01666
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
