MEPs call on Member States to publish digital switchover plans
Information society
2005-11-16 - 12:42
Telecoms Equipment
MEPs adopted a resolution on the digital switchover encouraging those Member States that have not yet published their switchover plans to announce them by the end of the year, in order to give clear signals to both consumers and broadcasters. Parliament calls on the Member States to ensure that policy interventions carried out to secure and accelerate digital switchover are transparent, justified, proportionate and non discriminatory.
The House calls on the European Commission to lay down clearly defined policy objectives to ensure the widest possible penetration of the new and innovative services. MEPs call on the European Commission to ensure that the research and development is completed at an early stage in the interests of penetration, also, by the new non broadcasting digital services. Parliament calls on the European Commission and the Member States to provide for a sufficient level of harmonisation of approaches and regulation regarding the spectrum dividend, particularly in order to be able to satisfy any future demand for pan-European services.
In order to ensure that the digital divide in society is not exacerbated, the House calls on the Member States to ensure, as soon as possible, that there are adequate provisions in place prior to the transition from analogue to digital, including funding and intelligible information, which will mitigate the cost of conversion for those elements in society who will have difficulty in procuring and financing the necessary replacement equipment.
The House calls on the European Commission to ensure that, in regulating digital transition, a clear distinction is made between the regulation of transmission of electronic signals and infrastructure and the regulation of content (including audiovisual content), and to ensure, in order to protect pluralism and diversity in the broadcasting field, that the majority, or an appropriate part, of the new broadcasting possibilities and broadcasters do not come under the exclusive control or decisive influence of multinational media undertakings. MEP say that regulation of the various additional services transmitted alongside digital broadcasts on the same network should be carried out by making a distinction appropriate to their nature: content services related to broadcasting, other content services and services related to telecommunications.
Finally, MEPs call on the European Commission and the Member States to ensure perfect interoperability and technological neutrality in order to provide a level playing field for all operators and to boost European innovation.
Background:
Switch-off of analogue terrestrial TV in Member States:
switch-off date end 2010 or earlier: AU, DE, ES, FI, IT, MT, SE
switch-off date: end 2012 or earlier: BE (in Flanders) , EL, SI, SK, UK, HU
Member States not listed have either yet to indicate their plans or have not yet indicated a switch-off date.
The US plans to terminate terrestrial analogue broadcasting by 1 January 2009,
South Korea announced to switch off terrestrial analogue broadcasting by end 2010 and Japan by 2011.
20051111IPR02229 Text adopted
EN
1
PHOTO
20050926PHT00702.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert.do#
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
