EP highlights dangers of Avian Flu pandemic
Public health
2005-10-27 - 16:33
Ducks
Better to plan than to panic in the face of avian flu - that was the conclusion of a debate at the European Parliament and the resolution adopted by MEPs. While the risk of a pandemic remains elevated in Europe, production capacity of vaccines and anti-virals is limited and some countries still lack emergency plans. MEPs advocate improved information and the coordination of efforts at EU level and on an international plan.
Today Parliament adopted a resolution calling on the Commission to step up its efforts in preparing for a possible bird flu pandemic affecting Europe. MEPs note the possibility that the avian flu virus could spread into humans, mutate or recombine with a seasonal influenza virus, and thus pose a serious health risk to European citizens. The resolution therefore urges the Commission to " strengthen its coordinating role " of preparedness plans in Member States, and to undertake the " necessary steps for the production of new vaccines in the shortest possible time ." In addition, the EP suggests the " possibility of using the EU Solidarity Fund as a precautionary instrument allowing for pre-emptive action to be taken in preparation for an influenza pandemic ."
The resolution contains recommendations for the Member States as well. It calls on EU governments to " increase influenza vaccination coverage ," and insists " that workers in and around the poultry sector be vaccinated as a matter of priority ." The Parliament also asks the Member States to update their preparedness plans according to " WHO [World Health Organization] and ECDC [European Centre for Disease Control] recommendations ." National authorities are urged to acquire " advanced purchase agreements to ensure adequate supplies of vaccines and antivirals to meet pandemic demand as well as antibiotics to treat secondary infections ."
Finally, the resolution " points out that the principal source of infection still remains in the countries of South-East Asia ." It therefore calls on both the Commission and Member States to " make available funds for assistance to South Asian countries in combating the disease in terms of expertise and finance ."
The resolution follows a debate based on an oral question by Karl-Heinz FLORENZ (EPP-ED, DE) on Tuesday. Health and Consumer Protection Commissioner Markos KYPRIANOU stressed that all Member States had provided the Commission with contingency plans, although some of them were only provisional. He noted that the Commission lacks the authority to stockpile vaccines at the Community level - the Council must first give it a mandate to do so. The Commissioner also underlined that it was indispensable to " create incentives for industry " to manufacture more vaccines and antivirals.
Caroline LUCAS (Greens/EFA, UK) and other Members called for a ban on the import of live birds into the EU. John BOWIS (EPP-ED, UK) urged the Commission and the wider public not to confuse a sense of urgency with a sense of panic. He emphasized the need for clarity, information and full disclosure by Member States. On the other hand, Françoise GROSSETÊTE (EPP-ED, FR) warned that prevention and precaution were crucial in the fight against avian flu. " No one will ever reproach you for having saved lives ," she told the Commissioner.
20051027IPR01952
EN
1
PHOTO
20051025PHT01880.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
