European Parliament Information Offices: Serving the public and the media
Institutions
2005-11-02 - 08:38
Information Offices situated in the capitals of EU members are important in explaining the work of the European Parliament to the general public and the media. They also liaise with national and regional political authorities as well as representatives from civil society and the business community. Their role is to keep them informed of developments in the Parliament. In the larger countries there are also regional offices for example in Barcelona, Edinburgh and Milan.
Support for the media:
The Offices issue press releases and organise press conferences to assist journalists enquiring about any aspect of the EP's work. They also invite editors to nominate journalists to report on Parliamentary sittings and provide the briefings, which give an advance overview of the agenda for each month's Plenary Session. Increasingly, Information Offices try to invite groups of journalists to visit the European Parliament to see for themselves how it works "up close".
Keeping the public informed:
The Offices are designed to answer questions that members of the public may have concerning the workings of the Parliament. This is done through replying to queries directly, distributing information brochures on the European Parliament and organising seminars and meetings - they also help people contact their MEPs if required.
20051019FCS01612
The public view:
Prague EP Info Office On 12-13 October we talked to some members of the public who were using the Information Offices.
Anne-Marie Lindgren and her son from Sweden decided to visit the Information Office in Brussels while on a trip to see the Parliament itself. She had come "to study, learn and understand" by collecting some information leaflets to take back to the adult education group she is a member of. Her son wanted some material for a school project.
Jean-Pierre Peyrani and his wife also said that they had come to "try and understand how the EU works". They were visiting Brussels from France. Mr Peyrani said that the EU was "covered on the TV and in newspapers but he wanted to learn more". He added that they found the Parliament "more accessible than the offices of the French administration".
In the Czech capital Prague, student Barbora Kresnickova said she had come to the Information Office to learn more about applying for the Parliament's traineeship programme. She said that "in case I succeed I will let you know..."
Fellow student Petr Koniok was there to look for information on his PhD dissertation about the 1979 Parliamentary elections.
Contacting and educating students is an important role of each Information Office. Every year they play a crucial role in organising the EUROSCOLA programme which brings secondary school age students from all over Europe to visit the European Parliament several times a year. The aim is to increase the students' understanding of the role of the Parliament.
Organisation and contacts:
To avoid duplication of effort the Parliament's Offices often share premises with the European Commission (the executive arm of the European Union) so they can jointly distribute information about their role.
Should you wish to know more about your nearest European Parliament Information Office - please see the link below and click on the country of your choice.
Click on the map of your country to find out more
EN
1
PHOTO
20051019PHT01646.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/parliament/public/nearYou.do;jsessionid=2F924A377A01920B476EC841933D33BF.node2?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
