Greenhouse effect: fluorinated gases in the dock
Environment
2005-10-27 - 14:34
Fluorinated gases are less well known than CO2 but they are responsible for at least 5 per cent of the greenhouse effect. The EU - and Parliament in particular - are planning rules drastically to reduce their use. This is the implication of two second reading reports by Avril DOYLE (EPP-ED, IE) which were adopted by MEPs on Wednesday.
Fluorinated gases are widely used in air conditioners, refrigerators and insulating foam. They are even present in the soles of some trainers. If they escape into the atmosphere, their damaging effects can last for hundreds, if not thousands, of years. Their harmfulness or " global warming potential " (GWP) is measured on a scale from 1 (equal to CO2) to more than 20 000 for sulphur hexafluoride (SF6).
The first of the two reports adopted by Parliament deals with a directive which aims to regulate the use of these gases in vehicle air conditioning systems. Parliament opted for a ban on fluorinated gases with a GWP of more than 150 in new models planned from 2011 onwards and in all vehicle from 2017. This threshold would eliminated some gases currently used by manufacturers, notably HFC-134a, but will allow continued use of HFC-152a, which has a lower GWP (120) and should encourage technical innovation. Just one amendment was adopted to this directive: it allows Member States to promote other air conditioning systems through tax incentives. A second reading agreement with the Council therefore seems likely.
A highly political decision on the legal base
The second report, dealing with a general regulation covering all fluorinated gases, was the subject of much more lively debate, in particular when it came to the legal base for the legislation. This is not a minor quibble for punctilious lawyers, but political choice with serious implications. The Council, in its common position, had chosen a double base: the internal market (Article 95 of the EC Treaty) and the environment (Article 175).
MEPs were divided on the issue and it took up most of the debate on Monday evening. The rapporteur, Avril Doyle, with the backing of the Environment Committee, wanted a single legal base, Article 175. The difference is that article 95 favours harmonisation to a single standard, according to internal market logic, while Article 175 makes it easier for Member States wishing to impose stricter limits to do so, as is presently the case for Denmark for example. "My main priority has been to achieve greater legal certainty for industry," said Mrs Doyle during the debate.
Despite this, some industrialists, who produce refrigeration or fixed air conditioning units, are concerned that Article 175 would lead to a fragmentation of the European market. To reassure them, the rapporteur said that regardless of the legal base used, "The internal market will still be protected from unjustified trade barriers." A double base might lead some Member States to challenge the legislation in the Court of Justice, which, according to the rapporteur, was likely to rule in favour of Article 175 after an unnecessary period of uncertainty.
This was a fierce debate. Horst SCHNELLHARDT (EPP-ED, DE) and Alessandro FOGLIETTA (UEN, IT) for example, both argued in favour of the double legal base, condemning the risks to the internal market. "There's no point putting obstacles in the way of harmonisation," said Mr Foglietta. On the other hand, Richard SEEBER (EPP-ED, AT) and Dorette CORBEY (PES, NL) were in favour of Article 175: "It is not for the European Union to prevent the Member States pursuing ambitious environmental policies." This view was shared by Johannes BLOKLAND (IND/DEM, NL), Jonas SJÖSTEDT (GUE/NGL, SE) and Caroline LUCAS (Greens/EFA, UK), the last two of whom both condemned the heavy lobbying of industrial interest groups on this point. The ALDE group and a large number of EPP-ED members were in favour of a single base too, but for them it should be the internal market provisions, according to amendments put down by Holger KRAHMER (ALDE, DE) and Vittorio PRODI (ALDE, IT) on the one hand, and Malcolm HARBOUR (EPP-ED, UK), Anja WEISGERBER (EPP-ED, DE) and Karl-Heinz FLORENZ (EPP-ED, DE) on the other.
In the end, no single amendment reached the necessary qualified majority of 367 votes in favour. The regulation will therefore continue to have a dual legal base as formulated in the Council's common position.
The Environment Committee had put forward a number of amendments aimed at eliminating fluorinated gases from a number of products: domestic and industrial refrigerators, fixed air conditioning units, insulating foam, aerosols etc. All these amendments were rejected by the plenary, in line with the advice from Commissioner Stavros DIMAS who said impact assessments should be carried out before taking any such decisions. MEPs nevertheless asked the Commission to develop new legislative proposals by the end of 2008 to deal with non-vehicle air conditioning systems and refrigeration systems in modes of transport.
MEPs also strengthened the provisions regarding labelling of appliances, and regarding monitoring, professional training and certification of businesses dealing with fluorinated gases. In addition, to help small and medium sized businesses, MEPs called for a European register to be available to them, with details of all the restrictions imposed in different Member States on different products. Finally, several amendments were adopted with a view to allowing those Member States who wish to do so the possibility of imposing stricter measures, in particular if these are part of their policies for implementing the Kyoto protocol.
20051027IPR01948
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
