EU budget 2006 - more money for research and youth programmes
Budget
2005-11-08 - 09:33
Budget
Parliament's ambitions for the EU will be translated into figures as the Plenary voted at first reading to restore much of the 2006 budget cut by the Council. Areas set to benefit include research, education and youth programmes, which were reduced by the Council in July, as well as external policy. The grand total after today's vote is €121.4bn in commitment appropriations and €115.4bn in payments, equalling 1.04% of the EU's Gross National Income.
Heading 1: agriculture and rural development
Parliament wants to re-establish the level of payments set by the Commission but cut by Council after its first reading in July. Council has the last say on most of Heading 1, as they are regarded as " compulsory expenditure ". The amendment proposing to scrap the one billion euro subsidy for tobacco growers; a part of the money saved should be used for EU anti-smoking campaigns has been rejected. Otherwise MEPs welcome the " modulation " transfer of €655m to the rural development sub-heading, which continues the process of reforming the Common Agricultural Policy.
Heading 2: structural actions
Parliament confirmed the Budgets Committee's willingness to raise payments for structural measures (the financial basis of regional policy). This increase partly takes account of the forecasts of the Member States who have already announced that the funding levels proposed for 2006 will be inadequate. This proposed increase amounts to €3.7bn roughly and covers all the main structural instruments.
Heading 3: internal policies
MEPs want to add no less than €200 million in payment appropriations to a range of budget headings for the Lisbon strategy which the Council reduced at first reading. The main areas which would boost EU competitiveness include increases for programmes to support small and medium-sized companies, but above all for the 6th framework research programme. The payments for education programmes are also increased, by €35 million for Socrates, €20 million for Leonardo da Vinci and €3 million for e-learning.
Another key feature of the vote is the funding allocated to the European Commission's information policy. MEPs
voted for more resources for the debate on the future of Europe, public information via the media and the euro. They tied this funding to one condition: the Commission must first publish its White Paper on information and communication policy. Parliament also wants an explanation for the Commission's under-spending of its information budget in 2005.
Heading 4: EU external policy
A heading which causes problems year after year is " external action " (support for projects outside the EU's borders). Here Parliament opted to exceed the available funding ceiling, partly to boost its traditional priorities such as regional programmes and promoting human rights around the world.
To finance more recent priorities - such as the reconstruction of Iraq (€200 million for 2006) and tsunami-hit regions (€180 million) plus expenditure linked to the EU's international commitments - Parliament proposes exploring all "options available" under the inter-institutional agreement linked to the financial perspective. Any agreement on extra expenditure must be reached at the negotiations with the Council ahead of the second reading of the 2006 budget and flexibility is seen as a must by a large number of MEPs.
On another note, Parliament and Council agreed yesterday to pledge €93m for the victims of the Asian quake, of which €73m are freed up for the current year and €20m in 2006. Finally, Parliament is supporting the €40m transitory aid to the ACP sugar producers to absorb the shock of the EU's pending Sugar CMO reform.
Other headings
For Heading 5, the 46 posts requested by the Commission which had been cut by the Council in July are re-entered submit to conditions. As for the pre-accession strategy, no changes in the funding for Turkey (€470 million in commitments, €155 in payments) is proposed nor for the other countries lined up for enlargement.
EU Institutions Budget 2006 - more money for information strategy
With its report on the budgets of the "other institutions" (all of them except the Commission), MEPs mostly focused on the Parliament and its targets for the coming year.
20% of the European institutions' administrative resources are dedicated to the European Parliament. With an estimated maximum of €1,341 million at its disposal, the Parliament decided to further limit its spending with a proposed cut of €20m to €1,321m.
As 2006 marks a pause in Parliament's successful buildings policy (i.e. the early repayment of interests taken on its purchases of buildings), MEPs look for ways to use the available appropriations to fulfil the needs of the institution.
€20 million will be put in an " information and communication reserve ". This amount is available for new projects currently examined by Parliament, MEPs regard improving communication between the EP and the citizens as a priority. Finally, the House wants, in addition to the amount of €13,8 million entered in its estimates, to make available further appropriations totalling €9,726 million in connection with preparations for Romanian and Bulgarian accession.
20051107IPR02059 For more information, see the budgets committee page, where the adopted amendments and figures will be published in detail : Report by Valdis Dombrovskis (EPP-ED, LV) on draft general budget for 2006 - other sections
EN
1
PHOTO
20051027PHT01938.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/comparl/budg/budg2006/procedure/default_en.htm
EN
3
LINK
/activities/expert.do
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
