Opening and highlights of the Session
Institutions
2005-10-24 - 18:18
The Plenary Session in Strasbourg
This week British Prime Minister Tony BLAIR, President-in-Office of the European Council, will address the plenary session ahead of the Informal Summit at Hampton Court. Internal Market Commissioner Charlie McCREEVY will explain to MEPs his apparent comments about the compatibility of the Swedish social model with the single market. Other subjects on the plenary programme include: Avian Flu, organised crime, the rights of immigrants and the 2006 EU budget.
Parliament President Josep BORRELL opened the session with a short statement reflecting today's sixtieth anniversary of the founding of the United Nations.
UN 60th anniversary
Mr Borrell said: " This is a good time to ask what we have learned over those sixty years. The UN Secretary General, Kofi ANNAN , is right to say that the UN must reflect the times it live in and the changes in the world since 1945. The September UN summit adopted reforms, and, while these did not met all our expectations, Parliament's resolution was borne in mind, and we should now closely follow the implementation of the reforms. We should stress the Parliament's determination that a Human Rights Council and a Commission on Peace Consolidation should become a reality before this sixtieth General Assembly ends ."
Changes to the agenda
One change to the agenda was approved: the two reports by Avril DOYLE (EPP-ED, IE) on greenhouse gases will be put to the vote on Wednesday instead of Tuesday, though the debate will be held as planned on Monday evening.
By rejecting a proposal from the Socialist group, MEPs confirmed that the debate on patents for biotechnological inventions would, as planned, lead to a vote on a resolution.
Highlights of the Week
At 3pm (Strasbourg time) on Wednesday 26 October, Prime Minister Tony BLAIR , President-in-office of the European Council, will open the debate on the informal summit of Heads of State or Government taking place the next day at Hampton Court. With the EU still officially in its " period of reflection " following the " no " votes on the Constitutional Treaty, as well as the lack of a deal on the financial perspective, MEPs are likely to have a lot to debate. The official purpose of the informal Council is " to discuss how to maintain and strengthen social justice and competitiveness in the context of globalisation; Europe's place in the world; and the security of citizens ." This is the second time that Tony Blair has addressed the European Parliament this year; he launched the UK Presidency on 23 June in a speech to the House in Brussels.
Monday starts with a series of four first-reading reports on education, youth and media programmes. For the Erasmus programme, MEPs are calling for an increase in the monthly standard grant from €210 in 2007 to €300 in 2013. Monday evening is also dedicated to the environment, with a report on the shipment of waste, and two reports by Avril DOYLE (EPP-ED, IE) on fluorinated greenhouse gases and emissions from motor vehicle air conditioning services.
On Tuesday 25 October at 9am, Commission President BARROSO and Internal Market Commissioner Charlie McCREEVY will appear before the House in the context of apparent comments made by Mr McCreevy on the compatibility of the Swedish social model with the internal market. This follows the vote during the Brussels mini-plenary session to invite the two Commissioners to Parliament. Following this, there will be a debate on avian flu, based on oral questions to the Commission and the Council on the strategy against an influenza pandemic. At midday, President Ricardo LAGOS of Chile will address the House in a formal sitting. Tuesday afternoon is dedicated to debating the progress made by Romania and Bulgaria towards accession scheduled for 1 January 2007. Just hours earlier, the Commission will have adopted its latest progress report on the two countries. Bill NEWTON DUNN (ALDE, UK) will lead the debate on his report into the fight against organised crime, with the Civil Liberties Committee calling for, inter-alia, a strengthening of Europol. On Tuesday evening, an own-initiative report by Ewa KL AMT (EPP-ED, DE) on economic migration is on the agenda. Finally on Tuesday, MEPs will debate the issue of food additives when they consider a directive which includes a list of exceptions for traditional national products, such as Wiltshire cured ham.
Wednesday starts off with the first reading debate on the EU budget 2006, with the Budgets Committee calling for increased funding for research and youth programmes. On Wednesday (9pm), MEPs will debate the situation in Afghanistan following the elections on 18 September.
Thursday sees the annual debate on the activities (for 2004) of the European Ombudsman Nikiforos DIAMANDOUROS . The session will end with three debates and resolutions on human rights in Western Sahara, Uzbekistan and the case of Tenzin Delek Rinpoche.
20051019IPR01650
EN
1
PHOTO
20051021PHT01762.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
