Arms export code must be binding
Security and defence
2005-11-17 - 14:00
Parliament called on the Council to make the code of conduct on arms exports legally binding as soon as possible. However, MEPs still have some concerns. In an own-initiative adopted by Parliament, on the Council's Sixth Annual Report on the EU Code of Conduct on Arms Exports, MEPs welcome the likelihood that Member States will have to align their legislation with the code as this becomes a so-called "common position."
EU Foreign Ministers have acknowledged the need for binding standards for trade in conventional arms.
MEPs call on the Member States to agree on a list of countries to which arms exports should be banned because they are involved in armed conflicts or violate human rights. They also say the quality of national reports needs to be improved and that minimum standards should be applied. The denial notification system - whereby Member States declare that a certain transaction does not involve the export of sensitive dual-use goods - also needs improvement.
Other issues raised by the European Parliament include the need for stronger controls on exports to countries against which an arms embargo has been lifted, licensing of arms brokering abroad, the setting up of a national registry of arms brokers and an international system for marking and tracing small arms as a tool to combat their illicit manufacture and proliferation. The House voices particular concern over recent cases in which EU arms manufacturers have transferred their production facilities overseas - they call for regulatory measures in this field.
The report reiterates Parliament's "strong conviction that the embargo on China should not be lifted" until the human rights situation has clearly improved. Adherence to the arms embargo against China should, they say, be included in negotiations about the EU's Neighbourhood Policy and Partnership Agreements.
20051111IPR02255 Arms: code of conduct on exports. 6th annual report
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5226172
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
