Sugar reform: MEPs demand moderate price cuts
Agriculture
2005-11-30 - 10:11
Sugar prices should be reduced by no more than 30% and flanking measures should be introduced to help producers cope with the impact of change. These were the key points of a vote on Tuesday by the Agriculture Committee on the planned reform of the European Community sugar regime.
Voting on three reports by Jean-Claude FRUTEAU (PES, FR), which constitute Parliament's response to the reform of the sugar sector proposed by the European Commission in June, the committee called for a reduction of 30% in the price of white sugar , to be staggered over four years. This compares to the Commission's proposal for a bigger and sharper cut of 39% over just two years. In a political deal reached last week EU agriculture ministers agreed on a reduction which was less radical (36% for white sugar) but still greater than the Agriculture Committee wants.
MEPs share the view of the Council that, to prevent disruption to the industry, the intervention mechanism should be preserved throughout the period of the reform. They believe the restructuring fund (which pays for partial closure of factories eligible for aid plus support for sugar beet producers) should be more flexible. A fixed percentage of the fund should be reserved for beet producers, says the Agriculture Committee. As regards support for switching to different crops, MEPs propose aid of €80 per hectare for "energy crops" but with a maximum of 2200 hectares eligible for such aid.
The committee also thinks, like the Council, that provision should be made to control imports into Europe of sugar from the less developed countries. Measures to safeguard the Community market will be triggered if year-on-year imports from a country benefiting from the Everything but arms initiative increase substantially, depending on the production and consumption of the importing country.
The demands of the ACP countries (African-Caribbean-Pacific), which enjoy privileged access to the European market and hence expect to be hardest hit by the reform, are partly taken into account. The prices paid to these countries will remain unchanged for two years. Transitional aid of €40 million from the EU budget is also proposed for the ACP countries affected by the reform.
Commissioner Mandelson seeks to reassure
While he regards the sugar reform as "necessary with a view to the WTO ministerial meeting in Hong Kong" , Trade Commissioner Peter Mandelson, addressing the Agriculture Committee on Tuesday, repeated his warnings to the EU's trade partners in the WTO: "the extravagant demands of the agricultural net exporting countries are unacceptable to Europe" , he said.
"Agriculture will never be a completely liberalised market at world level. We are not going to transform the world's farming sector in one go when it has taken us decades to liberalise other markets. The consequences would be disastrous: the EU could be held hostage for its food, which is obviously unacceptable, while the less well-off partners of the Union, such as the ACP countries, would see their economies annihilated. Is that the aim of the Doha development programme? Or is it a programme for net exporters?" said Mr Mandelson by way of conclusion.
2005-11-28 Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development Chair Joseph Daul EPP-ED FR
Procedure: Consultation
Plenary vote: January 2006
20051125IPR02874 Le résumé du compromis sur la réforme sucrière conclu au Conseil L'initiative "Tout sauf les armes"
EN
1
LINK
http://ue.eu.int/cms3_applications/applications/newsRoom/loadBook.asp?BID=100&LANG=2&cmsid=355
EN
2
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/trade/issues/global/gsp/eba/index_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
