Visit of German Chancellor and Polish PM to the EP
Institutions
2005-11-23 - 19:57
Chancellor Merkel and President Borrell
On Wednesday afternoon European Parliament President Josep Borrell held a meeting with Angela Merkel following her election as German Chancellor Tuesday. He thanked the Chancellor for coming to the European Parliament only one day after her election. This is a strong sign of German commitment to European integration, the President said.
The European Parliament has always counted on Germany as an ally, especially in difficult moments like now, where an agreement on the Financial Perspective for the EU has to be found, Mr Borrell added.
Ms Merkel pointed out that that Germany is willing to contribute - as it has in the past - to moving the European Union forward. "The idea of the Constitution must not be given up...the European Union needs a Constitution," she said.
Ms Merkel thanked the European Parliament for its vote on the REACH legislation governing chemicals that made the regulation more industry and business-friendly. She also accepted Mr Borrell's invitation to speak before the Conference of Presidents to outline Germany's position on the future of Europe.
She intends to rule Germany for the next four years in a "grand coalition" with her own conservative Christian Democrats (CDU), their smaller Bavarian allies the Christian Social Union (CSU) and the centre-left Social Democrats (SPD). It is only the second such coalition in post-war German history, the first being from 1966 to 1969 under Kurt Georg Kiesinger. In terms of policy, Ms Merkel has made it clear that economic reform in Germany is the highest priority for her time in office.
Meeting with the Polish Prime Minister
The President of the European Parliament also received this afternoon Kazimierz Marcinkiewicz who has also recently been elected to office, having become Polish Prime Minister after his conservative Law and Justice Party finished first in general elections in September 2005. This visit to the European Parliament is his first official visit abroad. His party also won Presidential elections in October which led to Lech Kaczynski becoming President of Poland.
The Law and Justice party has promised to tackle crime, corruption and to stimulate economic growth in Poland. Although victorious in the parliamentary election, the party requires the support of minority parties in the Polish Parliament to govern.
20051123STO02746
EN
1
PHOTO
20051123PHT02841.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
