MEPs launch offensive to improve EU arms procurement
Security and defence
2005-11-17 - 13:47
Europe's military capabilities remain weak. Part of the blame for this state of affairs, MEPs argue in a new report, lies with the Member States' policies in the area of defence procurement. Responding to a Commission Green Paper, the European Parliament urges the EU executive to draft a new directive on defence procurement and calls for the EU to push for further harmonisation and standardisation in the field.
EU countries are allowed, under Article 296 of the EC Treaty, to derogate from Community rules on public procurement on grounds of national security in the area of arms production. According to MEPs, this loophole is being systematically abused by Member States' armaments agencies, leading to a situation whereby most defence contracts are awarded on the basis of national rules. This, in turn, is aggravating the fragmentation of armaments markets, limiting interoperability between military systems and hampering European cooperation in international operations. The Commission, MEPs agreed, should try to end such general derogations by adopting both an Interpretative Communication on Article 296 and a new directive on defence procurement.
MEPs echoed the Commission's view that current policies of " juste retour " (ensuring that Member States get their "fair share" of contracts) and the " off-setting " of arms purchasers' costs through supplementary investment deals in the field of military procurement hinder efficiency and " lead to large-scale distortions of competition and artificial divisions of labour between industrial partners" . The inevitable concentration of the armaments industry, the EP concluded, should be subject to greater monitoring and control by the Commission with regard to competition law.
Seeking to ensure more competition, as well as greater transparency and fairness in the awarding of contracts, MEPs called on the European Defence Agency to devise an Article 296 code of conduct for defence procurement. They also urged the Commission to tackle a host of other obstacles to enhanced competition within the arms industry, such as the restrictions on cross-border trade in armaments within the EU, the exertion of political influence on award decisions and the lack of research cooperation.
Addressing the impact of arms procurement on foreign policy, MEPs noted that new EU defence procurement legislation "should not be used as an instrument enabling US corporate interests to unilaterally infiltrate European defence procurement markets.")
The own-initiative report, authored by Joachim Wuermeling (EPP-ED, DE), commanded a majority of 392 members against 77, with 7 members abstaining.
20051111IPR02257 Defence procurement. Green Paper
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5231462
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
