Opening of African Caribbean Pacific-European Union Assembly in Edinburgh
Development and cooperation
2005-11-21 - 17:40
The 10th meeting of the Joint Parliamentary Assembly (JPA) of the African Caribbean Pacific (ACP) - European Union countries opened on Monday in Edinburgh. The JPA brings together 77 MEPs and 77 countries from the ACP.
At the opening ceremony, co-President Glenys Kinnock MEP said: "The security and prosperity we seek I believe depends on rules-based multilateralism. Our globalisation provides prosperity for some, and mass poverty for others. Trade justice is the key to building fairness and equity. In Hong Kong, we face our last chance to restore confidence in the Doha Development Round. The ACP will, I believe, once again, demand recognition that cotton, sugar and bananas are literally life and death issues for them. I hope that agriculture ministers meeting this week will listen to the concerns expressed here in Edinburgh."
Sharon Hay Webster, the co-President for the ACP side, urged " all our EP partners to do everything in their power to facilitate the adoption of the Financial Perspectives and provide therein the resources for the ACP action plan for sugar and for the commitments of the EU derived from its own initiatives for the revision of the Cotonou Partnership Agreement. We also call for early agreement for adequate resources for the 10th European Development Fund".
The Assembly also heard from George Reid, Presiding Officer of the Scottish Parliament, and his HRH the Duke of Gloucester who formally opened the tenth Joint Parliamentary Assembly.
On Wednesday 23 November, the JPA will also hear from First Minister Jack McConnell MSP. The meeting is held at Edinburgh International Conference Centre. The JPA will deal with major issues related to the ACP-EU partnership and will adopt the following reports: The role of National Parliaments in implementing the Cotonou Partnership Agreement. Agricultural and mining commodities. The causes and consequences of natural disasters.
Beyond the reports, the JPA will discuss urgency topics such as the situation in West Africa and the registration, the evaluation and the authorisation of chemical substances (REACH). They will also adopt resolutions on all these subjects.
NB The session will close on Thursday 24 November at 1pm with a press conference in the Edinburgh International Conference Centre by the two co-Presidents, Glenys Kinnock and Sharon Hay Webster.
20051121IPR02642 ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly
EN
1
LINK
/intcoop/acp/10_01/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
