MEPs champion consumer culture in the new Member States
Free movement of goods
2005-11-23 - 14:46
Consumer organisations must work together, argue MEPs
In a report approved on Monday 21 November, MEPs from the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection called for increased support for consumer organisations and the development of a 'consumer culture' in the new EU Member States.
The creation of a ‘consumer culture’ based on a high level of awareness is "essential for better enforcement and application of the existing legal framework" , committee members concluded in their report. The internal market, they insisted, will not function properly as long as consumers in some Member States are protected less than in others. Though new Member States have succeeded in transposing existing Community legislation on consumer rights into their legal systems, implementation will not be completed until their citizens become ready and able to act as "political consumers" .
The new Member States' consumer protection authorities have a key role to play in creating such a consumer culture, MEPs argue. Still, such authorities often face numerous challenges. As József Szájer (EPP-ED, HU) put it during a pre-vote debate, "consumer protection organisations are quite fragmented and do not have appropriate financing" . Moreover, noted Zita Pleštinská (EPP-ED, SK), "low funding makes it impossible for consumer organisations to apply for projects financed by the European Commission" .
Committee members took such ideas to heart, calling on the European Parliament and the Council to devote more money to enhancing consumer protection in the new Member States and urging the Commission to support awareness-raising campaigns and training programmes for consumer organisations and their staff. MEPs also underlined the need for cooperation between organisations in the new and the old Member States -- be it through twinning projects, mentoring projects or other knowledge-sharing programmes.
The committee observed that Commission requirements for obtaining project grants are "strict and difficult to meet" for under-funded consumer organisations in the new Member States. MEPs accordingly asked the EU executive to examine whether such criteria could be made more flexible.
An amendment by Joseph Muscat (PES, MT), calling for the Commission launch an objective information and education campaign "to prepare consumers for the adoption of the Euro in the new Member States" was backed by a majority of 20 members against 13.
The report as a whole, drafted by Henrik Dam Kristensen (PES, DK), was approved unanimously by 35 votes to nil. 34 amendments were adopted.
2005-11-21 Phillip Whitehead PES UK
Procedure: Own-initiative
Plenary vote: December (possibly)
20051122IPR02733
EN
1
PHOTO
20050819PHT00638.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
