REACH - MEPs debate chemicals legislation and new Chemicals Agency
Environment
2005-11-16 - 16:40
REACH / chemical experiment
REACH, the package of new measures on Registration, Evaluation and Authorisation of Chemicals, had its first reading debate on Tuesday. The discussions centred on compromise proposals put forward by the largest political groups ahead of the vote on Thursday.
Commission Vice-President Günter VERHEUGEN told MEPs the Commission supported the compromise reached between Parliament's political groups on registration and information exchange. "This deal strikes a good balance between protecting the environment and ensuring competitiveness," he said, adding that he was glad to see there was scope for protecting business interests within the data sharing rules: "It would be a shame if businesses had no incentive to cooperate."
Commissioner Verheugen welcomed the strengthening of the European Chemicals Agency, though he warned against giving it too many tasks: there was limited expertise available, and the larger its remit, the more this would have budgetary implications. "The authorisation procedure is crucial, bringing in the principle of substitution. We don't want EU businesses to suffer a disadvantage on the global playing field," he said. The objective should be to keep risk under control, he said. On Article 6, he said there needed to be a level playing field between producers and importers, and that the Commission would support any such solution which was in compliance with WTO rules. The compromise on data security struck the right balance, he said, with the information that was necessary being published on the internet. Overall, he hoped for a ' yes ' to the Nassauer/Sacconi package as a way to find a solution on one of the most complex and controversial pieces of EU legislation ever proposed.
Environment Commissioner Stavros DIMAS paid tribute to Mr Sacconi and all the other MEPs involved for their efforts in preparing Parliament's first reading report. REACH, he said, was vital for improving the environment and human health. "It will bring a substantial increase in our knowledge of chemicals, boost consumer confidence and boost innovation. I am pleased that Parliament and Council are moving to almost identical positions." Substantial progress had been made in the compromise package, with a better functioning system for dealing with the most dangerous chemicals. The special approach to chemicals produced in small quantities differed from that originally proposed by the Commission, but this too could now be supported. On the scope of application and on the rules for approval and substitution, the Commission could also accept many of Parliament's amendments, though not all of them. Overall this would have a positive influence, encouraging companies to seek out safer materials.
Speaking for the UK Presidency of the EU, British Environment Minister Lord BACH told MEPs "This legislation offers a once in a lifetime opportunity to achieve proper protection of humans and the environment while, at the same time, being workable and maintaining the competitiveness of European industry." The main elements of the compromise on registration were very close to the ideas the Council was working on, he said. "The adoption of a European Parliament opinion along these lines should pave the way for an early adoption of REACH." On registration, the Council was aiming for a single pre-registration phase and to require data sharing through the " One Substance One Registration " principle, with clear criteria for opting out of the joint information package. To help small firms, low volume substances would only need a full data set if simple criteria identified them as high risk. Efforts had also been made to reduce the cost of registration in higher quantity bands, while still delivering the necessary information. On both evaluation and authorisation, the Council's position was close to Parliament's. "For our part, we will continue working in our role as Presidency to do all we possibly can to get agreement this year. We believe we can."
Parliament's rapporteur Guido SACCONI (PES, IT) said that listening to the debate reminded him of all the steps so far in trying to reach an agreement. "We have heard how close the positions of the three institutions now are. There are really no more divisions on points of principle." After examining his conscience, he was convinced the compromise he had reached with his EPP-ED counterpart Hartmut NASSAUER (DE) reflected the key concepts of balance and responsibility. Regarding balance, he said: "I think we have safeguarded and reinforced the balance between protecting health and the environment and protecting competitiveness." This sort of balance was far harder to reach in a piece of legislation with conflicting interests at stake than it would have been in a simple political resolution. There would, he said, be a chemicals safety report even for lower tonnages and there was a simpler mechanism for authorisation and substitution. For companies, the burden of proof had been maintained and the system for data sharing had been simplified, while the period of data protection had been extended. Parliament had met its responsibility to maintain its independence and autonomy despite the heavy, though legitimate, pressure from lobbyists on all sides of the debate. Parliament's position was now very close to the Council's: "At a time when many aspects of building Europe are seen to be in crisis, here is an example to show we can make decisions and find the balance, representing all the interests at stake. This sort of agreement is like a fruit: you must pick it when it is ripe or it will become rotten. Let us grasp the fruit of this compromise now and complete the dossier."
Speaking for the Industry Committee, Lena EK (ALDE, SE) (rapporteur under the enhanced cooperation procedure between committees, the " Hughes procedure ") said that the existing legislation on chemicals was " not good ". 30,000 chemicals would be covered by REACH. Mrs Ek gave the example of a toy and stated that some of the chemicals in toys may come from outside the EU. She was concerned about the impact on SMEs, stating that it was not possible to have a full dialogue with the Commission. The Industry Committee, she said, tried to promote innovation and improve technology. She called on the House to support the proposed compromise of the three main groups.
Hartmut NASSAUER (EPP-ED, DE), speaking for the Internal Market Committee, (and also a rapporteur under the Hughes procedure), highlighted the environmental and consumer protection elements of REACH. Over the next eleven years, he said, it would be possible to ascertain the impact of 30,000 chemicals on human health and this represented a decisive step forward. Nevertheless, there would be high costs associated with this which would have to paid by companies. He also called for support for the proposed compromise on the registration parts of REACH.
Ria OOMEN-RUIJTEN (NL), speaking for the EPP-ED group, said that the chemicals industry was very important, contributing some €440 billion to the EU's GDP. Over 1 million people, she said, were employed in the chemicals industry. REACH, she said was a huge project and the Commission's original proposal was too bureaucratic and cumbersome. She stated that new compromises were being put forward on authorisation but over the eleven year period, it would be possible for the EU to have a workable registration system.
Robert GOEBBELS (LU), speaking for the PES group, said a balance had to be struck between environmental protection and support for industry. The chemicals industry, he said, was not a right or left issue. NGOs such as Greenpeace, he said, had been advocating attacking the most dangerous and cancerous chemicals. The proposed compromise would allow this to happen. Mr Goebbels welcomed the " One Substance, One Registration " principle. The aim of REACH, he said, should be to defend human health and the environment. REACH was also needed to protect Europe's chemical industry. He welcomed the proposed compromise as " progressive and useful ".
Lena EK (SE), speaking for the ALDE group, said that reliable evaluation and support for SMEs were key to a strong REACH. She also welcomed the proposed compromise and said that better information on chemicals would be available to consumers. She welcomed the Parliament's position ahead of the vote and said that the three institutions - the Commission, Council and the European Parliament were close to agreement.
Carl SCHLYTER (SE), for the Greens/EFA, rejected Mr Nasseur's approach, saying that he had given in to the interests of German industry. SMEs would not have sufficient information available to deal with REACH and the issue of volume tonnage had been swept under the carpet. Mr Schlyter supported the Environment Committee's position and urged the House to vote against Mr Nasseur's position.
Jonas SJÖSTEDT (SE), for the GUE/NGL group, stated that he wanted to see a " strong REACH " that would reflect the EU's responsibilities towards the environment and consumers. He warned that his group " cannot accept " the existing compromise that would leave 90% of chemicals produced in low volumes exempt from regulation. According to him, this was due to the fact that " the industrial lobby had weakened REACH " and the environment and consumers would lose out as a result.
Johannes BLOKLAND (NL), for the IND/DEM Group, said that in overall terms the " Sacconi-Nassauer compromise was not sufficient though the compromise was laudable. " He wanted to see greater attention paid to the position of inorganic substances, metals and concentrates. Mr Blokland concluded by warning against excessive regulation saying that the " burden on small and medium size enterprises must be feasible ."
Liam AYLWARD (IE), for the UEN Group, noted that " REACH will reassure co nsumers" who may be worried about the presence of an estimated 100,000 chemicals on the European market. However, he cautioned MEPs that " the key is balance as chemicals play an essential role in our lives ." He went on to speak of the need to protect the 40,000 Irish jobs dependent on the industry.
For the non-attached Members, Irena BELOHORSKÁ (SK) used her experience as a doctor to warn of the dangers to public health posed by chemicals. She hoped that all results of all tests involving chemicals would be available to the public so " people can be more careful ." As an MEP from one of the countries that joined the EU in 2004, she said she feared they were being discriminated against as they have " only had one year " to participate in the REACH debate.
British and Irish speakers during the debate
Chris DAVIES (ALDE, UK ) said there had been "two early casualties of REACH" - first, the "truth" as the costs of REACH had been exaggerated and second, the Commission's claim that it took a neutral position. Commissioner Verheugen, he said, had clearly demonstrated that the Commission was taking an "anti-environment" stance. Mr Davies congratulated the UK presidency for reaching a political compromise of the 25 Member States and hoped that a common position could be reached before the end of the year. In Parliament, however, he said there were still MEPs who believed that industry should not bear the burden of proving that chemicals were safe, and that dangerous substances should not be substituted. Mr Davies also warned that the new chemicals agency "could be stuffed with supporters of the chemicals industry". Mr Davies supported the proposed compromise on registration.
Caroline LUCAS (Verts/ALE, UK) opposed the Mr Nassauer's and Mr Sacconi's compromise. Mrs Lucas raised the issue of animal testing and animal welfare and stated that there were many loopholes in the proposed REACH on this subject. She said that animal testing was completely unacceptable and that animal testing results could not easily be extrapolated to apply to humans as was pointed out in a recent article of "Nature" magazine.
Ashley MOTE (NI, UK) said that he could agree with the principles of registration and evaluation but authorisation by a centralised chemicals agency would be a "nightmare". REACH represented bureaucrats' attempts to take on multinationals. REACH, he said, had been sold to a naive public as a panacea to Europe's problems. If REACH were to be passed, he said, it would prevent any small company from entering the market due to high costs. The result would be to export jobs outside the EU.
John BOWIS (EPP-ED, UK) said that a workable REACH needed to be approved which would lead to a reduction in the amount of animal testing. Most chemicals, he said, were safe, some needed to be treated carefully and others were dangerous and needed to be substituted. The problem was that we did not know which were which. Industry needed certainty and clarity and Mr Bowis supported the "One Substance, One Registration" principle. It was also important that European industry was not disadvantaged as well as to take into account the concerns of developing countries, in particular in the areas of minerals and mining.
Mary HONEYBALL (PES, UK) said rarely do people take such a keen interest in the legislative work of the European Parliament. It was a tremendous opportunity, she said, to lead the world in the registration and authorisation of chemicals.
Godfrey BLOOM (IND/DEM, UK ) was concerned about the budget of the new chemicals agency to be set up under the regulation. He said that the budget would be €78 million over eleven years from 2006-2016. He was concerned that €50 million would be spent in 2014 and 2015.
Avril DOYLE (EPP-ED, IE) said REACH was intended to replace the complex and slow procedures of 40 present directives, aiming for a strong chemical industry in the internal market with a high level of protection. She said she supported the registration compromise, the amendment to limit costs to SMEs and the proposals to limit animal testing. She urged MEPs to support her amendments to include chemical additives to tobacco products in the full registration process of REACH: "It is in tobacco users' interest to know the effects of the 2000 chemicals added to cigarettes. Without this, the tobacco companies will be able to go on claiming ignorance of health effects."
Responses to the debate
The rapporteur Guido SACCONI responded to the debate, initially reacting to criticism that he had not represented the Environment Committee's report in his comments: he said that the rapporteur had a responsibility to the House to try to build the largest possible majority, and this meant working on the essentials to find a compromise. It was urgent, he said, to get REACH into place: "The burden of proof on small tonnages is maintained, 30 per cent will require full documentation and the 'One Substance One Registration' principle now has support across the House." Finally, he thanked all MEPs and staff involved in this legislative task.
Lord BACH , speaking for the UK presidency, welcomed the "knowledge, experience and passion" shown in the 61 speeches by MEPs. He said it was vitally important for REACH's burden on business to be as low as possible, while meeting the shared goals of protecting human health and the environment. He said: "The emerging consensus between the institutions is the only achievable balance on this delicate, complex and controversial decision." He stressed the sections which sought to limit animal testing to a minimum and emphasised that the compromise deal would allow the most hazardous chemicals to be dealt with as a priority. This subject had been debated since 1998, he said: "We have a once in a lifetime chance to replace a the present system, which is flawed, slow and ineffective."
For the Commission, Vice-President VERHEUGEN said there was no such thing as a perfect compromise and that it was impossible to please everyone. "It would be wrong to ignore the competitiveness of a major European employer, but also wrong to do without what is possible to protect the health of our citizens," he said. He rejected the idea that the compromise package weakened the Commission's original proposal - in fact, he said, its objectives were strengthened. It was wrong to say that chemical big business was being put first - in fact most chemicals firms were small, he said. Finally, he promised the Commission would work to ensure the agency was established and got to work effectively and quickly.
Commissioner DIMAS thanked all the participants, and welcomed the close positions of the Council and Parliament which should enable REACH to get onto the statute book quickly.
Vote : 10am, Thursday, 17.11.2005
20051116IPR02381 Chemicals : REACH system and European Agency (amend. direct. 999/45/EC, regul. on persistent organic pollutants) Chemicals : classification, labelling, packaging, adaptation to the REACH regulation (amend. direct. 67/548/EEC)
EN
1
PHOTO
20051108PHT02100.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=237952
EN
3
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=237962
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
