MEPs push for tough sanctions against racism in football
Human rights
2005-12-02 - 14:12
Tackling racism in European football
As racism in football hits the headlines again, with incidents in Italy, Spain and the Netherlands, a cross-party group of MEPs are backing the drive against bigotry. The European Parliament can help get rid of racism in football, Dutch Socialist MEP Emine Bozkurt told a press conference, by ensuring EU rules which "forbid discrimination in general and at work in particular" are applied in football clubs.
She urged European football organisation UEFA to impose tough penalties. "Let's get racism out of football," she said.
The football pitch is the place of work for footballers, clubs have the duty to protect them, Bozkurt said, introducing a written declaration on tackling racism in football, which she called on other MEPs to sign over the coming months. The declaration is jointly proposed by Bozkurt, British member of the EPP-ED group Christopher Heaton-Harris, German liberal Alexander Alvaro, German green Cem Özdemir and UK labour MEP Claude Moraes.
It says that "football players, like other workers, have the right to a racism-free working environment" and calls on UEFA and other competition organisers in Europe to ensure referees have the option to stop and even abandon matches in the event of serious racist abuse. It also suggests UEFA consider removing from their competitions "clubs whose supporters or players commit serious racist offences."
Moraes, chairman of the anti-racism and diversity intergroup, said "there is a lot of pain in the beautiful game today...we want tough sanctions at all levels, from amateur to professional." UEFA vice-president Per Ravn Omdal welcomed the move by the MEPs, noting that racism is a high priority for the organisation. He said UEFA has in place "grass roots" programmes for youth football to try and ensure clubs are "tolerant places, free of racist tendencies." Omdal said they backed tough sanctions from fines to the closing of stadia.
Meanwhile, former Chelsea, Bari and Celtic player, Paul Elliott said that while racism was probably at its height in the 1970s and 1980s when he was pelted with bananas "it is still here." He added "I hope in 20 years we won't still be having this conversation."
If the declaration gets the approval of a majority of MEPs it will become an official motion.
20051201STO03091 UEFA website Football against racism in Europe
EN
1
PHOTO
20051130PHT03082.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.uefa.com/uefa/index.html
EN
3
LINK
http://www.farenet.org/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
