Time for Europe's partners to move on WTO talks, says Mandelson
External/international trade
2005-11-23 - 19:25
Europe has done its bit to move world trade talks forward, and it is time for others to respond, according to Trade Commissioner Peter Mandelson. Speaking to MEPs in the International Trade Committee on Wednesday, he said reduced expectations for the Hong Kong meeting in December did not mean lower ambitions for the Doha Development round as a whole.
"We are far from where we should be," said Mr Mandelson. "For too long there has been no real negotiation and too little to negotiate about with the whole round driven into an agricultural silo. We have recently started looking beyond that, but there is not enough time to seek the trade offs needed for an agreement."
He said WTO members had agreed to aim simply for a "softer landing" at the Hong Kong meeting as a basis for talks to take off again next year. He had been the last to accept this scaling down, but it was unavoidable, he said: "But this does not mean we are lowering ambitions for the Doha round as a whole. It means key decisions will have to be taken early next year if an agreement is to be reached on schedule. Our partners will have to adopt a new broader and more inclusive approach or we will get not further forward." The credibility of the whole multinational negotiating system was now at stake, he added.
The trade commissioner wanted Hong Kong to get a result on trade and development issues as well as market access questions. On the former, he summarised the EU's proposal: all industrialised WTO members should give duty and quota free access to all products for the least developed countries (LDCs); special and differential treatment for LDCs should be reconfirmed where it already exists; better access for drugs needed to tackle pandemics should be included in intellectual property rules; a strong aid for trade package, using the example of the €1 billion pledged by the Commission at the Gleneagles G8 summit was needed.
On agriculture, Mr Mandelson said: "Our offer of 28 October is the most substantive offer the EU has ever made in any trade round. It makes substantial progress on market access, it offers opportunities to major exporters without wiping out the preferential access for LDCs. It would be good for all developing countries, not just competitive agricultural producers." To go any further would "further imbalance" the talks. "Other should now act to match our effort," he said, pointing to the lack of progress on industrial tariffs and trade in services. In both cases, he said LDCs were not being expected to open their markets further, but everyone else should at least offer something: "We need a serious multilateral approach or we will get nowhere."
He told other WTO members: "Stop hiding behind criticism of the EU and making unrealistic demands. Enter real negotiations on all areas, or you will be risking everything."
'Reality check' for EU trading partners
Many of the MEPs who joined the discussion agreed that lowering of expectations for the Hong Kong meeting was inevitable. They also raised a series of specific points. Georgios PAPASTAMKOS (EPP-ED, EL) asked in particular whether cotton would form part of the CAP package. Mr Mandelson said it was already part of the offer, with the EU reforms already agreed and in places. Europe was waiting for proposals from others on this sector. Erika MANN (PES, DE) said the Commissioner needed to be blunt, as Europe's trading partners needed to understand the extent of the EU's offer on agriculture. Mr Mandelson agreed: " We have done our bit, we are doing our bit and we will do more as the reforms come on stream (...) Our partners must take a reality check. It sometimes seems as if they will only be satisfied with a deal which closes down agriculture in the net importing countries, wiping it out in much of Europe and eliminating preferential access for the ACP countries."
A new approach on services negotiations
Giulietto CHIESA (ALDE, IT) asked about the lack of progress on services. Mr Mandelson said the request and offer system had "basically speaking got us nowhere." A new approach was needed, he said, based on targets, but with much flexibility for WTO Members to decide on which sectors to act on, but "with the exception of the LDCs, everyone must do something." He hoped the Hong Kong meeting could at least agree a framework for negotiations next year. Mr Mandelson went on to assure both Caroline LUCAS (Greens/EFA, UK) and Helmuth MARKOV (GUE/NGL, DE) that the EU was not adopting an aggressive stance insisting on undesirable market opening for developing countries, but he said: "I don't accept the premise that liberalisation is anti-development (...) Let's understand that trade is the main source of growth and foreign direct investment, prosperity for the business and consumer sector and the tax revenue that comes with it." He told Bogusław ROGALSKI (IND/DEM, PL) that he hoped a deal would be reached within the EU on the sugar sector, so this would not be a loose end at Hong Kong.
2005-11-23 In the chair Enrique Barón Crespo PES ES
Committee on International Trade
20051121IPR02638 30 MEPs, led by Trade Committee Chair Enrique Baron Crespo (PES, ES), will participate in the WTO ministerial meeting in Hong Kong 12-18 December and the parallel session of the Parliamentary Conference on the WTO.
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20051117IPR02434 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
