President Borrell calls for fresh boost for Euro-Mediterranean partnership
External relations
2005-11-28 - 16:44
"Inequality is greater between the two shores of the Mediterranean than anywhere else in the world. Along no other frontier do such huge differences of income lie so close together". These were the words of Josep Borrell, President of the European Parliament, speaking on Monday morning at the opening of the Euro-Mediterranean Summit in Barcelona, which brings together heads of state and government of the EU countries and their counterparts from the ten Mediterranean countries
Despite aid provided by the European Union over the last ten years, the sharp demographic growth in the region and lack of private investment due to the ongoing conflicts in the region have prevented the gap from narrowing. Mr Borrell, who was speaking in his dual capacity as President of the European Parliament and the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly, described to the heads of state and government the mixed conclusions reached by members of the Assembly at their recent meeting in Rabat. "Ten years of the Barcelona Process have not brought significant progress towards a common area of peace and prosperity" , he stressed.
Over the last ten years, the per capita GNP of the European Union of 15 has risen from 20 000 to over 30 000 dollars and that of the new Member States from 6 000 to around 15 000 dollars. In the same period, on the southern side of the Mediterranean, per capita income has stagnated, moving from slightly under 5 000 to slightly over 5 000 dollars. Trade patterns have not become favourable to the southern countries, their trade deficit with the EU having doubled over this 10-year period.
The President of the European Parliament believes a major improvement in the economic situation of the countries on the south of the Mediterranean requires a more stable political environment. "Private investment will not flourish in an unfavourable legal environment. Better governance in the countries of the region is essential. The best guarantee of this lies with democratic structures solid enough, and parliaments strong enough, to pass these reforms and ensure their implementation" said Mr Borrell. Contrary to those who call for improved economic conditions to enable political reform to progress, the message of the Euro-Mediterranean parliamentary institutions is that there will be no noticeable economic improvement without prior political reforms. "The economic and political goals are indivisible" , said Mr Borrell.
A second opportunity
The Barcelona Summit and the action plan adopted by the participants offer a second and perhaps final chance to achieve the cooperation goals between the two shores of the Mediterranean. For this purpose the summit's decisions must be turned into priorities of the European Union's external policy. The target dates laid down in the texts musts be respected "to show to all our fellow citizens that the political will is there. Otherwise they will lose trust. And without trust there will be no popular support" . Mr Borrell believes the stakes are high, as failure would inevitably lead to a clash of civilisations that Europe would be unable to manage. The Barcelona Summit must therefore be the one at which the Euro-Mediterranean partnership commits itself to achieving practical results.
The European Parliament's delegation to the Barcelona Summit consisted, in addition to President Borrell, of Hans-Gert PÖTTERING, leader of the EPP-ED group (European People's Party and European Democrats), Luisa MORGANTINI (GUE/NGL, IT), chair of the Development Committee, Anneli JÄÄTTEENMÄKI (ALDE, FI), author of the European Parliament's report on the Barcelona process revisited, and Carlos CARNERO (PES, ES), Member of the Foreign Affairs Committee.
20051128IPR02939 The Barcelona Process revisited The Barcelona Summit
EN
2
LINK
http://www.euromedbarcelona.org/Home_EN.html
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2005-0412 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
