Europe by Satellite Tenth Anniversary: Sharing the sights and sounds of Europe
Institutions
2005-11-25 - 13:24
The European Union TV agency Europe by Satellite (EbS) celebrates its tenth anniversary on Friday the 25th November. Flagship of the EU institutions’ audiovisual service, EbS is today an indispensable one-stop shop for the latest and most accurate picture of EU affairs.
" 10 years after its creation, EbS plays an ever-growing role for the European Parliament. Our sessions are broadcast live, as are many other activities of Parliament. Europe by Satellite contributes to transparency and facilitates the work of broadcasters and journalists when reporting on European Affairs. It also plays an important role in explaining how EU institutions interact, thereby rendering Europe more intelligible to its citizens. We believe strongly in EbS and we are committed to developing it to become even more efficient and tailored to the needs of broadcasters ", says Alejo Vidal-Quadras, Vice-President of the European Parliament in charge of information and communication policy.
“ TV is of course, more than ever primary source of information for the European citizens. And the EBS has an important role to play in this: it supplies pictures to the broadcasters ten hours daily ”, said Vice President for Communication Margot Wallström. “ It is also vastly more accessible now than ever, thanks to the magic of the Internet and the desktop PC. It is our ambition to make it an essential tool for informing about Europe in all its diversity ever wider networks of media and civil society all across the European Union .”
EbS offers broadcasters and journalists live coverage of the main events and live daily news broadcasts from the European Parliament, the Council, the European Commission and the other EU institutions. EbS newswires serve as a global newsroom for broadcasters and other media services providers. In addition, EbS provides thematic footage illustrating the daily news and video news releases related to Europe. It broadcasts for an average of 10 hours per day, besides which there are hundreds of daily requests for EbS advisories and consultations of the website (100 000 visits every month). EbS is available as a provider of information to everyone interested in European affairs.
On the fast changing information market, EbS has constantly to adapt to the increasingly diverse and demanding needs of users. EbS aims now at providing a broader range of information services to media providers as well as the daily flow of news. Information packages of pictures and other material on top EU events will soon be regularly offered to the press well in advance on air and via the Internet. Packages will include footages, archives material, video-stocks, info-clips and background information (human-interest stories, facts and figures, web addresses and contact persons). The possibilities to format and diffuse content through other emerging means such as mobile devices will be explored.
Today EbS transmits a free to air signal via satellite directly available to local, regional, national and international organisations in the Union, the Mediterranean area, and Central and Eastern Europe.
20051125IPR02887 European parliament's EbS Schedule EbS Technical information EbS Info-express
EN
1
LINK
/eplive/expert/ebsplan_top_page/default/default_en.htm
EN
2
LINK
/eplive/expert/freetext_page_prog/20050818FTX00415-2202/default_en.htm
EN
3
LINK
/eplive/expert/tous_les_infoexpress/default/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
