Bird flu: call for tougher measures
Agriculture
2005-11-17 - 10:25
The Agriculture Committee has voted for tough new measures on avian flu control. These measures, which should come into force as quickly as possible, introduce compulsory surveillance in the Member States for Low Pathogenic Avian Influenza, which can mutate into the Highly Pathogenic form. The committee also emphasised the need to develop cost-effective vaccines for poultry.
The report by Neil PARISH (EPP-ED, UK), adopted by the committee on 14 November in Strasbourg, seeks to beef up the measures to be taken by the EU if bird flu hits Europe. Firstly, early warning systems must be improved, say MEPs: the authorities must be informed immediately of any outbreak of the virus, even if it is believed to be Low Pathogenic.
Temporary restrictions could be introduced on the transport of birds and eggs in the event of a crisis, pending the findings of epidemiological surveys, says the Agriculture Committee. Poultry and other birds must not be moved to other establishments until it is established that there is no risk they will spread the disease. Eggs can be exempted in order to be transported to a processing plant, as thermal elimination of the virus is regarded as more effective by MEPs than destruction on the spot. Robust contingency plans should also be drawn up to deal with any outbreak and to ensure proper co-ordination among animal and public health authorities.
The measures to be taken in the event of a crisis in the EU's neighbouring countries should also be tightened up, with restrictions on movements and imports from non-EU countries, the extension of protection zones to the EU's neighbours and the supply of vaccines where these countries are unable to combat a crisis without outside assistance.
For cases of human contamination, MEPs believe coordinated emergency plans should be envisaged, notably to determine the measures to be put in place in the event of a confirmed risk. These emergency plans would promote coordination between Member States as well as targeting populations needing to be vaccinated as a matter of priority. Anti-virals and vaccines must be as widely available as possible: Member States must create sufficient stockpiles of anti-virals and ensure that they have adequate capacity to produce vaccines against the strain causing the crisis. If a crisis occurs outside the EU, MEPs believe the Commission should be able to act within 24 hours by imposing measures such as quarantine, the disinfection of any airports receiving flights from certain regions and travel restrictions.
The Agriculture Committee also recommends closer cooperation with the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control, based at Solna in Sweden. The role of this agency, which began operations in May 2005, is to help strengthen Europe's defences against infectious diseases such as influenza, SARS and HIV/AIDS.
More funding for veterinary measures
A report by Ilda FIGUEIREDO (GUE/NGL, PT) on veterinary expenditure was also adopted on 14 November. Here the Agriculture Committee underlined the need for equal co-financing rates for outbreaks of both High Pathogenic and Low Pathogenic Avian Influenza. MEPs want a Community-Member State ratio of 50-50 for both types, recognising the need to erradicate the Low Pathogenic form as this can mutuate into HPAI. The committee also favoured the idea of the Community paying 100% of the cost of vaccinations.
These two reports have been adopted following the presentation by the European Commission of a directive designed to update measures to be taken in the event of an outbreak of avian influenza. Once the reports are adopted by the full Parliament, in principle on 1 December, the ball will be in the court of the Council, which plans to push through the legislation (a priority of the UK Presidency) before the end of the year.
2005-11-14 Chair of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development Joseph Daul EPP-ED FR
Procedure: Consultation
Plenary vote: December, Brussels
20051111IPR02220
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
