Debates and results of votes - Strasbourg Plenary 14-17 November 2005
Institutions
2005-11-22 - 16:28
Details of the main votes and debates at the November II plenary session in Strasbourg.
REACH: MEPs strike a balance between health, the environment and industry
MEPs concerned about possible existence of detention centres in Europe
Support for a "social globalisation"
A common blacklist for unsafe airlines
Winning the battle against climate change
MEPs call on Member States to publish digital switchover plans
Arms export code must be binding
20051114BKG02297
Opening of the session - Statement by President Borrell on the recent bomb attacks in Jordan
EP President Josep BORRELL opened the session with a statement on the bomb attacks on hotels in Amman.
"On 9 November, terrorism struck again in all its horror, this time in Jordan. On behalf of the whole house, I immediately conveyed our sorrow to the authorities in Amman and asked that our condolences be passed on to those affected. We will have the opportunity to debate terrorism and how we should react to it during the meetings planned to mark the tenth anniversary of the Barcelona process. Terrorism is not just a matter for Europe. It affects both shores of the Mediterranean; it is something we must face up to together - it will be on the agenda of both the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly meeting in Rabat and of the meeting of Heads of State or Government in Barcelona.
These barbaric acts show us that this is not a matter of attacks based on religion or the colour of peoples' skin. It shows that Europe must advance in an alliance of civilisations, and avoiding a clash of civilisations."
MEPs concerned about possible existence of detention centres in Europe
Opening the debate on "secret detention centres in Europe" Commissioner for Justice, Freedom and Security, Franco FRATTINI said that there had been widespread reporting in the reputable media on the alleged existence of CIA secret detention centres. Many Member States, he recalled, had already made statements on the issue and have categorically denied the allegations. If such centres did exist, he said, it would be a grave infringement of both European and national law.
Commissioner Frattini recalled that the Union was based on Article 6 of the Treaty of the European Union which outlines the principles of democracy, human rights and respect of the rule of law. Sanctions, he recalled, were available to both the Member States and national governments if these principles were to be contravened. Mr Frattini also pointed out that all Member States wishing to accede to the Union have to reach certain standards in these areas. The Commission, he said, would follow matter the closely and would inform the European Parliament of any developments.
Political group speakers
Carlos COELHO (PT), for the EPP-ED group, stated that he was pleased that no EU countries or candidate countries were involved in "this outrage - this shame." He went on to say that "we all feel solidarity with the victims of terrorism," but "every step must be taken in respect fundamental human rights and the rule of law." This would be the best way to "give legitimacy" to our fight against terrorism said Mr Coelho.
Martine ROURE (FR), for the PES group, referred to the 2002 report by Human Rights Watch which identified "ghost prisoners" held by the United States government. She said it was not acceptable that there were possibly areas in Europe where "our writ doesn't run." Mrs Roure asked Commissioner Frattini what measures the EC would take to ensure that "all Charters that govern Human Rights are upheld in the EU."
Baroness Sarah LUDFORD (UK), for the Liberal ALDE group, launched a scathing attack on the American government, saying that it had made "disappearances a US tactic." The war on terror, Baroness Ludford stated, had opened the "blackest of black holes."
Hélène FLAUTRE (FR), for the Greens/EFA group, welcomed the opportunity to have this debate and said that if these allegations were true then they represented "a violation or articles 3, 5 and 6 of the UN Convention against Torture." She called for the Commission to get to the bottom of the matter as "it was sapping our credibility."
Vittorio AGNOLETTO ( IT), speaking for the GUE/NGL group, said that Commissioner Frattini's statement reminded him of the "three monkeys - hear nothing, see nothing, say nothing". He said that there were "hidden prisoners and torture centres in Europe". There was evidence to prove this, including evidence from the USA. The EU, he said, had not done enough to investigate the matter. He also stated that 22 US intelligence agents had been involved in the kidnapping of an Imam violating the sovereignty of a European state.
Ryszard CZARNECKI ( PL), speaking as a non-attached MEP, said that the issue affected Poland. The Polish government had made statements denying the existence of camps but this only applied to the present and not the past. There had to be a balance between civil liberties and the fight against terrorism and public opinion should be listened to in order to strike correct balance.
British Speaker
Claude MORAES (PES, UK), pointed out that the US Secretary of State Condoleezza RICE had herself ordered an inquiry into these leaks to the press, - a clear indicator in his view of their veracity. He called on the Commissioner to institute an "enquiry that would bring credibility to this House."
Commissioner's response to the debate
Commissioner Frattini, responding to the debate, said that the whole House supported the principles of the absolute respect for human life and the dignity of the individual. Were the allegations to be proven, it would constitute a grave breach of the Treaty of the European Union and would lead to political sanctions being taken against the Member States concerned. If evidence was provided, it would be an issue for a criminal investigation at national level. He recalled that, at the moment, the Italian authorities were investigating alleged action of CIA operatives in Italy. The Commission was carrying out a policy of dialogue with the Member States and with NGOs. The Commission was, he said, intensifying its contacts with the US Senate and Congress. Indignation expressed by MEPs was not the answer to this issue. The Commission could not carry out a full scaled enquiry obliging Member States to handover documents as the Commission did not have such powers. The Commission, he said, did not have the same powers as a national judge. Had the European Constitution been in force, it would have been easier he said, for the Commission to investigate and obtain answers. Presently, the evidence to facilitate an enquiry, such as photos or witness statements, was not available. The Commission, he said, would nevertheless continue its policy of questioning Member States and candidate countries.
MEPs support a "social globalisation"
If globalisation has certainly had positive effects on the economy, then there should in turn be advantages for everybody. Its negative effects, notably in the social sector, need to be offset by policies that make globalisation work for mankind. These sentiments were reflected in the report by Slovenian MEP Mihael BREJC (EPP-ED, SI) on "globalisation and its social dimension".
The report went on to say that EU actions in this field could, if successful, serve as an inspiration to other parts of the world.
To contribute significantly to the ongoing debate of how to counteract the negative effects of globalisation worldwide, the European Union needs to act in a coherent way through its internal and external policies. This the key message of the report on the social dimension of globalisation.
Certain actions of good practice could even serve as an example to other parts of the world; other EU policies have to be reformed to be compatible with the development policy. MEPs highlight various actions they believe to be taken at EU level and expect the Commission to come forward with concrete proposals and the necessary resources.
For the Parliament, globalisation must be a process with a strong social dimension based on universally shared values, respect for human rights and individual dignity which is fair, inclusive and democratically governed, provides opportunities and tangible benefits for all countries and people and is linked to the Millennium Development Goals.
Social rights, social dialogue and human rights should be given greater importance in the EU's various external programmes. The EU's partnerships should include a social pillar covering among other things labour standards. Through bilateral agreements the Commission should ensure that, at the least, ILO (International Labour Organisation) standards are respected in order to ensure humane working conditions.
The EU should use its bilateral relations to ensure that jobs which are moved off -shore or relocated outside the EU do not end up being performed in sweat shops in the third world but instead, jobs of high quality are created.
MEPs support the Commissions efforts to raise awareness among multinational companies of their social responsibility, which have as yet had limited effect. They consider that the social and environmental responsibilities of multinationals should be clearly established, and that EU action in this area should be stepped up. Text adopted - social dimension of globalisation
Simplifying access to cross-border social security
MEPs adopted a legislative report on the annual review of Regulation 1408/71 on cross social security. Parliament adopted amendments intended to simplify the proposal, to correct mistakes and to update the annexes of Regulation. These technical amendments are acceptable to both the Commission and the Council.
The aim of Regulation 1408/71 is to ensure that anyone moving from country to country within the EU enjoys the same rights as someone who has always lived and worked in the same country. Thanks to this Regulation, people who move around do not lose their acquired social security rights and are not required to contribute simultaneously to more than one national social security scheme. The Regulation determines whether the citizen is entitled to specific benefits laid down by their Member State of origin, or whether an equivalent benefit is available in the person's new Member State of residence. Almost every year, the Regulation is modified in order to take account of the developments of national social security schemes, incorporate changes in national law, and take account of the case law of the Court of Justice.
The proposal updates the Regulation to reflect changes in national legislation on social security, in particular from the new Member States since the end of accession negotiations. It also completes the simplification of procedures on receiving medical care abroad, introduced by Regulation (EC) No 631/2004, by extending some of those modifications to the identical procedures regarding benefits for accidents at work and occupational diseases. Finally, it aims at updating and simplifying the list of bilateral agreements which include provisions on social security that are still in force and have not been replaced by Regulation 1408/71, as well as at introducing technical corrections. Text adopted by Parliament on social security schemes
MEPs call for action on eel stocks
In recent years, eel stocks in Europe have declined rapidly, to the extent that some are concerned they may become extinct if action is not taken urgently to reverse the trend.
In an own initiative report adopted by Parliament, MEPs call for the Member States to draw up national management plans for eel stocks as soon as possible and for the Commission to undertake a range of research projects to study the problem.
MEPs also want the Commission to adjust the policy on catches and exports of eel in such a way that enough glass eels are available for natural migration and enough are available at a reasonable price for restocking natural eel habitats. Text adopted by Parliament on European eels
REACH: MEPs strike a balance between health, the environment and industry
The first step in a great legislative marathon has taken place in the European Parliament. MEPs reached their first reading position on the REACH package. The House approved a legislative package aimed at considerably benefiting the environment and public health as well as taking the interests of industry into account. The fears of SMEs about over-regulation also found an echo with MEPs. REACH is one of the most complex issues the Parliament has ever been asked to consider.
Parliament's President Josep Borrell said, "The European Parliament has shown that it lives up to its responsibilities and, as legislator, has responded to some of the fears of the Europeans, ensuring competitive jobs together with a high level of protection of health and the environment."
The main elements of the position of the European Parliament on REACH (Registration, Evaluation and Authorisation of Chemicals) adopted today by 398 votes in favour, 148 against and 36 abstentions (The actual vote on the report was 407 in favour, 155 against with 41 abstentions) are the following:
On registration:
The compromise reached by the PES, the EPP-ED and the ALDE groups was endorsed by plenary by 438 votes in favour, 144 against and 15 abstentions. This compromise is based on the following elements:
Introduction of a targeted approach on data requirements for 1-10 tonnes chemicals (those having been identified by the impact assessment studies as being the ones for which costs of REACH implementation would be higher)
Maintain, in all cases, the responsibility on industry to make available information on the hazards, risks, and risk reduction measures for chemicals ("burden of proof")
Application of the above targeted approach only to existing substances; new substances continue to provide full safety data. Substances of high concern and substances dangerous to human health or environment which are used in consumer products also have to provide full sets of safety data.
Introduction of the possibility of making additional tests, if this appears necessary
Introduction of the possibility of omitting certain tests ("waiving") for the substances produced/imported between 10-100 tonnes when this is justified on the basis of certain criteria (to be fixed by the Commission in comitology)
Introduction of the "One Substance, One Registration" (OSOR) approach to minimise costs, with an opt-out in specific conditions where it can be justified
On Authorisation:
The European Parliament endorsed by 324 votes in favour, 263 against and 13 abstentions the approach of the Environment Committee which is based on the following elements:
Consideration of available substitutes, innovation through time-limited authorisations (5 years), and certainty through a list of the most hazardous substances. Early registration of these chemicals.
On Substances in Articles:
The EP endorsed by 291 in favour, 290 against and 16 abstentions a slightly revised version of the approach adopted on this issue by the Environment Committee:
Equal treatment of imported articles to those produced in the EU, through simple notification requirements for articles containing substances listed as being of very high concern, and by equal application of authorisation.
For SMEs:
The EP endorsed the approach of the Environment Committee (supported also by Internal Market and Industry Committees) seeking at providing:
Helpdesks and additional guidance and tools to meet the obligations of the regulation.
On the Agency:
The EP endorsed the approach of the Environment Committee (supported by Internal Market and Industry Committees) seeking to:
Strengthen the Agency's role for evaluating dossiers and substances, while at the same time maximising the use of Member States’ expertise on substance evaluation.
On animal testing:
The European Parliament endorsed the approach of the Environment Committee seeking to:
Minimise animal testing through regular adaptation of testing methods and avoidance of duplication.
What's next?
The Council, under the UK Presidency, should try to reach a common position. The UK Presidency has indicated that it aims to achieve a common position by the end of the year.
Reactions of the political groups
Just before the final vote, Guido Sacconi (PES, IT), the rapporteur said he had asked to speak since he had feared the vote would go differently, but instead the vote had been very positive, it had strengthened the balance of the regulation, especially concerning authorisation. Overall, the vote had been very strong.
Ria Oomen-Ruijten (EPP-ED, NL) said that they won concerning registration but lost concerning authorisation, a very narrow majority had been reached concerning the most important points.
Lena Ek (ALDE, SE) said that the ALDE was happy since the environmental aspects had been strengthened.
Hartmut Nassauer (EPP-ED, DE) said that he could not support the vote on authorisation, but he supported the vote on registration - the only subject which had been adopted with qualified majority; he rejected the vote on authorisation, which, he said, had to be corrected by Council.
Jonas Sjöstedt (GUE/NGL, SE) said that the vote was too weak, especially concerning the compromise on registration, but on authorisation it was positive. As he put it, better a weak REACH than no REACH.
Carl Schlyter (Greens/EFA, SE) said that the outcome of the vote on authorisation was a positive result, but he feared that it would be changed in Council; the majority of his group could not vote in favour of the report.
Johannes Blokland (IND/DEM, NL) said that the majority of his group would vote against the report.
Alessandro Foglietta (UEN, IT) said his group was happy with the registration part but not with the authorisation section of the report.
Debate
REACH, the package of new measures on Registration, Evaluation and Authorisation of Chemicals, had its first reading debate on Tuesday. The discussions centred on compromise proposals put forward by the largest political groups ahead of the vote on Thursday.
Commission Vice-President Günter VERHEUGEN told MEPs the Commission supported the compromise reached between Parliament's political groups on registration and information exchange. " This deal strikes a good balance between protecting the environment and ensuring competitiveness ," he said, adding that he was glad to see there was scope for protecting business interests within the data sharing rules: "It would be a shame if businesses had no incentive to cooperate."
Commissioner VERHEUGEN welcomed the strengthening of the European Chemicals Agency, though he warned against giving it too many tasks: there was limited expertise available, and the larger its remit, the more this would have budgetary implications. "The authorisation procedure is crucial, bringing in the principle of substitution. We don't want EU businesses to suffer a disadvantage on the global playing field," he said. The objective should be to keep risk under control, he said. On Article 6, he said there needed to be a level playing field between producers and importers, and that the Commission would support any such solution which was in compliance with WTO rules. The compromise on data security struck the right balance, he said, with the information that was necessary being published on the internet. Overall, he hoped for a ' yes ' to the Nassauer/Sacconi package as a way to find a solution on one of the most complex and controversial pieces of EU legislation ever proposed.
Environment Commissioner Stavros DIMAS paid tribute to Mr Sacconi and all the other MEPs involved for their efforts in preparing Parliament's first reading report. REACH, he said, was vital for improving the environment and human health. "It will bring a substantial increase in our knowledge of chemicals, boost consumer confidence and boost innovation. I am pleased that Parliament and Council are moving to almost identical positions." Substantial progress had been made in the compromise package, with a better functioning system for dealing with the most dangerous chemicals. The special approach to chemicals produced in small quantities differed from that originally proposed by the Commission, but this too could now be supported. On the scope of application and on the rules for approval and substitution, the Commission could also accept many of Parliament's amendments, though not all of them. Overall this would have a positive influence, encouraging companies to seek out safer materials.
Speaking for the UK Presidency of the EU, British Environment Minister Lord BACH told MEPs "This legislation offers a once in a lifetime opportunity to achieve proper protection of humans and the environment while, at the same time, being workable and maintaining the competitiveness of European industry." The main elements of the compromise on registration were very close to the ideas the Council was working on, he said. "The adoption of a European Parliament opinion along these lines should pave the way for an early adoption of REACH." On registration, the Council was aiming for a single pre-registration phase and to require data sharing through the " One Substance One Registration " principle, with clear criteria for opting out of the joint information package. To help small firms, low volume substances would only need a full data set if simple criteria identified them as high risk. Efforts had also been made to reduce the cost of registration in higher quantity bands, while still delivering the necessary information. On both evaluation and authorisation, the Council's position was close to Parliament's. "For our part, we will continue working in our role as Presidency to do all we possibly can to get agreement this year. We believe we can."
Parliament's rapporteur Guido SACCONI (PES, IT) said that listening to the debate reminded him of all the steps so far in trying to reach an agreement. "We have heard how close the positions of the three institutions now are. There are really no more divisions on points of principle." After examining his conscience, he was convinced the compromise he had reached with his EPP-ED counterpart Hartmut NASSAUER (DE) reflected the key concepts of balance and responsibility. Regarding balance, he said: "I think we have safeguarded and reinforced the balance between protecting health and the environment and protecting competitiveness." This sort of balance was far harder to reach in a piece of legislation with conflicting interests at stake than it would have been in a simple political resolution. There would, he said, be a chemicals safety report even for lower tonnages and there was a simpler mechanism for authorisation and substitution. For companies, the burden of proof had been maintained and the system for data sharing had been simplified, while the period of data protection had been extended. Parliament had met its responsibility to maintain its independence and autonomy despite the heavy, though legitimate, pressure from lobbyists on all sides of the debate. Parliament's position was now very close to the Council's: "At a time when many aspects of building Europe are seen to be in crisis, here is an example to show we can make decisions and find the balance, representing all the interests at stake. This sort of agreement is like a fruit: you must pick it when it is ripe or it will become rotten. Let us grasp the fruit of this compromise now and complete the dossier."
Speaking for the Industry Committee, Lena EK (ALDE, SE) (rapporteur under the enhanced cooperation procedure between committees, the " Hughes procedure ") said that the existing legislation on chemicals was " not good ". 30,000 chemicals would be covered by REACH. Mrs Ek gave the example of a toy and stated that some of the chemicals in toys may come from outside the EU. She was concerned about the impact on SMEs, stating that it was not possible to have a full dialogue with the Commission. The Industry Committee, she said, tried to promote innovation and improve technology. She called on the House to support the proposed compromise of the three main groups.
Hartmut NASSAUER (EPP-ED, DE), speaking for the Internal Market Committee, (and also a rapporteur under the Hughes procedure), highlighted the environmental and consumer protection elements of REACH. Over the next eleven years, he said, it would be possible to ascertain the impact of 30,000 chemicals on human health and this represented a decisive step forward. Nevertheless, there would be high costs associated with this which would have to paid by companies. He also called for support for the proposed compromise on the registration parts of REACH.
Ria OOMEN-RUIJTEN (NL), speaking for the EPP-ED group, said that the chemicals industry was very important, contributing some €440 billion to the EU's GDP. Over 1 million people, she said, were employed in the chemicals industry. REACH, she said was a huge project and the Commission's original proposal was too bureaucratic and cumbersome. She stated that new compromises were being put forward on authorisation but over the eleven year period, it would be possible for the EU to have a workable registration system.
Robert GOEBBELS (LU), speaking for the PES group, said a balance had to be struck between environmental protection and support for industry. The chemicals industry, he said, was not a right or left issue. NGOs such as Greenpeace, he said, had been advocating attacking the most dangerous and cancerous chemicals. The proposed compromise would allow this to happen. Mr Goebbels welcomed the " One Substance, One Registration " principle. The aim of REACH, he said, should be to defend human health and the environment. REACH was also needed to protect Europe's chemical industry. He welcomed the proposed compromise as " progressive and useful ".
Lena EK (SE), speaking for the ALDE group, said that reliable evaluation and support for SMEs were key to a strong REACH. She also welcomed the proposed compromise and said that better information on chemicals would be available to consumers. She welcomed the Parliament's position ahead of the vote and said that the three institutions - the Commission, Council and the European Parliament were close to agreement.
Carl SCHLYTER (SE), for the Greens/EFA, rejected Mr Nasseur's approach, saying that he had given in to the interests of German industry. SMEs would not have sufficient information available to deal with REACH and the issue of volume tonnage had been swept under the carpet. Mr Schlyter supported the Environment Committee's position and urged the House to vote against Mr Nasseur's position.
Jonas SJÖSTEDT (SE), for the GUE/NGL group, stated that he wanted to see a " strong REACH " that would reflect the EU's responsibilities towards the environment and consumers. He warned that his group " cannot accept " the existing compromise that would leave 90% of chemicals produced in low volumes exempt from regulation. According to him, this was due to the fact that " the industrial lobby had weakened REACH " and the environment and consumers would lose out as a result.
Johannes BLOKLAND (NL), for the IND/DEM Group, said that in overall terms his group supported the " Sacconi-Nassauer compromise ," although he wanted to see greater attention paid to the position of inorganic substances, metals and concentrates. Mr Blokland concluded by warning against excessive regulation saying that the " burden on small and medium size enterprises must be feasible ."
Liam AYLWARD (IE), for the UEN Group, noted that " REACH will reassure co nsumers" who may be worried about the presence of an estimated 100,000 chemicals on the European market. However, he cautioned MEPs that " the key is balance as chemicals play an essential role in our lives ." He went on to speak of the need to protect the 40,000 Irish jobs dependent on the industry.
For the non-attached Members, Irena BELOHORSKÁ (SK) used her experience as a doctor to warn of the dangers to public health posed by chemicals. She hoped that all results of all tests involving chemicals would be available to the public so " people can be more careful ." As an MEP from one of the countries that joined the EU in 2004, she said she feared they were being discriminated against as they have " only had one year " to participate in the REACH debate.
British and Irish speakers
Chris DAVIES (ALDE, UK ) said there had been " two early casualties of REACH " - first, the " truth " as the costs of REACH had been exaggerated and second, the Commission's claim that it took a neutral position. Commissioner Verheugen, he said, had clearly demonstrated that the Commission was taking an " anti-environment " stance. Mr Davies congratulated the UK presidency for reaching a political compromise of the 25 Member States and hoped that a common position could be reached before the end of the year. In Parliament, however, he said there were still MEPs who believed that industry should not bear the burden of proving that chemicals were safe, and that dangerous substances should not be substituted. Mr Davies also warned that the new chemicals agency " could be stuffed with supporters of the chemicals industry ". Mr Davies supported the proposed compromise on registration.
Caroline LUCAS (Verts/ALE, UK) opposed the Mr Nassauer's and Mr Sacconi's compromise. Mrs Lucas raised the issue of animal testing and animal welfare and stated that there were many loopholes in the proposed REACH on this subject. She said that animal testing was completely unacceptable and that animal testing results could not easily be extrapolated to apply to humans as was pointed out in a recent article of " Nature " magazine.
Ashley MOTE (NI, UK) said that he could agree with the principles of registration and evaluation but authorisation by a centralised chemicals agency would be a " nightmare ". REACH represented bureaucrats' attempts to take on multinationals. REACH, he said, had been sold to a naive public as a panacea to Europe's problems. If REACH were to be passed, he said, it would prevent any small company from entering the market due to high costs. The result would be to export jobs outside the EU.
John BOWIS (EPP-ED, UK) said that a workable REACH needed to be approved which would lead to a reduction in the amount of animal testing. Most chemicals, he said, were safe, some needed to be treated carefully and others were dangerous and needed to be substituted. The problem was that we did not know which were which. Industry needed certainty and clarity and Mr Bowis supported the " One Substance, One Registration " principle. It was also important that European industry was not disadvantaged as well as to take into account the concerns of developing countries, in particular in the areas of minerals and mining.
Mary HONEYBALL (PES, UK) said rarely do people take such a keen interest in the legislative work of the European Parliament. It was a tremendous opportunity, she said, to lead the world in the registration and authorisation of chemicals.
Godfrey BLOOM (IND/DEM, UK ) was concerned about the budget of the new chemicals agency to be set up under the regulation. He said that the budget would be €78 million over eleven years from 2006-2016. He was concerned that €50 million would be spent in 2014 and 2015.
Avril DOYLE (EPP-ED, IE) said REACH was intended to replace the complex and slow procedures of 40 present directives, aiming for a strong chemical industry in the internal market with a high level of protection. She said she supported the registration compromise, the amendment to limit costs to SMEs and the proposals to limit animal testing. She urged MEPs to support her amendments to include chemical additives to tobacco products in the full registration process of REACH: "It is in tobacco users' interest to know the effects of the 2000 chemicals added to cigarettes. Without this, the tobacco companies will be able to go on claiming ignorance of health effects."
Responses to the debate
The rapporteur Guido SACCONI responded to the debate, initially reacting to criticism that he had not represented the Environment Committee's report in his comments: he said that the rapporteur had a responsibility to the House to try to build the largest possible majority, and this meant working on the essentials to find a compromise. It was urgent, he said, to get REACH into place: "The burden of proof on small tonnages is maintained, 30 per cent will require full documentation and the 'One Substance One Registration' principle now has support across the House." Finally, he thanked all MEPs and staff involved in this legislative task.
Lord BACH , speaking for the UK presidency, welcomed the "knowledge, experience and passion" shown in the 61 speeches by MEPs. He said it was vitally important for REACH's burden on business to be as low as possible, while meeting the shared goals of protecting human health and the environment. He said: "The emerging consensus between the institutions is the only achievable balance on this delicate, complex and controversial decision." He stressed the sections which sought to limit animal testing to a minimum and emphasised that the compromise deal would allow the most hazardous chemicals to be dealt with as a priority. This subject had been debated since 1998, he said: "We have a once in a lifetime chance to replace a the present system, which is flawed, slow and ineffective."
For the Commission, Vice-President VERHEUGEN said there was no such thing as a perfect compromise and that it was impossible to please everyone. "It would be wrong to ignore the competitiveness of a major European employer, but also wrong to do without what is possible to protect the health of our citizens," he said. He rejected the idea that the compromise package weakened the Commission's original proposal - in fact, he said, its objectives were strengthened. It was wrong to say that chemical big business was being put first - in fact most chemicals firms were small, he said. Finally, he promised the Commission would work to ensure the agency was established and got to work effectively and quickly.
Commissioner DIMAS thanked all the participants, and welcomed the close positions of the Council and Parliament which should enable REACH to get onto the statute book quickly.
REACH Adaptation to REACH
A common blacklist for unsafe airlines
The European Parliament has given the green light for the introduction of an EU-wide blacklist of airlines that do not meet safety requirements. Airlines that fail to comply will be subject to an operating ban throughout the EU. Also, passenger rights are to be strengthened by informing them of the identity of the operating carrier. Passengers will also have a right to compensation should the carrier be included on the blacklist after the reservation has been made.
Parliament's first reading report which is acceptable to the Council was adopted with 577 votes in favour 16 against with 31 abstentions.
The common blacklist will be drawn up as follows:
Each Member State should, within one month after the entry into force of the Regulation, communicate to the Commission the identity of the air carriers that are subject to an operating ban in its territory. The Commission informs the other Member States on these operating bans.
Within one month after having received the information the Commission should, on the basis of common criteria, establish the blacklist. Air carriers concerned should be given the opportunity of being heard, if necessary using an urgency procedure.
Air carriers are included on the blacklist if there is verified evidence of serious safety deficiencies, if there is a lack of ability and/or willingness to address safety deficiencies or if there is a lack of ability and/or willingness of the authorities responsible for the oversight of an air carrier to address safety deficiencies, to enforce the relevant safety standards or to oversee the aircraft.
At least every three months, the Commission should verify whether it is appropriate to update the Community list, either to include a new carrier or to remove air carrier if the safety deficiency has been remedied. In order to efficiently update the list, the Member States and the European Aviation Safety Agency should communicate to the Commission all relevant information.
The list will be published on the Internet and in the Official Journal. Also, air carriage contractors, national civil aviation authorities, the European Aviation Safety Agency and airports should bring the list to the attention of passengers, both via their websites and, where relevant, in their premises.
The common blacklist does not preclude a Member State from reacting to an unforeseen safety problem by introducing an immediate operating ban in respect of its own territory. Member States may also impose an operating ban on an air carrier, not included on the list, "in view of a safety problem specifically affecting that Member State".
MEPs also strengthened information rights of passengers. The so-called air carriage contractor selling the ticket, has to inform the passenger of the identity of the operating air carrier or carriers, whatever the means used to make the reservation.
Where the identity of the operating air carrier is not yet known at the time of reservation, the air carriage contractor should ensure that the passenger is informed as soon as such identity is established. Wherever the operating air carrier is changed after reservation, passengers must be informed at check-in, or at the time of boarding at the latest.
Parliament decided that passengers will have the right to reimbursement or re-routing if the air carrier is included on the blacklist after the reservation has been made and the flight has therefore been cancelled.
Parliament, Council and Commission agreed on a compromise beforehand, so that the Council will accept Parliament's first reading without amending it. The regulation will enter into force 20 days after publication in the Official Journal, probably beginning of 2006.
The provisions regarding information rights and reimbursement will enter into force six months after the regulation's publication in the Official Journal, the provisions regarding the drawing up of a blacklist will enter into force 20 days after publication in the Official Journal. Text adopted by Parliament on information to air passengers
Financial resources for the decommissioning of nuclear power plants and financing closure of nuclear power plant in Slovakia
Parliament adopted two reports by Rebecca HARMS (Greens/EFA, DE): (i) an own-initiative report on the question of the use of financial resources earmarked for the decommissioning of nuclear power plants and (ii) a consultation report concerning the implementation of Protocol No 9 on the Bohunice V1 nuclear power plant in Slovakia.
(i) Decommissioning nuclear power plants
According to the European Commission, it is a fair assumption that 50 to 60 of the 155 reactors currently operating in the enlarged European Union will need to be decommissioned by 2025. At the moment, the decommissioning strategies and the mode of management chosen for financial resources differ widely between the Member States. Until the Council adopts legally binding instruments in the field of nuclear safety and management of radioactive waste, the Commission intends, on the basis of the Euratom Treaty, to present a non-binding recommendation in 2005 on the subject.
MEPs recognise that it is important, for the protection of human beings and the environment, that nuclear power plants are properly decommissioned after they are shut down definitively. They consider it necessary to ensure that, in each Member State, all nuclear undertakings have sufficient financial resources available needed to cover all the costs of decommissioning, including waste management in order to uphold the polluter pays principle and avoid any recourse to state aid. Parliament notes that the approach to the management of financial resources earmarked for decommissioning differs from one Member State to the other and calls for the sound management of these resources. They call for the use of the financial resources for equitable investments fully in-line with EU competition law. The Commission should, with due regard for the subsidiarity principle, draw up precise definitions concerning the use of financial resources in each Member States, taking into account the decommissioning as well as the management, conditioning and final disposal of the resultant radioactive waste. MEPs consider it necessary for the financial resources to be managed and used with maximum transparency, and for external auditing to be guaranteed.
On 28 April 2004 the Commission sent a letter to 14 Member States (Belgium, the Czech Republic, Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Lithuania, the Netherlands, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden and the United Kingdom) which have nuclear plants asking for details of how financial resources, earmarked for decommissioning were used.
This information reveals widely differing situations, in terms both of decommissioning strategies and of the way financial resources are managed. It indicates that the majority of the Member States have chosen the option of external management, i.e. separate from the accounts of the nuclear operator.
(ii) Financing the closure of the Bohunice VI nuclear power plant in Slovakia
Parliament adopted this report on the Bohunice V1 nuclear power plant in Slovakia by 377 votes in favour to 222 against with 59 abstentions. Before the final vote Ms Harms withdrew her name from the report and asked MEPs to vote against the report because MEPs had voted to raise EU spending.
The purpose of the Commissions proposal is to establish the legal framework to enable Community support for the closure of Unit 1 and 2 of the Bohunice nuclear power plant to be provided from 1 January 2007 to 31 December 2013.
MEPs think that the estimated costs of the early closure and decommissioning of the two units are higher than the basis used for the Commission's calculation. Therefore, Parliament wants to raise EU appropriations from €237 million as in the Commission's proposal to €400 million for the period from 1.1.2007 to 31.12.2013. The additional amount of €163 million should be made available by the European Union and especially to those Member States that will benefit from the closure of the nuclear power plant in the context of the annual budgetary procedure. MEPs think that the measures to be supported using Community budget will be defined in more detail by the Commission in 2006 after it receives the decommissioning plans comprising all the necessary information on decommissioning process from the Slovak authorities. On the basis of this plan the Commission will give its yearly approval to measures to be financed. The financial assistance from the Community budget should continue after 31.12.2013.
Background:
During accession negotiations, Slovakia committed to the closure of Unit 1 of the Bohunice nuclear power plant by 31 December 2006 and of Unit 2 by 31 December 2008 at the latest. The European Union has already established a specific assistance programme. In the framework of the Phare programme, a contribution of €150 million had been earmarked for Slovakia up to 2003. For the period 2004-2006, under Protocol No 9 to the Act of Accession, €90 million had been earmarked to support decommissioning and the consequences for Bohunice.
The purpose of the Commissions proposal is to establish the legal framework to enable Community support to be provided from 1 January 2007 to 31 December 2013. In the case of Slovakia, Protocol No 9 to the Act of Accession refers only to the Phare programme, which is due to expire and therefore cannot cover the period after 2006. The Protocol mentions the need to continue financing beyond 2006 but does not provide a specific legal basis. Decommissioning nuclear power plants Bohunice V1
MEPs call on Member States to publish digital switchover plans
MEPs adopted a resolution on the digital switchover encouraging those Member States that have not yet published their switchover plans to announce them by the end of the year, in order to give clear signals to both consumers and broadcasters. Parliament calls on the Member States to ensure that policy interventions carried out to secure and accelerate digital switchover are transparent, justified, proportionate and non discriminatory.
The House calls on the European Commission to lay down clearly defined policy objectives to ensure the widest possible penetration of the new and innovative services. MEPs call on the European Commission to ensure that the research and development is completed at an early stage in the interests of penetration, also, by the new non broadcasting digital services. Parliament calls on the European Commission and the Member States to provide for a sufficient level of harmonisation of approaches and regulation regarding the spectrum dividend, particularly in order to be able to satisfy any future demand for pan-European services.
In order to ensure that the digital divide in society is not exacerbated, the House calls on the Member States to ensure, as soon as possible, that there are adequate provisions in place prior to the transition from analogue to digital, including funding and intelligible information, which will mitigate the cost of conversion for those elements in society who will have difficulty in procuring and financing the necessary replacement equipment.
The House calls on the European Commission to ensure that, in regulating digital transition, a clear distinction is made between the regulation of transmission of electronic signals and infrastructure and the regulation of content (including audiovisual content), and to ensure, in order to protect pluralism and diversity in the broadcasting field, that the majority, or an appropriate part, of the new broadcasting possibilities and broadcasters do not come under the exclusive control or decisive influence of multinational media undertakings. MEP say that regulation of the various additional services transmitted alongside digital broadcasts on the same network should be carried out by making a distinction appropriate to their nature: content services related to broadcasting, other content services and services related to telecommunications.
Finally, MEPs call on the European Commission and the Member States to ensure perfect interoperability and technological neutrality in order to provide a level playing field for all operators and to boost European innovation.
Background: Switch-off of analogue terrestrial TV in Member States: switch-off date end 2010 or earlier: AU, DE, ES, FI, IT, MT, SE switch-off date: end 2012 or earlier: BE (in Flanders) , EL, SI, SK, UK, HU Member States not listed have either yet to indicate their plans or have not yet indicated a switch-off date. The US plans to terminate terrestrial analogue broadcasting by 1 January 2009, South Korea announced to switch off terrestrial analogue broadcasting by end 2010 and Japan by 2011.
Digital switchover
Winning the battle against climate change
Parliament adopted an own-initiative report on winning the battle against climate change, enabling the European Parliament to express its opinion with a view to the United Nations Climate Change Conference, due to take place in Montreal, between 28 November and 9 December. The report was adopted with 450 votes in favour, 66 against and 143 abstentions.
This Conference includes the eleventh session of the Conference of the Parties (COP 11) and the first session of the Conference of the Parties serving as the meeting of the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol (COP/MOP 1). The report also gives an overview of various actions to be undertaken at European field for the coming years.
The text adopted tries to define the main axes of the EU strategy on climate change:
- building on key Kyoto elements - binding greenhouse gas emission targets, a global cap-and-trade system, and flexible mechanisms;
- undertaking strong emissions reductions at home, starting with 20-30% domestic reductions by 2020, using a combination of market incentives and regulation to stimulate investments in efficiency and/or carbon-free and low-carbon technologies;
- adopting a pro-active approach to engage other main actors, notably the US;
- developing a strategic partnership with countries like China, South Africa, Brazil and India to assist them in developing sustainable energy strategies and secure their participation in mitigation efforts;
- vigorously promoting research and innovation for sustainable energy technologies and removing ‘perverse’ incentives such as fossil fuel subsidies as well as internalising external costs, including those of climate change, into the price of energy production;
- requiring the political system to take responsibility for facilitating measures to enable citizens to reduce their own impact on climate;
- encouraging much greater direct involvement in mitigation efforts at the level of the European citizen, a necessary prerequisite being the provision of detailed information about the carbon content of products and services and a future option being a system of personal tradable quotas.
MEPs also call on the European Institutions to set a positive example by limiting greenhouse gas emissions in their various activities, through enhanced energy efficiency in office buildings and for all equipment used, low carbon travel etc.; special efforts should be made in relation to travel of Members of Parliament, implying a reconsideration of the double location of the EP, low-carbon vehicles for the drivers´ service etc.
MEPs support "the introduction of ecotaxes at Community level" and call "on the Commission to put forward proposals and on the Member States to adopt the first European ecotax by 2009 at the latest".
Beating global climate change
MEPs condemn Iranian President for comments on Israel
The European Parliament has condemned the statements of Iranian President Mahmoud AHMADINEJAD that Israel "must be wiped off the map" and reaffirmed Israel's right to exist within internationally recognised borders and in security, side by side with an independent and viable Palestinian state.
In a resolution adopted by a large majority, MEPs expressed their concern about the possible consequences of such statements and praised the position of several senior Palestinian officials, who have equally condemned Ahmedinejad's views. They also welcomed the statement by the Central Council of Muslims in Germany that every nation has to respect international law and the rights of other states.
MEPs underlined that the statements cause concern about Iran's role in the region and its intentions. They called on Iran to refrain from any support for international terrorist groups.
The House reaffirms its unalterable commitment to Israel's right to existence within internationally recognised borders and in security, side by side with an independent and viable Palestinian State.
MEPs call upon Iran to recognise the State of Israel and its right to live in peace and security and to use its influence in the Middle East to persuade movements with which it maintains relations to refrain from the use of violence.
Parliament also said that the EU should continue to seek a diplomatic solution to the question of Iran's nuclear programme. Resolution on Iran
Directive on 'humane' animal traps rejected
The issue of 'humane' animal trapping standards continues to divide the European Commission and Parliament. MEPs voted to reject of a draft directive designed to bring EU law into line with international agreements reached with Russia, Canada and the United States. It is now for the whole Parliament to decide the issue, which is subject to the co-decision procedure.
Parliament overwhelmingly backed its rapporteur, Karin SCHEELE (PES, AT), in presenting a legislative resolution which states quite baldly that 'the European Parliament rejects the Commission proposal'. The rapporteur argued that the draft directive was 'very unsatisfactory' and 'difficult to improve by means of amendments'. In addition, she said, the text lacked any proper scientific basis.
In 1996, the Community concluded two identical agreements on the trapping of certain animal species, firstly with Russia and Canada and then with the United States. The Council approved the agreements in 1998 but, because national laws continued to differ, the Commission proposed that a directive be adopted to harmonise these laws and thus enable the European Union to comply with these agreements. The draft directive does not cover leghold traps, which have been banned since 1991. The aim is to regulate other traps, for example drowning traps, to make them less cruel. The agreements and the draft directive cover 19 species (muskrat, marten, sable, badger, wolf, beaver, otter, etc.).
In June 1997, meanwhile, Parliament condemned by a large majority the agreement concluded with Canada and Russia because it did not take sufficient account of animal welfare and was primarily motivated by trade considerations.
The use of the term 'humane' in the title of the directive was strongly contested by some members of the Parliament, particularly the Socialist, Green and GUE/NGL groups. It was also queried by the Commission's own Scientific and Veterinary Committee, which maintained that the international agreements do not rule out unacceptable levels of suffering.
However, a large majority vote in of the Parliament was achieved partly because of an alliance between contradictory points of view, between those who thought the directive too weak and those who believed it went too far. Some, including a number of Dutch MEPs, did not want the directive to possibly hinder the fight against certain harmful animals, in particular the muskrat, which constantly threatens the dykes that protect the regions of the Netherlands below sea level.
Commissioner DIMAS said the Commission would now have to reflect on the best way of moving forward.
Arms export code must be binding
Parliament called on the Council to make the code of conduct on arms exports legally binding as soon as possible. However, MEPs still have some concerns. In an own-initiative adopted by Parliament, on the Council's Sixth Annual Report on the EU Code of Conduct on Arms Exports, MEPs welcome the likelihood that Member States will have to align their legislation with the code as this becomes a so-called "common position."
EU Foreign Ministers have acknowledged the need for binding standards for trade in conventional arms.
MEPs call on the Member States to agree on a list of countries to which arms exports should be banned because they are involved in armed conflicts or violate human rights. They also say the quality of national reports needs to be improved and that minimum standards should be applied. The denial notification system - whereby Member States declare that a certain transaction does not involve the export of sensitive dual-use goods - also needs improvement.
Other issues raised by the European Parliament include the need for stronger controls on exports to countries against which an arms embargo has been lifted, licensing of arms brokering abroad, the setting up of a national registry of arms brokers and an international system for marking and tracing small arms as a tool to combat their illicit manufacture and proliferation. The House voices particular concern over recent cases in which EU arms manufacturers have transferred their production facilities overseas - they call for regulatory measures in this field.
The report reiterates Parliament's "strong conviction that the embargo on China should not be lifted" until the human rights situation has clearly improved. Adherence to the arms embargo against China should, they say, be included in negotiations about the EU's Neighbourhood Policy and Partnership Agreements. Arms exports
MEPs launch offensive to improve EU arms procurement
Europe's military capabilities remain weak. Part of the blame for this state of affairs, MEPs argue in a new report, lies with the Member States' policies in the area of defence procurement. Responding to a Commission Green Paper, the European Parliament urges the EU executive to draft a new directive on defence procurement and calls for the EU to push for further harmonisation and standardisation in the field.
EU countries are allowed, under Article 296 of the EC Treaty, to derogate from Community rules on public procurement on grounds of national security in the area of arms production. According to MEPs, this loophole is being systematically abused by Member States' armaments agencies, leading to a situation whereby most defence contracts are awarded on the basis of national rules. This, in turn, is aggravating the fragmentation of armaments markets, limiting interoperability between military systems and hampering European cooperation in international operations. The Commission, MEPs agreed, should try to end such general derogations by adopting both an Interpretative Communication on Article 296 and a new directive on defence procurement.
MEPs echoed the Commission's view that current policies of "juste retour" (ensuring that Member States get their "fair share" of contracts) and the "off-setting" of arms purchasers' costs through supplementary investment deals in the field of military procurement hinder efficiency and "lead to large-scale distortions of competition and artificial divisions of labour between industrial partners". The inevitable concentration of the armaments industry, the EP concluded, should be subject to greater monitoring and control by the Commission with regard to competition law.
Seeking to ensure more competition, as well as greater transparency and fairness in the awarding of contracts, MEPs called on the European Defence Agency to devise an Article 296 code of conduct for defence procurement. They also urged the Commission to tackle a host of other obstacles to enhanced competition within the arms industry, such as the restrictions on cross-border trade in armaments within the EU, the exertion of political influence on award decisions and the lack of research cooperation.
Addressing the impact of arms procurement on foreign policy, MEPs noted that new EU defence procurement legislation "should not be used as an instrument enabling US corporate interests to unilaterally infiltrate European defence procurement markets.")
The own-initiative report, drawn up by Joachim Wuermeling (EPP-ED, DE), was adopted with 392 votes against 77, with 7 members abstaining. Defence procurement
Human Rights in Kashmir, the Philippines and Burma
MEPs are calling for urgent action to help those affected by the earthquake in Kashmir, for President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo of the Philippines to grant a full pardon to Francisco Larrañaga, and for renewed efforts by the UN and the EU to bring about a transition to democracy in Burma. These calls came in three resolutions on human rights around the world adopted, as usual, at the close of the Strasbourg session.
Access to humanitarian aid in Kashmir
In their resolution adopted on Kashmir by a clear majority, MEPs express their sincere condolences, sympathy and solidarity to all those affected by the earthquake that struck South Asia on 8 October 2005. They say they remain seriously concerned about the situation of survivors, especially the people living in high country settlements cut off by landslides, who can only be reached by a fleet of relief helicopters. They are alarmed about reports that people in some of the hardest-hit areas have received little if any aid.
Parliament stresses that the worst-hit areas have become inaccessible, as roads and communication systems are largely destroyed, and underlines the tragic consequences that will result from a continued delay in the delivery of humanitarian aid to remote mountainous areas. It welcomes the relief efforts already made by Pakistan, the international community, NATO and the EU. MEPs fully support relief operations such as ‘Winter Race’, which has been launched by the International Organisation for Migration (IOM) and the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies to deliver 10,000 shelter repair kits to high-altitude villages. They call for increased cooperation between all the agencies involved and the governments of India and Pakistan.
Parliament fully supports requests for immediate funding of emergency aid. It urges donors to contribute to the USD 550 million requested by the UN without delay and reminds them of the additional USD 580 million pledged during the donor conference of 26 October 2005. It asks the Commission to indicate as soon as possible whether the EU will be able to make further funds available within the global transfer or under other mechanisms, particularly in view of the reconstruction needs from 2006 onwards.
In this regard, MEPs express serious concern about the severe budget constraints faced by the Commission as far as humanitarian aid is concerned and stresses that most of the remaining operational reserve of ECHO has been used up by other recent major emergencies.
Parliament welcomes the agreement between the governments of India and Pakistan on the opening of crossing points on the Line of Control (LoC). It is convinced that the opening of crossing points is of vital importance to the people of Kashmir and the relief operation. It asks the authorities of both countries to allow crossing by civilians and welcomes the opening of five crossing points for the exchange of goods. It also supports the call by the UN World Food Programme to open other points for crossing the LoC and to allow movement of trucks in order to support the relief operation for hundreds of thousands of people in remote valleys and on high mountains in Kashmir.
Parliament welcomes the signs of progress in Indo-Pakistani bilateral talks on Kashmir, and other mutual displays of flexibility, such as the recently launched bus service between the two parts of the territory, or the visits by the Indian Minister of Foreign Affairs to Pakistan and the President of Pakistan to India. It also welcomes the Indian Prime Minister’s declaration, supported by President Musharraf, that the Siachen Glacier in Kashmir should be regarded as a ‘Mountain of Peace’ and as a new symbol on the path to full reconciliation between India and Pakistan on Kashmir, and calls on the EU to support this positive move in order to achieve, as soon as possible, a definitive agreement between the parties.
Finally, MEPs expresses hope that the terrible catastrophe, which struck the Kashmiri people hardest of all, may bear the positive fruit of bringing the survivors closer to peace, free movement and prosperity in the near future; applauds the governments of India and Pakistan for recent first steps towards reconciliation, which for the first time included the Kashmiris directly in the process. Parliament very much hopes that this is the beginning of a steady process towards peace; calls therefore on the Indian and Pakistani governments to continue with the process that should, while involving the population concerned, lead to a peaceful settlement of the Kashmir issue.
Death sentence in the Philippines for EU citizen
Parliament's resolution on the Philippines, adopted by a clear majority, focuses on the case of one of the prisoners currently being held there under sentence of death - European citizen Francisco Larrañaga, who was accused of rape and murder. Despite the fact that his case has all the characteristics of an unfair trial according to international legal standards, the death sentence on Francisco Larrañaga was confirmed in July 2005 and there are no further possibilities of appeal. Parliament asks the President of the Philippines, Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo, to exercise her powers by granting an absolute pardon to Francisco Larrañaga and securing his immediate release from prison, as well as commuting the death penalty of prisoners on death row, particularly the 18 child offenders.
MEPs call for a review of the legal procedure leading to the death penalty in this case, and ask for a fair trial to be held on the basis of respect for all legal, penal and jurisdictional guarantees. They urge the Commission and Council to take all necessary initiatives to prevent the execution of this EU citizen.
MEPs endorse all international initiatives which would lead to the abolition of capital punishment worldwide, notably United Nations Commission on Human Rights resolution No 2005/59 on 'The Question of the death penalty' and the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. They reiterate their call for the universal abolition of the death penalty, and in the meantime for a moratorium on executions.
Parliament calls on the President of the Philippines to reinstate her decision to end the moratorium on the death penalty, and urgently calls on the Philippines Congress to repeal the law on the reintroduction of the death penalty. It supports the legislative initiative of the Philippines Congress for the abolition of the death penalty in the Philippines. It further calls on the Government and Parliament of the Philippine to take radical steps for the reform of the national law enforcement and criminal justice system.
Finally, MEPs call on the Council and Commission to consider the abolition of the death penalty and a universal moratorium on executions as an essential element in relations between the EU and third countries, raising this issue when concluding or renewing agreements with third countries.
Situation in Burma/Myanmar
In its resolution on Burma, adopted by 74 votes in favour to 3 against with 2 abstentions, Parliament calls on the UN Security Council to address the situation in Burma as a matter of urgency and to empower the UN Secretary-General to mediate in Burma in order to bring about national reconciliation and a transition to democracy, and calls on the UN Security Council to take the necessary measures to impose economic sanctions against Burma in an effort to force change. MEPs condemn the total disregard of the military dictatorship for the welfare of the people of Burma and the Burmese military's brutal campaign involving forcible relocations against several major ethnic groups fighting for autonomy.
Parliament demands the immediate release and full freedom of movement and expression for Aung San Suu Kyi, Hkun Htun Oo, General Hso Hten, other political leaders and all political prisoners held by the State Peace and Development Council (SPDC). It insists that the SPDC immediately initiate a meaningful dialogue with the National League for Democracy (NLD) and ethnic groups to bring about a return to democracy and respect for human rights, including ethnic minority rights and state rights in Burma.
MEPs insist that the EU's Common Policy on Burma be strengthened immediately by:
officially stating that the EU will not accept any outcome of the military's National Convention unless the minimum conditions laid down at the Sixth ASEM Foreign Ministers' Meeting in Kildare in April 2004 are met, due democratic process is guaranteed and the NLD and other representative pro-democracy parties are free and able to attend; by encouraging a blanket prohibition in Regulation (EC) No 1853/2004 on EU-registered companies making new investments or extending loans to amyl Burmese state-owned enterprises.
Parliament calls for a high-ranking EU envoy to be appointed to work towards securing the release of Aung San Suu Kyi, Hkun Htun Oo and other political leaders, to develop a comprehensive EU strategy on Burma enabling humanitarian aid to be delivered to the people of Burma from within Burma and through cross-border strategies, and to bring about a transition to democracy and respect for human rights.
MEPs express their deep regret at the fact that the Government of Burma has not yet undertaken all the relevant measures to allow the Joint Government of the Union of Myanmar - International Labour Organization (ILO) Plan of Action for the elimination of Forced Labour Practices in Myanmar to come into force.
Finally, Parliament calls on the European Union to endorse the report and resolution proposed in the report 'Threat to Peace - A Call for the UN Security Council to Act in Burma', and urges all members of the ILO within the EU to seriously review their relations, under Article 33 of the ILO Constitution, with Burma, as called for by the ILO. Kashmir Philippines (the sentencing to death of Francisco Larrañaga, an EU citizen) Burma
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2005-0427 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2005-0424 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2005-0425 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2005-0434 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2005-0435 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2005-0428 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2005-0432 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2005-0429 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2005-0431 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2005-0433 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2005-0441 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2005-0436 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2005-0440 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2005-0442 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2005-0443 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2005-0444 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
