ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly draws to a close in Edinburgh
Development and cooperation
2005-11-25 - 08:54
The tenth meeting of the Joint Parliamentary Assembly (JPA) composed of 77 MEPs and 77 nations from Africa and the Caribbean and the Pacific drew to a close on Thursday with the Assembly adopting three reports on: The role of national parliaments in implementing the Cotonou partnership agreement, Agricultural and mining commodities and The causes and consequences of natural disasters.
Beyond the reports, the JPA adopted urgent resolutions on the situation in West Africa and the registration, the evaluation and the authorisation of chemical substances (REACH).
The JPA was particularly concerned with the imminent cut in price support for the sugar regime and its impact on ACP countries as well as the imminent reform of the banana regime. On sugar , the Assembly adopted a resolution calling on the Council and the Commission to ensure that the reform of the EC Sugar Regime is fair and equitable to all stakeholders, including the ACP and the LDCs, and is respectful of the EU’s legal commitment under the Sugar Protocol. The JPA insists that the 18 ACP Sugar Protocol countries, many of whose economies are almost fully dependent on sugar, be given more adequate and timely support, which should be new and fresh money.
On bananas , the Joint Assembly expressed its grave concern that the very low tariff recently announced for the new banana regime will not preserve remunerative market access for the ACP suppliers, in particular the most vulnerable. The JPA calls on the EU Council and the Commission, following the rejection by the WTO Dispute Settlement Body of the latest proposal relating to the level of the single tariff under the new ‘tariff only’ banana import regime starting on 1 January 2006, to extend the current import arrangements beyond that date so as to make it possible to negotiate, free of pressure, a balanced settlement that is acceptable to all the parties concerned, in particular Community and ACP producers
On REACH , the Joint Assembly urges that REACH should not lead to unintended consequences which may result in this laudable legislation becoming a technical barrier to trade and thereby negatively impacting on the export of commodities and raw materials from ACP countries.
The Joint Parliamentary Assembly also heard from the First Minister of Scotland - Jack McConnell on Wednesday 23 November who told delegates that the JPA was "a unique and special partnership between north and south. By coming together in this way, we are able to get new perspectives on problems and to help build a common understanding between Europe and its ACP partners."
The next meeting of the Joint Parliamentary Assembly is due to take place in Vienna from 17 June -22 June 2006.
20051121IPR02671 ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly
EN
1
LINK
/intcoop/acp/10_01/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
