EP delegation goes to Rabat for key Euro-Mediterranean meeting
Delegations
2005-11-18 - 16:24
The Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly will meet for an extraordinary session on 20 and 21 November in Rabat, Morocco, to celebrate the 10th anniversary of the Barcelona Process. The session will be opened by European Parliament President Josep Borrell, as current chair of EMPA, together with Abdelwahad Radi, Speaker of the Moroccan House of Representatives, who hosts the extraordinary session.
The Parliamentary Assembly will draw up recommendations for consideration by the Euromed heads of state or government when they meet for the Tenth Anniversary Summit on 27 and 28 November in Barcelona. Exactly ten years ago, the EU, the EU member states and Algeria, Egypt, Jordan, Israel, Lebanon, Morocco, the Palestinian Authority, Syria, Tunisia and Turkey agreed in Barcelona to set up a Euro-Mediterranean Partnership (also called the "Barcelona Process"), " stressing the strategic importance of the Mediterranean and moved by the will to give their future relations a new dimension, based on comprehensive cooperation and solidarity, in keeping with the privileged nature of the links forged by neighbourhood and history ". The Barcelona Process consists of a political and security partnership, an economic and financial partnership and a partnership in social, cultural and human affairs. An essential feature of the implementation of the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership has been the negotiation of Euro-Mediterranean Association Agreements to replace the 1970s Cooperation Agreements.
At the Euromed meeting of Foreign Ministers in The Hague on 29-30 November 2004, ministers decided to give a new impetus to the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership and to raise its profile. In this connection a decision was taken to name 2005 - the tenth anniversary of the Barcelona process - the ‘Year of the Mediterranean’.
Last month the full European Parliament adopted a resolution saying that " even if the (Euro-Mediterranean) Partnership has not as yet produced the expected benefits and has not contributed to the lowering of tensions in the area to its full potential (...) the Barcelona Process continues to be the appropriate framework for Mediterranean policy, in which changes are needed to obtain better results ".
The Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly (EMPA) is the parliamentary institution of the Barcelona Process and was established in Naples on 3 December 2003. The Parliamentary Assembly is composed of 120 European MPs (75 from the EU national parliaments and 45 from the EP) and 120 MPs from the national parliaments of the EU's Mediterranean partner countries. It is currently chaired by European Parliament president Josep Borrell.
The EMPA plays a consultative role. It provides parliamentary impetus, input and support for the consolidation and development of the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership. It expresses its views on all issues relating to the Partnership, including the implementation of the association agreements. And it adopts resolutions or recommendations, which are not legally binding, addressed to the Euro-Mediterranean Conference.
20051117IPR02480
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
