Europe - which way forward?
Future of Europe/European integration
2005-12-05 - 15:01
Europa Quo Vadis - Debate
Europe must define its objectives, borders and future common policies - that was the message of a debate "Europa Quo Vadis" hosted by the Parliament on 1 December. It brought together past and present European leaders to debate the future direction of the continent. Former President of the European Commission Jacques Delors argued that Europe should respect the rights of all countries to express their opinion on the EU Constitution - "let them be heard" he said.
Belgian Prime Minister Guy Verhofstadt said sometimes he had the impression "that we are not allowed to think about the future of Europe."
Jacques Delors went on to stress that different approaches to Europe should be considered: "differentiation is back on the agenda, it has to be, otherwise it isn't possible to reconcile widening and deepening." Former Norwegian Prime Minister Gro Harlem Brundtland said we need a Europe that stands for...sustainable development and the rule of law that symbolises these values to the rest of the world". She went on to warn that "if the EU is unable to organise politically and enlarge the benefits to all, it's difficult to see how international cooperation can be successful." The President of the European Parliament Josef Borrell opened the meeting calling for a debate about the role of Europe, the identity of Europe, and finally its limits and objectives.
When it came to discussing how Europe would move forward as an enlarged bloc of 25 or more, Gyula Horn, former Prime Minister of Hungary, called for a special approach from the old 15 EU members towards the new central and eastern European countries that joined in May 2004. This was necessary as "such a huge transformation has never occurred in our history." György Konrád, a former Hungarian President of the Academy of Arts stressed the cultural richness of the continent saying that European identity lies in "literature, learning and curiosity."
The debate was organized by the European Parliament, the City of Aachen and the Charlemagne Prize Foundation - whose annual prize is awarded to "the individuals or institution for significant contribution in promoting European integration process" . Five of the participants - Jacques Delors, Gyula Horn, Gro Harlem Brundtland, György Konrád and Pat Cox (who accepted in on behalf of the Parliament during his Presidency) are former Charlemagne prize laureates.
20051205STO03169 Website of the Charlemagne prize
EN
1
PHOTO
20051205PHT03167.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.aachen.de/EN/sb/pr_az/karls_pr/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
