MEPs criticise lack of information from Council on foreign policy
External relations
2005-11-30 - 11:48
In a wide-ranging report on the EU's common foreign and security policy adopted on Tuesday, MEPs in the Foreign Affairs Committee expressed annoyance at the lack of consultation and information of Parliament by the Council, and decided to see if legal action can be taken.
The Foreign Affairs Committee is asking Parliament's Legal Affairs Committee to see whether action can be taken against the Council at the European Court of Justice for a breach of Article 21 of the EU Treaty, which explicitly states that Parliament must be consulted "on the main aspects and the basic choices of the common foreign and security policy" and that its views must be taken into account.
The report, which was drawn up by committee chair Elmar Brok (EPP-ED, DE) and adopted by 53 votes in favour to 6 against with no abstentions, also called on the Council High Representative, Javier Solana, to participate actively in the annual debate on the CFSP. It calls on the Council to report to the Foreign Affairs Committee on every Foreign Ministers Council meeting and high-level summit with key international partners.
More generally, MEPs said that the future priorities of the CFSP should be the Mediterranean, the Near and Middle East, the Balkans, Eastern Europe and relations with the US, as well as conflict situations, the promotion of peace, security in all its aspects, the fight against terrorism, disarmament and the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. MEPs believe security also includes aspects such as energy, climate change and the spread of poverty.
Turning to more specific issues, MEPs called for a solution to the future status of Kosovo which respects its territorial integrity, upholds minority rights and does not endanger the EU's overall policy for the Balkans. Special attention should be given to the development of Africa. MEPs expressed their deep concern over the large-scale war crimes and human rights violations "which can be construed as genocide" in Darfur.
The committee criticised the present partnership with Russia as reflecting "common economic interests without achieving any progress as regards human rights and the rule of law" . The EU policy towards Belarus has achieved few results, MEPs said; therefore new measures should be proposed to strengthen links with the people of Belarus. Relations with China should be advanced in such a way that progress is also made on human rights and democracy.
MEPs called on the Council to renew efforts for a revival of negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians and to set up a comprehensive strategy for the broader region of the Middle East. Regarding Afghanistan, MEPs warned that ISAF's reconstruction mission should not be merged with the US Enduring Freedom operation.
Finally, the committee recommended that joint costs for military operations in the framework of the European Security and Defence Policy should come from the Community budget, doing away with the current Member States' subsidiary budgets. This should also be the case for any future ESDP operations in the fight against terrorism.
2005-11-28 Committee on Foreign Affairs Chair Elmar Brok EPP-ED DE
Procedure: Own-initiative
Plenary vote: February, Brussels
20051128IPR02905
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
