Opening of the session - President Borrell on kidnappings in Iraq / World AIDS Day
Institutions
2005-11-30 - 17:52
President Borrell opened the mini-session in Brussels with statements on kidnappings in Iraq and World AIDS Day. The President also highlighted the changes to the agenda.
President Borrell calls on all to exercise influence to release hostages in Iraq
Among most recent victims, two are European citizens: Susanne Osthoff from Germany, a prestigious archaeologist who has been a member of Iraqi society for the last ten years, and who has devoted all her efforts helping the Iraqi people since the start of the war. The second European kidnapped is a British citizen, Norman Kember , a member of a Canadian NGO abducted with two Canadians and one United States colleague. There has been an intense mobilisation to free them, especially in Germany and Britain. We should support and actively participate in this campaign, repeating that nothing could ever justify such acts.
World AIDS Day - Borrell expresses thanks to volunteers who help around the world
Turning to a more global problem affecting millions of human beings, the President said " Tomorrow is World Day for the fight against AIDS. The European Parliament must mobilise efforts and political influence to focus on this issue. The mobilisation so far has been strong but inadequate - we must make citizens aware AIDS pandemic continues to expand. In 2001, 35 million people were affected. Four years later, the figure is now 41 million, half of whom are women and 2.5 million are children under 15. Five million more people will be infected this year. Pandemic is advancing at 10 per cent per year. Three million people will die this year, half a million of then children. AIDS is also a matter of inequality. We in the industrialised world have assistance and prevention, and research for vaccinations, but most do not have this possibility. In Africa, especially Sub-Saharan Africa, a high price is being paid. 26 million people are infected. With 10 per cent of world's population, they have 60 per cent of carriers. Only seven per cent have access to proper health care. These are dramatic and cruel figures - they show this is an issue of world inequality alongside malnutrition and the famine crisis. We need more help for prevention, for understanding and a cure. AIDS is also an expression of exclusion because of the irrational fear, condemnation of behaviour on religious grounds and isolation in families and the workplace - we need to fight against daily. Parliament should express its gratitude to the millions of volunteers who help around the world. The Parliament will have an information campaign and special meeting of the Development Committee tomorrow. We should be aware of extent of drama and political will needed to confront it ."
Highlights
The two-day Brussels plenary session of 30 November -1 December will see MEPs deal with topics from sport to VAT, from the WTO to bird flu.
The session opens on Wednesday with a debate on the WTO ministerial meeting in Hong Kong in December, with MEPs due to adopt a resolution setting out their expectations for the world trade talks. A debate on human rights in Cambodia, Laos and Vietnam follows, before MEPs turn to sporting matters, notably support for an Olympic truce. Reinforcing measures to protect against bird flu and a deal to allow developing countries to import generic medicines needed to combat major public health problems will also feature.
Before the votes at 11am, Thursday's sitting will be devoted to a debate on VAT, including the future of the scheme allowing reduced rates for some labour intensive services. Also on Thursday, Parliament will adopt a resolution on the EU budget (Financial Perspective) for 2007-2013. The House is likely to stress that there will be no Financial Perspective without an agreement on an Interinstitutional Agreement. MEPs should also recall that, in this context, Parliament adopted non-negotiable points such as the creation of a revision clause, reserves for flexibility, improvement of the quality of implementation through the revision of the Financial Regulation, simplification of the administrative burden, certification by Member States and respect for Parliament's rights in the external programmes.
Changes to the Agenda
Slovak Police - oral question to be answered by the Commission
As the request of the PES group, Parliament voted 181 votes in favour to 130 against with 5 abstentions to add an oral question on Slovak police to the agenda. The Commission indicated that it would not be in a position to answer this question until a subsequent plenary session.
Parliament has approved the following changes to the agenda for the sittings of 30 November - 1 December in Brussels:
Wednesday 30 November:
There will be motions for resolutions to wind up the debate on the oral questions to the Council and Commission on development and sport which form part of the joint debate on sport.
There will be no motions for resolutions following the oral question to the Commission on the imposition of criminal penalties in the event of an infringement of Community law. The report by Dariusz ROSATI (PES, PL) on widening the Euro zone was adopted under Rule 131 and will be included directly in voting time on Thursday.
Thursday 1 December:
Parliament will vote on a report on the Financial Perspectives 2007-2013.
20051128IPR02943 Revised agenda for the mini-session
EN
1
LINK
/omk/sipade3?PROG=AGENDA&REF=2005-11&QUERY=ALL-SIT&NAV=S&L=EN&LEVEL=1&SAME_LEVEL=1
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
