Borrell: Statement on the death penalty
Institutions
2005-12-13 - 09:54
President Josep BORRELL opened the last session of 2005 with a statement on the use of the death penalty. He stated that the European Parliament would fight its use. The illegal detention of CIA prisoners in Europe, the upcoming EU Summit and the use of data retention in the fight against terrorism are among the issues MEPs will debate during the session. MEPs will attend the presentation of the 2005 Sakharov Prize to the three laureates during a ceremony in Strasbourg on Wednesday.
"The 10 December, we commemorate the 57th anniversary of the Declaration on Human Rights. In the United States, the 1000th person to be condemned to death since the re-establishment of the death penalty in 1976 has just been reached. In Singapore, on the same day, 2 December, there was also an execution. These events have once again put the death penalty high on the agenda. The European Parliament will fight it. It goes against the values of the Union. Its abolition is a sine qua none for accession to the Union. Fortunately, progress towards abolition in the world is increasing quickly. In 1977, 16 countries had abolished the death penalty for all crimes. Today, there are 84 countries. But in 76 countries, the death penalty is still in use. Moreover, 24 countries have abolished the death penalty de facto as they have not executed anyone for at least 10 years. Although the number of countries using the death penalty is reducing, the number of executions is particularly concerning.
In 2004, according to Amnesty International, 64 countries condemned 7,395 people to death. 25 countries have executed close to 3,800 people. 95 per cent of executions have taken place in four countries: China, Iran, Vietnam and the United States. The United States is the only democracy that regularly uses the death penalty. In US prisons, there are some 3,415 held on death row. In the USA, since 1973, 121 people have been freed before execution. Nevertheless, there are reasons for hope. American society is becoming less and less favourable to the death penalty. Doubt is growing. American juries are less likely to use the death penalty. The US Supreme Court has abolished the death penalty for minors and mentally disabled people. 12 US States have abolished it and 20 others have excluded the use of it.
China is the country that has the highest number of executions. Lack of information prevents clear figures from being known. Amnesty International states that some 3,400 executions have been carried out. There are some 6,000 people condemned to death.
74 countries continue to use the death penalty and that is 74 countries too many. Our work as parliamentarians is to convince our partners in these countries to finally abolish the death penalty. The right to life is an absolute right. It is the essence of human nature. We can not take it away, even from the worst criminals ."
Highlights of the week
The last plenary session of 2005 takes place at a crucial time for the European Union. Prime Minister Tony BLAIR will be in Strasbourg on Thursday 15 December for a working (closed) lunch with President Josep BORRELL and the leaders of Parliament's political groups. Immediately after, the Prime Minister will leave for Brussels for the start of the long awaited European Council. Mr Blair will be at the European Parliament in Brussels at 9.30am (Brussels time) on Tuesday 20 December to explain the results of the Council to an open Conference of Presidents.
On Wednesday, 14 December in the morning, Parliament will be discussing the forthcoming summit. Douglas ALEXANDER , UK Minister for Europe will represent the Council and President José Manuel BARROSO will speak for the Commission. MEPs will react to the key topic of the UK's proposed deal on the Financial Perspective 2007-2013.
At midday on Wednesday, President Borrell will be awarding Parliament's prestigious Sakharov Prize for freedom of thought. This year the prize is awarded to three laureates: the Cuban opposition movement " Damas de Blanco (Women in White )", the " Nigerian human rights lawyer Hauwa Ibrahim " and the international organisation "Reporters without Borders." Press kits on the Sakharov Prize will be available in Brussels at the press briefing in the press room on Friday 9 December at 11.00am. They will also be available in the press room in Strasbourg.
On Monday 12 December, the House will debate a second reading report on the issue of batteries and dangerous substance contained within them.
On Tuesday 13 December, MEPs will tackle the important issue of data retention, a new EU law which will help national authorities to track down possible criminals and terrorists by granting them access to a list of all telephone calls, SMS or Internet connections made by suspects during the previous few months. The vote will take place on Wednesday. Differences remain between Council and Parliament on how long the data should be stored.
Tuesday sees Parliament's second reading of the EU 2006 budget. The figure for payment appropriations will be €111,969 billion, equivalent to 1.01% of the European Union's gross national income. On Tuesday evening, the House will react to the Commission's proposals on how it intends to better communicate with citizens. Further details will be given on the Commission's white paper on Information Strategy. On Tuesday evening, Parliament will also debate the rights of persons with reduced mobility when travelling by air. There is also a report on the reform of state aid and its impact on regional development.
Two fisheries reports are authored by Scottish MEPs. On Wednesday evening, Elspeth ATTWOOLL (ALDE, UK) will lead the debate on the role of women in the fishing sectors and Catherine STIHLER (PES, UK) will present her report on financing the common fisheries policies and the law of the sea.
On Wednesday afternoon, there will be Council and Commission declaration on the alleged use of European countries for the transport of prisoners by the CIA for illegal detention. A resolution will be adopted on Thursday.
Thursday sees MEPs voting from 10am as there is only one vote taking place on Wednesday on the ALVARO report on data retention.
Changes to the Agenda
The urgent human rights to be debated and voted on Thursday 15 December will be the following:
Detention of monks and closure of a monastery in Tibet and the situation in Hong Kong
Human rights in Russia
Ethiopia and new border conflicts
20051206IPR03223 Briefing plenary session Strasbourg 12-15 December 2005 Updated final agenda
EN
2
LINK
/omk/sipade3?PROG=AGENDA&L=EN&QUERY=ALL-SIT&NAV=S&REF=2005-12
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20051129BRI03042 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
