Highlights of Strasbourg plenary session 12 - 15 December 2005
Institutions
2005-12-12 - 14:52
plenary
MEPs will debate the key summit of Heads of State and government one day before it is due to start. The summit should decide the EU financial framework 2007-2013. President Borrell will also award the Sakharov Prize to the Cuban opposition movement "Damas de Blanco", the "Nigerian human rights lawyer Hauwa Ibrahim" and "Reporters without Borders." MEPs will also adopt a resolution and debate the alleged use of European countries for the transport of prisoners by the CIA for illegal detention.
The last plenary session of 2005 takes place at a crucial time for the European Union. Prime Minister Tony BLAIR will be in Strasbourg on Thursday 15 December for a working (closed) lunch with President Josep BORRELL and the leaders of Parliament's political groups. Immediately after, the Prime Minister will leave for Brussels for the start of the long awaited European Council. Mr Blair will be at the European Parliament in Brussels at 9.30am (Brussels time) on Tuesday 20 December to explain the results of the Council to an open Conference of Presidents.
On Wednesday, 14 December in the morning, Parliament will be discussing the forthcoming summit . Douglas ALEXANDER , UK Minister for Europe will represent the Council and President José Manuel BARROSO will speak for the Commission. MEPs will react to the key topic of the UK's proposed deal on the Financial Perspective 2007-2013.
At midday on Wednesday, President Borrell will be awarding Parliament's prestigious Sakharov Prize for freedom of thought. This year the prize is awarded to three laureates: the Cuban opposition movement "Damas de Blanco (Women in White)", the "Nigerian human rights lawyer Hauwa Ibrahim" and the international organisation "Reporters without Borders . " Press kits on the Sakharov Prize will be available in Brussels at the press briefing in the press room on Friday 9 December at 11.00am. They will also be available in the press room in Strasbourg.
On Monday 12 December, the House will debate a second reading report on the issue of batteries and dangerous substance contained within them.
On Tuesday 13 December, MEPs will tackle the important issue of data retention, a new EU law which will help national authorities to track down possible criminals and terrorists by granting them access to a list of all telephone calls, SMS or Internet connections made by suspects during the previous few months. The vote will take place on Wednesday. Differences remain between Council and Parliament on how long the data should be stored.
Tuesday sees Parliament's second reading of the EU 2006 budget. The figure for payment appropriations will be €111,969 billion, equivalent to 1.01% of the European Union's gross national income. On Tuesday evening, the House will react to the Commission's proposals on how it intends to better communicate with citizens. Further details will be given on the Commission's white paper on Information Strategy. On Tuesday evening, Parliament will also debate the rights of persons with reduced mobility when travelling by air. There is also a report on the reform of state aid and its impact on regional development.
Two fisheries reports are authored by Scottish MEPs. On Wednesday evening, Elspeth ATTWOOLL (ALDE, UK) will lead the debate on the role of women in the fishing sectors and Catherine STIHLER (PES, UK) will present her report on financing the common fisheries policies and the law of the sea.
On Wednesday afternoon, there will be Council and Commission declaration on the alleged use of European countries for the transport of prisoners by the CIA for illegal detention. A resolution will be adopted on Thursday.
Thursday sees MEPs voting from 10am as there is only one vote taking place on Wednesday on the ALVARO report on data retention.
Probable changes to the agenda
The debate on the ALVARO report on data retention will take place on Tuesday afternoon starting at 3pm (initially scheduled for Monday)
Debate on the SCHWAB report on machinery will take place on Wednesday evening (initially scheduled for Monday)
Debates on the KAUPPI report on markets in financial instruments and the FOURTOU report on building legislation will take place on Monday evening. (initially scheduled for Wednesday)
The KOTEREC report on state-aid and LEHIDEUX report on sugar will be debated on Tuesday evening (initially scheduled for Thursday).
On Wednesday, there will be Council and Commission declaration on the alleged use of European countries for the transport of prisoners by the CIA for illegal detention.
On Thursday, voting will start at 10am because the only vote on Wednesday will be the ALVARO report on data retention.
20051209STO03402
EN
1
PHOTO
20051121PHT02684.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
