Baron Crespo: WTO talks must deal with complete agenda
External/international trade
2005-12-12 - 12:52
A balanced agreement at the WTO talks means covering all the points on the trade agenda, according to Enrique Baron Crespo, Chair of the European Parliament delegation. Speaking in Hong Kong on Monday 12 December at the opening session of the Parliamentary Conference on the WTO, he also called on WTO negotiators not to forget the development goals of the Doha round.
“I want to stress something that may seem obvious but which some people seem to have forgotten: this round is meant to be about development,” said Mr Baron Crespo. He called on all developed countries to follow the example of the EU’s 'Everything But Arms' initiative, completely opening their markets to exports from the Least Developed Countries, as well providing ‘aid for trade’.
“A second essential point is that these negotiations have an agenda – and if we want to achieve a balanced result, we will have to deal with all the points of that agenda,” he continued, stressing that progress in agriculture, industrial goods and services would all have to be part of the final deal.
“Trade is not an end in itself. The objective is to increase global prosperity, giving priority to the least advanced countries. However, we know that economic growth alone will not deal with all the concerns of the public,” he said. While the environmental, social, employment and cultural matters were not directly part of the trade talks, a WTO deal would have consequences in all these fields, and ignoring them would only have a negative impact on the legitimacy of the process.
“A final point which needs to be emphasised is the importance of preserving and maintaining the multilateral trade system,” he said, stressing that all countries must meet their responsibilities and that all sides would have to make efforts proportional to their stage of development.
A critical moment for the WTO, say parliamentarians
More than 400 members of national parliaments and the European Parliament representing 65 countries are taking part in the Hong Kong session of the Parliamentary Conference on the WTO. The Parliamentary Conference is jointly organised by the European Parliament and the Inter-Parliamentary Union.
IPU President and Speaker of the Italian Chamber of Deputies, Pier Ferdinando Casini, told the opening session: "The keywords for our debate will be agriculture, non-agricultural market access, services, rules and institutional capacity building amongst others. I would place 'political will on the very top of this list because of the importance of this factor at a time when success depends upon leadership, vision and firm adherence to the international commitments inscribed in the Doha Declaration. We are gravely concerned - already two years ago in Cancun we expressed alarm that the Doha Development Agenda was making no real progress. This seems to be even more the case today. We reiterate that failure to move the Doha Agenda forward will exacerbate many other problems, weaken the fragile fabric of the global economy and accelerate centrifugal forces in the global community. Conversely, progress in trade and a truly successful WTO ministerial meeting in Hong Kong will have a highly salutary effect."
WTO Director General Pascal Lamy told the conference: "In the next few days WTO members will have to take important decisions, although not the very final ones. Hong Kong is one of many steps along the road of a complex and lengthy negotiation. However, it is a step that should take us closer to our finishing line next year. (...) There is little time to spare. As the WTO expands to include new Members, like Saudi Arabia and Tonga, the world expands its expectations of the WTO. And now it is time to start delivering."
Wuyun Qimugem , Vice Chair of the Standing Committee of China's National People's Congress said: "The Doha Round is at a critical moment, attracting worldwide attention. As we parliamentarians represent the people, we have the responsibility and obligation to work together with the governments to maintain the hard won momentum of the negotiations and strive for substantive results at the ministerial conference."
The Parliamentary Conference continues on Thursday 15 December, when it will adopt a final declaration to be delivered to the WTO Ministerial Meeting, which is taking place from 13 to 18 December.
20051212IPR03499
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
