Backing for a common company tax base
Taxation
2005-12-13 - 12:49
Parliament adopted a report by 392 votes in favour, 121 against and 89 abstentions which backs the idea of a common consolidated corporate tax base within the EU. The report was drawn up by Pier Luigi BERSANI (PES, IT). It also supports a pilot scheme on home country taxation for small businesses.
Noting that European companies are hampered by tax obstacles, problems of double taxation and high compliance costs when they invest or operate in another Member State, the House welcomes the Commission's proposals for a common consolidated corporate tax base at European level. This would make it possible to determine the taxable revenue of a group of companies according to a set of common rules defined at European level. The aim would be to remove barriers set up by different national tax systems, to reduce bureaucracy and compliance costs, to create equal conditions for companies based in different Member States and to remove problems of double taxation and tax evasion.
MEPs reaffirm that this would not in any way prejudice the fundamental rights of the Member States on tax matters, in particular the right to set the rates of corporate taxation. They regret that some Member States still reject the need for greater cooperation on tax matters, in particular tax bases applicable to companies. They say the best way forward would be via an EU regulation creating a common tax base and a method of apportionment among the Member States, allowing companies to offset and consolidate profits and losses globally throughout the EU. A second best approach would be to use the enhanced cooperation mechanism, which allows some Member States to go ahead with a project applying only to those in favour if the necessary unanimity for EU-wide action cannot be found. There should, says the Parliament, be a step by step approach, initially giving companies the choice of whether to apply the EU or national system, with an assessment then being made of whether to make the common base compulsory.
On the issue of home state taxation for SMEs, the House supports the Commission proposal for a pilot project to test the scheme, which would allow SMEs to calculate the taxable revenue of a parent company and all its branches and subsidiaries in other Member States applying the tax rules of the home State. Agreements on sharing of revenue between the participating Member States would be essential.
20051207IPR03305 The taxation of undertakings in the Union: a common consolidated corporate tax base
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5254622
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
