The European Bathing Water Directive - ensuring UK beaches are clean
Environment
United Kingdom
2006-01-12 - 18:47
Hastings beach
January may not be the month when most of us are thinking of taking a dip in the sea, but we are probably dreaming of summer holidays which may well take us to one of the 20,000 recognised bathing beaches in the EU. It is thanks to the 1976 European Bathing Water Directive that we have a system in place with minimum standards for the cleanliness of the water we swim in and information to help us choose which beaches to bathe from.
MEPs will vote on a revised directive which will update the 1976 rules, raising standards and improving information to the public. The vote will take place in Strasbourg on 17 January on a text which has been agreed between a delegation of MEPs and the Environment Ministers from the 25 EU Member States. The new directive should come into effect from 2008.
Figures from the European Commission for 2005 showed that 97.7% of UK coastal bathing waters met the minimum quality criteria set out in the 1976 directive (a slight fall on numbers in 2004). Progress in meeting the directive's more stringent, but voluntary, standards has been dramatic, with the Environment Agency for England and Wales claiming that 85% of bathing waters in England and Wales now meet the strictest standards. Results published by the Scottish Environment Protection Agency show that in 2005, 33 out of 60 beaches met the tougher 'excellent' criteria. 110 beaches in England, Scotland and Wales now claim the famous Blue Flag for cleanliness for which the directive's top standards are a requirement.
A mid-season health-check in summer 2005 by the Marine Conservation Society showed that only 28 designated beaches out of over 500 failed to meet the voluntary standards and only five beaches across the whole of the UK did not match the directive's minimum standards.
So how will the new directive, being discussed by MEPs this month, affect the UK's bathing waters?
- it simplifies the tests, focusing only now on two types of bacteria:- e.coli and intestinal enterococchi, instead of 19 different tests;
- it brings in an extra classification of 'sufficient' quality which comes below 'excellent' and 'good' but still allows a beach to qualify as a bathing water - the standards have been raised, however so that the health risk to bathers is reduced;
- tests will be carried out more frequently, especially when a beach is classified as 'poor' or only 'sufficient';
- information on water quality will be provided almost instantly on the internet instead of being one year out of date, with the findings of the regular tests being quickly available;
- new standard signs will be devised which must be placed at all bathing sites to indicate the quality of the water - in some UK beaches, a smiley system of faces to indicate good or poor quality water already exists on display boards at the beach.
When the 1976 directive was adopted, the European Parliament was not elected and had little say on the content of the rules. This time round, things are different: the European Parliament now shares equal power with the Council of Ministers to decide the final text of the new directive and MEPs can genuinely claim to have achieved a stronger directive for the environment, with greater clarity of information to be made available to the general public. European Parliament amendments focused in particular on the criteria for the new 'sufficient' category, on the quality of information to the public and on emergency plans where a bathing water is classified as 'sufficient' or 'poor'.
MEPs were lobbied strongly on this key piece of legislation by groups as diverse as Surfers Against Sewage, a Cornwall-based group which wanted to see the directive extended beyond bathing to other recreational activities, and WaterVoice (now the Consumer Council for Water) which represents water and sewerage customers in England and Wales - they argued that the new directive would increase water prices and still claim that up to 70 English or Welsh beaches would fail to meet the new minimum standards laid down in the directive from 2008.
20050820IPR01040 Environmental facts and figures: bathing water quality DEFRA website on the proposed change to the Bathing Water Directive Surfers Against Sewage campaign for clean, safe recreational waters, free from sewage effluents, toxic chemicals and nuclear waste. Consumer Council for Water
EN
1
PHOTO
20050818PHT00516.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.environment-agency.gov.uk/yourenv/eff/water/213925/bathing/?version=1&lang=_e
EN
3
LINK
http://www.defra.gov.uk/environment/water/quality/bathing/revision.htm
EN
4
LINK
http://www.sas.org.uk
EN
5
LINK
http://www.ofwat.gov.uk/aptrix/ofwat/publish.nsf/Content/navigation-watervoice-homepage
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
