The European Parliament in 2005
Institutions
2005-12-20 - 00:05
Constitution takes a knock
As 2005 draws to a close, it is time to look back over a year in which MEPs have voted almost 5000 times on a wide range of legislation that directly concerns us as citizens, workers and consumers. But the year was also marked by two major events for the EU as a whole: the rejection in two countries of the European Constitution and the crisis surrounding future funding.
What was the biggest event of 2005? For most of the leaders of the Parliament’s political groups it was the failure of the European Constitution referendums in France and the Netherlands. For Germany’s Hans-Gert Poettering, the EPP-ED Group Leader, the no vote in the two countries “leaves the EU without the political and legal structures needed for a union of 25 members.” The UK’s Graham Watson, Leader of the ALDE Group, stresses the negative effect of the French referendum, and Germany’s Martin Schulz, Chairman of the Socialist Group, counts the “yes” vote for the Constitution in Luxembourg and Spain among the most important events, along with the public debates that preceded the referendums. According to Italy’s Monica Frassoni, Joint Chair of the Greens, “the double no has plunged the EU into an unprecedented crisis.” Francis Wurtz (France), President of the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left, points out that “from now on the question being asked is what direction is the European project taking?” For Denmark’s Jens-Peter Bonde, Leader of the Independence/Democracy Group, the French and Dutch rejection of the Constitution enables a positive assessment of 2005 to be made.
A year after 10 new countries joined the EU, the financial framework for 2007-2013, which will ensure the smooth running of the enlarged Union, has been the focus of a good deal of attention. It is of such importance that it was the subject of a special temporary committee, under the direction of EP President Josep Borrell. MEPs were almost unanimous in lauding an ambitious approach and deplored the attitude of those countries unwilling to give the EU the means to move ahead.
A number of issues on which the EP has acted this year have direct impact on the functioning of the EU and the life of its citizens.
Environment and Industry
The package of measures known as REACH (the regulations affecting the operation of the chemical industry) can be picked out from among the top issues, covering as it does the environment, people’s health, business competitiveness and even the labour market. Another decision, which made all the front pages, was the overwhelming rejection by MEPs of the Commission’s proposals concerning software patenting. This was an unacceptable measure for the Chamber, which came out against the “common patents” rule, and also against the tendency for the Council and the Commission not to take MEPs’ views seriously.
Consumer Rights
The list of banned business practices in the European Union is one of the most important features of the legislation on consumer rights protection. MEPs also voted in favour of another black list, one covering airline companies regarded as being dangerous. At stake is passenger safety. On rail networks, passengers’ rights and peace of mind were also strengthened. There will be better compensation when trains are delayed and competitiveness will be improved through opening up the sector to competition.
The Market and a Social Europe
Being able to respond effectively to the way the market operates while retaining the social benefits which guarantee welfare and desired quality of life is the issue facing the European model - and which gives it its distinctive feature. An illustration of the difficulty in finding the right balance was the debate throughout the year on the Services Directive. The Working Time Directive, which Parliament voted on its first reading in May, will be subject to further negotiations with the Council next year.
Basic Freedoms and Human Rights
The Advocate General gave an opinion in favour of Parliament, which had lodged a complaint over the agreement between the EU and the USA over the transfer of airline passengers’ personal data to the American authorities. The Court of Justice will make a final ruling in March. On the other hand, Parliament and the Council were able to agree on the monitoring of telephone calls, SMS messages and internet connections in a way which enables data to be kept for the purpose of preventing terrorist acts without endangering individual freedoms.
But MEPs’ concerns extended beyond the EU’s borders. The Electoral observation missions, the awarding of the Sakharov Prize to three winners and MEPs’ involvement in Ukraine’s “Orange Revolution” are some of the many examples of Parliament’s involvement in promoting democratic values throughout the world.
20051215STO03775 Highlights of 2005 Highlights of 2005
EN
1
PHOTO
20051214PHT03753.jpg
EN
2
MULTIMEDIA
20051219MLT03843.mov
EN
3
MULTIMEDIA
20051219MLT03845.mov
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
