European Parliament probe into Equitable Life case
Institutions
2006-01-12 - 13:16
The Conference of Presidents has reached agreement on a draft decision setting up a European Parliament committee of inquiry to look into the case of the British insurance company Equitable Life. This decision has to be endorsed by the full Parliament at next week's Strasbourg plenary session.
Over a million UK policy holders and more than 15,000 policy holders in other EU countries, notably Germany and Ireland, incurred major losses to their pensions, savings or investments following alleged mismanagement at Equitable Life. The question has arisen as to whether the relevant EU legislation was properly applied in the UK.
The committee's draft mandate requires it to investigate the way in which the UK authorities applied the relevant Council directives, examine whether the European Commission properly monitored the transposition of Community law and assess allegations that UK regulators consistently failed to protect policy holders by rigorous supervision of accounting and provisioning practices and of the financial situation of Equitable Life. The committee will have twelve months to complete its work and submit a report to Parliament. An interim report will be delivered after four months.
The committee will be composed of 22 MEPs.
Next week's plenary vote on setting up the committee takes place on Wednesday 18 January. The vote to approve the list of MEPs who will sit on the committee takes place the following day.
The European Parliament has the power to set up a committee of inquiry to investigate "alleged contraventions or maladministration in the implementation of Community law" (Article 193 of the EC Treaty). The committee can hold hearings and invite EC institutions or national governments to send representatives to testify at those hearings. It may also request national or EC authorities to provide any documents necessary to carry out its duties.
20060112IPR04222
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
