2006 - A look ahead
Institutions
2005-12-23 - 04:21
Bulgaria and Romania move towards EU membership
With 2005 behind us the Parliament looks ahead to a year that promises to be full of debate and controversy, particularly regarding legislation on the free movement of services. Here is a selection of some things to expect from 2006: The coming year has been declared the "European Year of Workers Mobility" in an effort to boost the labour market in the EU and encourage people to consider the possibility of working abroad in an effort to gain new skills and experiences.
In this context 2006 is also the year when the 12 EU countries that imposed restrictions on the transfer of labour, after the last EU enlargement in 2004, will have the first opportunity to review whether to keep them. To make it easier to work abroad, Parliament's Employment committee will be considering the issue of transferring pension rights from one country to another - whilst the working time directive is also likely to feature in the general debate about the labour market.
The Parliament, along with the other EU institutions will focus on the so-called Lisbon Strategy, which aims to make the EU the most competitive area in the world by 2010. In more general developments it is likely that the "period of reflection in Europe" due to the stalled ratification of the EU Constitution after it was rejected by voters in France and the Netherlands will continue. The Parliament will continue to show its backing for the Constitution with a position on the future of the institutional process in January. In addition the heads of the political groups plan a series of debates with the public, media and students to canvas grass roots concerns.
In the spring of 2006 two new aspirant countries - Romania and Bulgaria - will face the final report from the European Commission on their suitability for EU membership which is scheduled for January 1st 2007. This is going to be a key issue of the year as will Croatia's EU ambitions. The year also sees the 20th anniversary of Spain and Portugal joining the European Union back in 1986.
The Parliament's budgetary control committee will renew its calls for better use of EU money and tighter controls on how it is spent at a national level. The Parliament will vote on the famous budget "discharge" in April . On transport, the parliament will be considering social legislation in road transport, measures to combat pollution caused by ships and EU aviation policy.
Measures to improve energy efficiency are going to be a priority of the Austrian Presidency in the first half of the year (Finland will take over the EU Presidency from July). The Parliament's energy committee is preparing a report on the issues and there will be a joint meeting with national Parliaments in January.
2006 will also see the establishment of a European Institute for Gender Equality which should help the EU fight gender discrimination.
Political groups: Having had a look at some of the issues for the coming year, we asked the leaders of the political groups in the Parliament what they thought were going to be the big issues of 2006.
Hans-Gert Poettering . Chairman of the Group of the European People's Party and European Democrats, said "Europe needs more than ever to provide itself with the main legal and political reforms set out in the European Constitution, we must work hard during 2006 to give practical effect to these reforms."
Leader of the Socialist Group in the Parliament Martin Schulz thought the progress reports concerning the accession of Bulgaria and Romania would be a major issue.
For the Liberal Group, Graham Watson said that the outlook for 2006 would be "saving the EU from the attacks of the larger Member States, especially in regard to the EU budget 2007-2013."
Monica Frassoni, co-president of the Greens and European Free Alliance said that "for 2006, the services directive is crucial. This is the occasion for the EU to choose between a social or neo-liberal orientation." She also said the group hopes the EU will be able to find a solution to the impasse over the constitution.
The Chairman of the Confederal Group of the European United Left and Nordic Green Left, Francis Wurtz, also thought services would be key. "The services directive will certainly give rise to debate."
Nigel Farage of the Europe of Democracies and Diversities Group feels the major issue of 2006 would be "the voting on a mass of legislation that, in defiance of the voter's wishes, introduces the EU constitution via the back door. This will be especially true in the area of justice and home affairs."
Non-attached Slovakian MEP Irena Belohorska said the most important thing in 2006 will be the full integration of the new Member States in the European decision-making... they still haven't seen promised improvements of economic and social conditions (rather) they have lost young qualified workers and social uncertainty has increased."
20051215STO03767
EN
1
PHOTO
20051215PHT03772.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
