1986 – Europe becomes twelve with the accession of Spain and Portugal
European citizenship
2006-01-11 - 15:45
The arrival of Spanish and Portuguese MEPs
January the 1st 1986 saw the birth of a 12-nation European Community with the accession of Spain and Portugal. The Community opened up more towards the south, continuing a movement started five years earlier with the accession of Greece. For the new Member States, who had long been marginalised from the European political and economic scene, accession rapidly brought about political stability and unprecedented economic development.
Twenty years after Spain and Portugal joined the EU (or the European Economic Community as it was then known), the Head of the European Commission is Portuguese and the President of the European Parliament is Spanish. Furthermore, Parliament’s current President, Josep Borrell (Socialist), is the third representative of his country to hold this position, following in the steps of Enrique Barón Crespo, President from 1989 to 1992 (who was also a Socialist) and the Christian-Democrat José María Gil-Robles (President from 1997 to 1999).
Leading from the front
From the outset, both countries were at the forefront of the construction of the European project. Since their accession, Spain has held the presidency of the Council on three occasions and Portugal twice. Their Presidencies have left their mark on the history of European integration. It was at the Madrid Summit in December 1995 that Member States formally committed themselves to the introduction of the euro and set out a timetable for the changeover from national currencies to the European single currency. Five years later, at the Lisbon Special European Council, the strategy bearing the name of the Portuguese capital was launched. Will we have to wait for a new Portuguese presidency to relaunch the endeavour aimed at enabling Europe to become the most competitive economy, one based on innovation and knowledge and which maintains social cohesion?
Shaking off the past
Both countries are among the biggest recipients of structural and cohesion funds, which have widely contributed to their rapid economic development. When Europe was enlarged for the third time the benefits, not just for Spain and Portugal but also for the Union, were all the more spectacular given that the two countries had barely emerged from dictatorial regimes when they submitted their requests to join the EEC in 1977. In Spain, the death of General Franco in 1975 and the 1974 “Carnation Revolution” in Portugal (which saw the end of the regime first set up by Salazar) opened the way to democracy and, at the same time, enabled negotiations on accession to get underway.
Change and modernisation
On the 20 th anniversary of the accession of Spain and Portugal, MEPs from the two countries have given us their views. For Josep Borrell, Parliament’s Spanish President, “no other country has changed its face as much as Spain, not just tangibly in terms of the physical infrastructure which is there for all to see, but also in spirit as a country which has adapted to modernity and progress, has changed its attitudes, is open to the world and which takes pride in the recognition it has achieved and in contributing to a project which is much more political than some people think.” Manuel António dos Santos (PES), the Portuguese Vice-President of the European Parliament, makes the same “obviously very positive” assessment of Portugal’s presence within the EU. Firstly, in economic and social terms, “it was possible with the help of the Community to modernise the country and its economy, reduce social inequalities and to narrow significantly the economic and social gap in relation to other Member States.” Then, at the political level, “Portugal’s joining Europe was a critical factor in reinforcing the democratic process and its institutions.” But, above all, accession enabled Portugal “to break with the sovereigntist and isolationist model which had been one of the decisive factors in holding the country back.”
Reaction of Spanish and Portuguese MEPs
You can read other views (in Spanish and Portuguese) from MEPs from the two countries by selecting the links below.
20060111STO04190 20th anniversary of Spain joining the European Union 20th anniversary of Portugal joining the European Union
EN
1
PHOTO
20060111PHT04184.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20051215BKG03779 ES NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20051215BKG03779 PT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
