Irish participation in Euroscola programme for young people to visit EU institutions
Institutions
Ireland
2005-12-15 - 18:14
Euroscola programme - chance for young people to understand the EU institutions
Each year, the European Parliament's Information Office in Ireland invites approximately 16 Irish school groups (comprising 30 students aged between 16 and 18, accompanied by 3 teachers) to visit the European Parliament in Strasbourg to participate in the Euroscola programme, organised annually by DG Information (IV).
The aim of each one-day Euroscola event is to bring together approximately 600 second-level students from all 25 EU Member States in order to give them an insight into the workings of the European Parliament, and also to give them a deeper sense of Europe and what it means to be a European citizen. They actively take part in discussions on topical European subjects, and engage in group activities where they interact with their peers from other EU Member States and communicate using their foreign language skills. The students enjoy this opportunity to sit in the Parliament's chamber and to re-enact the work of their MEPs. Participating schools are asked to give some feedback on their experiences in the European Parliament and Irish participants in Euroscola 2004 gave the following comments on their trip, illustrating the positive impact it has on young people:
"I enjoyed meeting new, different people and overcoming the language barrier. It was an interesting experience which I will never forget".
"Everybody had a great time meeting new people and acting as a member of the EU Parliament for a day and everybody was sad to leave".
"My trip to Strasbourg was on of my greatest experiences yet"
"To this day I can still remember my seat number "345" and I will always treasure it as a reminder of the time that I was in the European Parliament".
"We got to sit on the chairs that the real representatives of Europe would sit on. We even got officials of the European Parliament to hear our questions and answer them".
"Our day in the European Parliament was really good, we learned a lot about Europe and had a great time doing the quizzes and talking to other people of different nationalities. The day was made interesting and fun for us".
"The European Parliament was probably one of the best experiences I've ever had. We really are so lucky for the opportunity we got to go there. I was so proud to say I was from Ireland!"
"I really enjoyed speaking in the chamber; I didn't think I had the confidence to talk in front of hundreds of people".
"It was good to be able to speak freely about our thoughts concerning Europe".
Schools are invited to apply to the European Parliament information office in their own country to take part in Euroscola. The Parliament pays successful applicants a subsidy covering approximately one-third of the travel costs.
Recent Irish participants have included prize-winners in the Irish Rotary Club's all-Ireland 'Young Leaders Competition', and winners in essay and public speaking competitions organised by the European Movement in Ireland. Those who took part in Euroscola 2005 were the winners of the annual 'Spring Day' competition, organised by the European Parliament's information office in Ireland . They were: Mountmellick Community School, Mountmellick, Co. Laois; Passage West Community School, Passage West, Co. Cork; and Colaiste Mhuire, Tourmakeady, Co. Mayo.
Further information on the Euroscola programme is available from Mary Killoran, European Parliament Office in Ireland.
20051213IPR03570
EN
1
PHOTO
20051207PHT03244.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
