Community licence for air traffic controllers to improve safety and combat staff shortages
Transport
2006-01-24 - 17:03
Parliament's Transport Committee today adopted a second reading report establishing a Community Air Traffic Controller Licence. Rules on training and licensing of air traffic controllers will be harmonised. The aims are to ensure high safety standards and make it easier for air traffic controllers to work outside their home country by simplifying the mutual recognition of national licences.
Given the lack of air traffic controllers in Europe - around 1800 more are needed - the job mobility of controllers was one if the committee's main concerns. MEPs backed moves to ease restrictions on the free movement of air traffic controllers: from now on, under the principle of "unconditional mutual recognition" , all EU Member States must recognise each others' licences and qualifications, language certificates and medical certificates for air traffic controllers.
Rapporteur Christine de Veyrac (EPP-ED, FR) also underlined the importance of the directive for the Single European Sky, created in 2004, as it facilitates both the establishment of cross-border functional airspace blocks and the provision of cross-border air-traffic control services. At present airspace blocks often end at national borders. One of the objectives of the Single Sky is a safer, more efficient flow of traffic by creating airspace blocks that do not end at national borders but straddle them where this makes operational sense. The Air Traffic Controller Licence is an important precondition for the creation of airspace blocks.
Regarding language requirements MEPs and Council have agreed on an operational language proficiency (level 4) for English, and for a local language where Member States consider it necessary for safety reasons. Moreover, in line with the committee's wishes, Member States are also allowed to require advanced proficiency in the local language (level 5) for important safety reasons: MEPs argued that staff responsible for air traffic control are also in contact with a number of local services (particularly the local emergency services), with whom they must be able to communicate easily.
MEPs approved the Council's Common Position as it stood, since it takes account of the amendments proposed by Parliament at first reading and of the Commission's amended proposal. The vote was 34 in favour, 1 against and no abstentions.
2006-01-24 Committee on Transport and Tourism Chair Paolo Costa ALDE IT
Procedure: Co-decision, second reading
Plenary vote: February, Strasbourg
20060124IPR04634
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
