Safer bathing in cleaner water
Environment
United Kingdom
2006-01-19 - 18:31
Have a swim in clean bathing water
Fancy a swim? From 2013 at the latest, consumers will be able to check out the safety of EU bathing sites on the Internet before taking to the water, thanks to legislation approved by the European Parliament. Information will also be posted at the locations. The Parliament negotiated ruthlessly with EU ministers over three years to strengthen standards and to improve the quality of conditions across the EU.
January may not be the month when most of us are thinking of taking a dip in the sea, but we are probably dreaming of summer holidays which may well take us to one of the 20,000 recognised bathing beaches in the EU. It is thanks to the 1976 European Bathing Water Directive that we have a system in place with minimum standards for the cleanliness of the water we swim in and information to help us choose which beaches to bathe from. Figures from the European Commission for 2005 showed that 97.7% of UK coastal bathing waters met the minimum quality criteria set out in the 1976 directive (a slight fall on numbers in 2004). Progress in meeting the directive's more stringent, but voluntary, standards has been dramatic, with the Environment Agency for England and Wales claiming that 85% of bathing waters in England and Wales now meet the strictest standards. Results published by the Scottish Environment Protection Agency show that in 2005, 33 out of 60 beaches met the tougher 'excellent' criteria. 110 beaches in England, Scotland and Wales now claim the famous Blue Flag for cleanliness for which the directive's top standards are a requirement. A mid-season health-check in summer 2005 by the Marine Conservation Society showed that only 28 designated beaches out of over 500 failed to meet the voluntary standards and only five beaches across the whole of the UK did not match the directive's minimum standards. So how will the new directive affect the UK's bathing waters? - it simplifies the tests, focusing only now on two types of bacteria:- e.coli and intestinal enterococchi, instead of 19 different tests; - it brings in an extra classification of 'sufficient' quality which comes below 'excellent' and 'good' but still allows a beach to qualify as a bathing water - the standards have been raised, however so that the health risk to bathers is reduced; - tests will be carried out more frequently, especially when a beach is classified as 'poor' or only 'sufficient'; - information on water quality will be provided almost instantly on the internet instead of being one year out of date, with the findings of the regular tests being quickly available; - new standard signs will be devised which must be placed at all bathing sites to indicate the quality of the water - in some UK beaches, a smiley system of faces to indicate good or poor quality water already exists on display boards at the beach. When the 1976 directive was adopted, the European Parliament was not elected and had little say on the content of the rules. This time round, things are different: the European Parliament now shares equal power with the Council of Ministers to decide the final text of the new directive and MEPs can genuinely claim to have achieved a stronger directive for the environment, with greater clarity of information to be made available to the general public. European Parliament amendments focused in particular on the criteria for the new 'sufficient' category, on the quality of information to the public and on emergency plans where a bathing water is classified as 'sufficient' or 'poor'. MEPs were lobbied strongly on this key piece of legislation by groups as diverse as Surfers Against Sewage, a Cornwall-based group which wanted to see the directive extended beyond bathing to other recreational activities, and WaterVoice (now the Consumer Council for Water) which represents water and sewerage customers in England and Wales - they argued that the new directive would increase water prices and still claim that up to 70 English or Welsh beaches would fail to meet the new minimum standards laid down in the directive from 2008. Parliament voted to approve the conciliation agreement on bathing water with 584 votes in favour 11 against and 56 abstentions. For years the European Union has struggled to replace its existing directive on bathing water, which dates from 1976. An agreement was reached between MEPs and representatives of the Member States in a conciliation meeting in October 2005. The provisions of the old directive and the parameters it required to be measured had been overtaken by scientific developments. But the European Parliament and the Council, in their efforts to strike a balance between health standards and the need to avoid administrative and financial burdens, had stuck to their different positions at the end of the second reading of the co-decision procedure. This meant conciliation was needed, i.e. direct negotiations between 25 Council representatives and 25 MEPs. The two sides had a maximum of six weeks to reach a deal but they achieved an agreement at the first meeting of the official negotiations. Two UK MEPs participated in the debate on the concliation agreement on Tuesday 17 January:
Caroline Lucas (South East), on behalf of the Greens/EFA Group said: – "Mr President, on behalf of my group, I wish to say that, in spite of the good offices of the rapporteur, we believe the compromise in front of us is unacceptably weak. That is why my group will be abstaining in tomorrow’s vote. With that abstention, we intend to indicate the following. First, that the values agreed on fresh water protection are completely unclear: the parameters have been so tampered with by statistical changes that the degree of protection they will provide is extremely dubious. According to the peer-reviewed article about to appear in the scientific journal Environmental Health Perspectives , which was mentioned by Mr Maaten, these values will bring no improvement for the quality of fresh water at all. Second, the real opportunity we had to extend this directive to cover recreational uses has been completely lost in the compromise. Third, after a strong fight for higher standards, Parliament’s delegation suddenly dropped all of its demands after the Council offered a minimal increase of one of the two standards of the sufficient category. Finally, the process by which this final agreement was reached was highly unsatisfactory, with last-minute technical proposals being introduced – verbally, not in writing – and with no time to properly study their implications. This is a disappointing result, but, in spite of that, I should like to thank everyone involved. I appreciate that it is not an easy business, but we will be abstaining tomorrow."
Jim Allister (Northern Ireland) (Non attached MEP) said: – "Mr President, clean and safe bathing water is an obvious necessity, and an essential aid to a prosperous tourist industry. In my region of Northern Ireland there are many beautiful beaches, several of which proudly boast blue flag status. We have others yet to attain that accolade. I trust that this directive will assist in their achievement of that status. Equally relevant is compliance with the Urban Waste Water Treatment Directive. This has been easier for countries eligible for cohesion funding, which makes available grants precisely for such projects. However, regions like mine, which have not and still do not qualify for cohesion funding, have greater difficulty in bringing their water treatment infrastructure up to acceptable standards. Extra national funding is, therefore, the only resort and has to be found. It is important to realise that the Bathing Water Directive should be considered in that wider context."
Final obstacles removed The main obstacle in the final round of talks was the question of the standards to be applied to a new category of intermediate quality - known as "sufficient quality" - which would be lower than "excellent quality" and "good quality". Parliament had accepted this new suggestion from the Council provided the standard required was raised. The negotiations produced an agreement on tougher reference values than those proposed by the Council, both for inland waters and coastal waters. From now on, in the "sufficient" category, the parameters for intestinal enterococchi will be 330 (inland waters) and 185 (coastal waters), measured at 90 percentiles. The values for the bacterium Escherichia coli were not changed. Overall, this represents a reduction in health risks to bathers from 12% to around 8%. Once MEPs had obtained satisfaction on tightening up the standards, their demand to make this category a transitional one was no longer necessary. The report to be submitted later by the Commission to Parliament has been brought forward from 2018 to 2008 and, at the insistence of MEPs, will have to include an analysis of viruses. On the basis of this report, the Commission will have to review the directive by 2020. At that point it is envisaged that the "sufficient" category may disappear. During the negotiations, Parliament also obtained a commitment from the Member States that constantly updated information should be provided to bathers. New standard signs will be devised in the near future and must be placed at all bathing sites to indicate the quality of the water. The findings of regular tests will also be made available swiftly, in particular on the Internet. The directive is scheduled to be implemented within two years after it has entered into force, namely at the start of 2008. The new standards will replace the existing 1976 Directive. Internet information must be available by 2013 and the new quality criteria, along with standard water quality signs by 2015.
20060116IPR04323
EN
1
PHOTO
20060116PHT04325.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
