Human rights: extradition of Alberto Fujimori, Sudanese refugees in Egypt, repression in Cambodia
Human rights
2006-01-19 - 16:48
Three resolutions on human rights issues around the world were adopted, as usual, at the end of the Strasbourg session. MEPs supported the extradition of Alberto Fujimori from Chile to Peru, condemned the violence of the Egyptian police in clearing a group of Sudanese refugees from outside the Egyptian office of the UNHCR, and called for EU action in response to repression in Cambodia.
Peru - extradition of Alberto Fujumori from Chile
In its resolution on Peru and in particular the arrest of former President Alberto Fujimori in Chile on the basis of the international arrest warrant issued against him by the Peruvian authorities, Parliament congratulates the Chilean and Peruvian authorities on their effective cooperation in the detention of Mr Fujimori and welcomes the Chilean authorities' decision to formally initiate the extradition procedure. It reiterates that the fight against impunity is one of the cornerstones of the Union's policy in the field of human rights; is of the view that it is the primary duty of all the partners to work together for respect for democracy and human rights.
MEPs therefore support the extradition of Mr Fujimori to Peru, which has already been formally requested, so as to ensure that Mr Fujimori appears in court to face the charges against him. Parliament expresses total confidence in the Chilean and Peruvian judicial systems, and trusts that this extradition will take place on the basis of full respect for the procedures and applicable legislation, and that Mr. Fujimori's trial will be conducted according to international standards. MEPs urge the Peruvian government to take all necessary steps to ensure a policy of full protection of the witnesses in respect of the charges against Fujimori, as recommended by the ombudsman's office in September 2005
Egypt - violence against Sudanese refugees
On 30 December 2005, the Egyptian security forces evacuated by force more than 2500 Sudanese migrants, refugees and asylum seekers who were settled in Moustafa Mahmoud Square in front of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) Headquarters, requesting to be relocated to third countries since 29 September 2005. Reportedly, 2000 police officers surrounded the improvised encampment, fired water cannon into the crowd and beat individuals with clubs in order to end the sit-in. Eyewitnesses, the international press and human rights organisations have reported over 200 deaths. According to official information from the Egyptian authorities, only 27 people, all Sudanese and most of them women, children and elderly people, were killed, others were imprisoned and many others were injured following the Egyptian security forces’ attack. A large number of refugees were arrested and brought to detention centres outside the capital following the incident.
In a resolution adopted by a clear majority the European Parliament condemns the violence of the Egyptian police, that resulted in deaths and injuries, and insists that the situation could and should have been resolved peacefully It calls on the Egyptian authorities to ensure that police officers act in compliance with international standards and to put an end to the disproportionate use of force.
MEPs welcome the decision of the Egyptian authorities to start an investigation into the tragic events of 30 December and urge the Egyptian Government to involve UN human rights experts and members of independent Egyptian human rights organisations. They recall that Egypt is a state party to the Convention against Torture and other international agreements which expressly prohibit the forcible return of anyone to a country where they would be at risk of torture or ill-treatment. They ask the Egyptian authorities to halt the forced deportation to Sudan of up to 650 Sudanese nationals, as the group is believed to include asylum seekers and refugees recognised by the UNHCR, and to respect the principle of non-refoulement.
Parliament calls on the Egyptian authorities to provide information on the places where Sudanese migrants and refugees arrested are settled or detained since 30 December 2005 and to release all Sudanese nationals detained during or following the events, unless they are to be charged with a recognisable criminal offence and, moreover, to ensure that all those held have full access to lawyers and their families, and receive adequate medical treatment when necessary. It expresses its concern at the allegation of torture and ill treatment and appeals to the Egyptian authorities to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of all migrants and refugees and to adopt a law on the protection of refugees, asylum seekers and migrants which complies with international law, in particular the Convention relating to the Status of Refugees.
MEPs recognise the mandate of the UNHCR and the importance of its efforts to protect and promote durable solutions for refugees and other uprooted people who are its concern, and their support for the UNHCR’s work. However, they criticise the UNHCR for having been too slow in finding a solution for the Sudanese refugees and asylum seekers, and call on the UNHCR to clarify the procedure used in considering the requests submitted by Sudanese asylum seekers and the various initiatives taken to break the deadlock.
They also call on the European Commission and the Member States to establish a true partnership with the UNHCR by offering both political and financial support to assist the work of the UNHCR in Cairo, in order to maintain a constant dialogue with the Egyptian authorities, emphasising that the situation of the Sudanese migrants and refugees needs to be resolved peacefully. They stress that respect for human rights is a fundamental value of the EU-Egypt Association Agreement, saying that the incidents of 30 December represent a serious violation of Article 2 of the Association Agreement. Parliament calls on the Council and the Commission to emphasise this issue at the next meeting of the EU-Egypt Association Council and when continuing the EU-Egypt discussions towards a national Action Plan. It also says the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument (ENPI) should have a specific programme to combat the use of torture and degrading and inhuman treatment.
Among other points, Parliament also welcomes and supports the worldwide calls to release the leader of the secular El Ghad party and former member of parliament Ayman Nour, and strongly urges the Egyptian authorities to ensure that the Ayman Nour is well treated and not subjected to torture or other forms of ill-treatment and that he is given prompt, regular and unrestricted access to his lawyers, doctors (as he is diabetic) and family.
Cambodia - political repression
In recent weeks political repression in Cambodia has dramatically increased with several arrests of human rights workers, journalists and trade unionists for defamation offences. Kem Sokha, President of the Cambodian Centre for Human Rights (CCHR), Pa Nguon Teang, Acting Director of the Cambodian Centre for Human Rights and radio director, Rong Chhun, President of the Cambodian Independent Teachers' Association (CITA), and Mam Sonando, Director of the Beehive Radio, are facing trial. Yeng Virak and Kem Sokha were released on bail but the charges were not dropped. For the same reasons, the Cambodian authorities are searching for Chea Mony, President of the Free Trade Union of Workers, Ea Channa, Deputy Secretary General of the Students' Movement for Democracy, Men Nath, President of the Cambodian Independent Civil Servants' Association, Prince Sisowath Tomico, secretary to former King Sihanouk, and Say Bory, advisor to former King Sihanouk. Several other activists and members of the opposition have left the country under the threat of arrest and persecution. On 22 December 2005 the leader of the opposition, Sam Rainsy, was sentenced in absentia to 18 months' imprisonment on defamation charges brought by the Prime Minister and the President of the National Assembly. Cheam Channy, Member of the Cambodian Parliament, was tried and convicted in August 2005, and sentenced to seven years' imprisonment.
In a resolution adopted by a clear majority, Parliament says it is deeply concerned about the recent arrests and prosecutions and urges the Cambodian Government to consider very carefully the compatibility of such actions with the commitments it has given to its people and to donors to build a more open, democratic and just society. It takes note of the release of the recently arrested human rights activists and calls for the annulment of all charges against them, as well as the annulment of all charges and arrest warrants issued on human rights defenders who are not currently detained. It calls moreover for all acts of intimidation and harassment of human rights activists in Cambodia to be halted.
MEPs urge Cambodia to stop breaching its obligations under international law, and in particular the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, and immediately release Cheam Channy. They call for the judgment against Sam Rainsy and Chea Poch to be overturned and their parliamentary immunity restored.
Parliament strongly believes that the continuing detentions of leading figures from the political opposition, trade unions, the media and NGOs and the use of the criminal law in cases of expression of dissenting opinions on matters of politics and policy send a worrying message to the donor community on which the government relies for about 50% of its annual budget. It reminds the Cambodian Government that it has to meet its obligations and commitments regarding the democratic principles and fundamental human rights which are an essential element of the Cooperation Agreement of 1997 between the EC and Cambodia as defined in Article 1 of the Agreement.
MEPs call on the Commission and the Council to respond to the latest crackdown on civil and political rights in clear and unambiguous terms, in coordination with the donor community, at the forthcoming Consultative Group meeting. They express their support for the Special Representative of the UN Secretary General for Human Rights in Cambodia and the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, whose mandate includes protection and monitoring.
Parliament is concerned that the use of the Cambodian judiciary as an instrument of repression against the political opposition and civil society casts serious doubts on the Cambodian Government's commitment to establish the Khmer Rouge Tribunal in accordance with international standards of judicial independence, fair trials and due legal process, as agreed with the UN in June 2003. Parliament questions the need for defamation of the office of the Prime Minister to be a criminal offence. It strongly believes that dissenting views and opinions should be challenged through public debate rather than criminal law suits and calls for prosecutions on defamation charges to be abolished, as they could easily be abused for political purposes.
MEPs call on the EU to take steps to ensure that fundamental freedoms are respected and that attacks on civil liberties have consequences. They say the EU should also make continuation of its financial aid conditional upon an improvement in Cambodia's human rights record. They call for an EP ad hoc delegation visit Cambodia to evaluate respect for Article 1 of the Cooperation Agreement and the situation of detained parliamentarians, media representatives and trade union leaders in the country.
Finally, Parliament call on the Cambodian authorities to fully implement the 1953 UNHCR Convention both with regard to the protection of Montagnard refugees, refraining from illegal forced deportation to Vietnam, and to granting refugee status to ethnic Khmer Krom escaping from Vietnam.
20060113IPR04297 Joint motion for a resolution on Peru Joint motion for a resolution on Cambodia Egypt : Violence against Sudanese refugees
-//EP//TEXT MOTION P6-RC-2006-0055 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT MOTION P6-RC-2006-0057 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT MOTION P6-RC-2006-0056 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
