The Week Ahead 30 January - 5 February 2006
Institutions
2006-01-27 - 11:21
The weekly summary of the main events at the European Parliament over the next seven days is now available
Plenary session and committee meetings in Brussels
Plenary session
Middle East. Parliament will debate the situation in the Middle East following the Palestinian elections, as well as the Council's decision not to publish a report on East Jerusalem (Wednesday).
CFSP. The annual report on the EU's common foreign and security policy as well as future priorities in this area will be discussed with CFSP High Representative Javier Solana (Wednesday).
Transport. The House is expected to approve the concilation agreement reached with the Council on the working hours of lorry and bus drivers (Thursday).
Internal market. MEPs vote at first reading on plans to deregulate the package sizes and formats of widely consumed pre-packed products (Wednesday).
Committee and other meetings
Lisbon strategy. Parliament's President Josep Borrell takes part with Austrian Chancellor Wolfgang Schüssel and Commission President José Manuel Barroso in a forum on the Lisbon strategy with representatives of national parliaments (Tuesday and Wednesday).
Ukraine. The Foreign Minister of Ukraine, Boris Tarasyuk, will attend a joint meeting of the EP Delegation for Relations with Ukraine and the Foreign Affairs Committee (Tuesday). The following day the delegation meets opposition leader Yulia Timoshenko. These meetings come in the wake of the gas supply crisis between Russia and Ukraine and two months ahead of the parliamentary elections.
Health. Two action programmes for 2007-2013 aimed at improving the quality of life of the EU's citizens will be put to the vote at first reading by the Environment and Public Health Committee and the Consumer Protection Committee (Tuesday).
Industry. The Industry Committee votes on several proposals to boost competitiveness and innovation in the European Union over the period 2007-2013 (Tuesday).
N.B. A press briefing on the highlights of the coming week in Parliament will be held at 11am on Monday 30 January.
20060127IPR04779 For full details see 'The Agenda'
EN
1
LINK
/news/expert/event_top_page/default/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
