Austrian Presidency - MEPs set out their priorities
European Council
2006-01-18 - 13:15
EP debates the priorities of the Austrian Presidency
MEPs debated the Austrian Presidency with Federal Chancellor Wolfgang Schüssel. The House was particularly concerned with the fate of the European Constitution, the EU's budget and the services directive.
Colours of Europe were as varied as those of a rainbow, Austrian Chancellor Wolfgang SCHÜSSEL told MEPs: " The strength of Europe is in its diversity; no country loses out by joining the EU - it creates freedom, security, peace and the chance for prosperity... so why are there doubts and scepticism ?" The enlargement of 2004 had been a high point, but a difficult period had followed with the two ' no ' votes after three years of debate on the Constitution, terrorist attacks, a tug of war on the Financial Perspective and growing public doubts about future enlargement.
He told Parliament the Austrian presidency would aim to rebuild confidence in Europe. There needed to be confidence between the Member States and between institutions. " We need to establish clarity about questions which really concern people. As in quantum physics, the questions you ask create reality. What are the right questions? We need to be honest, and look at unpleasant answers as well. Europe must be useful and protect its citizens from the real threats that exist. "
He spoke about the question of energy security raised by the dispute between Russia and Ukraine. " This is a reserved topic of national sovereignty but it could only really be solved in the European sphere. We need more Europe - for diversification of supplies and building reserves". We needed long term solutions, he said, and while his country would not be using nuclear power, he wanted all countries to have their own choice on the matter. "We are aiming at the use of renewable energies, we want to exhaust every drop of potential from them ." This issues of avian flu and Iranian nuclear rearmament also showed the need for more Europe, standing together to ensure security, he said.
He said growth and jobs would be a central issue for the Spring summit. Without jobs, he argued, unease and turbulence would increase. The Commission would assess the 25 reform plans of Member States under the Lisbon Strategy; the aim was action for tangible results. " No politician can promise jobs, but we can create conditions to ensure success. With 1.045 per cent of GNI we cannot create millions of jobs, but can create positive knock-on effects " Small and medium sized enterprises were " the only job creation machine we have. They are a sleeping giant. We need to awake them, with better access to capital markets and funds for research and development and through the better regulation programme, reducing red tape ."
He stressed the importance of good relations with the social partners, inviting the two sides of industry to discuss how to go forward on subjects such as the services directive. Amid the thousands of amendments before Parliament, there was the difficult task of finding the correct balance, " opening markets while ensuring standards and safety guarantees for our consumers. We must fight against social dumping and protect the provision of public services by local and regional authorities ."
" The spring summit must create incentives for growth - and the right enlargement could also be a growth strategy for old Member States ," he said. We needed to increase the qualifications and flexibility of our workforce better to compete with the US and Asia and to reduce unemployment.
On the Financial Perspective, he acknowledged the unhappiness of many MEPs with the agreement reached by Council. He said: " Europe needs stronger system of own resources. It is not right that tight national budgets need to be cut for Europe. This leads to unhappy tension between net contributors and recipients. This will not be popular for all, but there are tax gaps: short time financial speculation is exempt from tax, so is international aviation. Europe has important tasks here. If you want a strong Europe do not be shy and eschew this issue "
He called for better cooperation between the institutions, and for action to ensure EU funds were efficiently and transparently spent, with openness about who received EU subsidies.
" We want to work hand in hand for a good debate on the Constitution - we don't want an elite debate. Europe concerns everybody. It is not just about a text. There is more at stake. What holds us together, links us, fair division of labour in Europe, what Europe can, must, and should do. Those who want to resolve big questions must leave others to decide smaller issues. We will aim to breathe new life into subsidiarity ." He wanted also to address the issue of where Europe ends. This is not for geographers or surveyors - it is a political question," he said. The presidency plans to develop a road map with timetables and interim report. " The worst thing would be a debate no one takes part in ."
European Commission President José Manuel BARROSO said that in 2006, Europe had an " unclouded horizon " given the December agreement on the financial perspective. The agreement showed that Europe was both effective and relevant. Mr Barroso said that he was optimistic for 2006. The next step forward would be reaching a new Inter-institutional agreement. Extra effort would be required in the fields of citizenship, culture and youth. The Commission, he said, would be putting forward a draft inter-institutional agreement on 1 February 2006. The inclusion of the review clause on the budget and the new globalisation fund would be essential parts of the negotiation. The institutions would have to work to make sure that the budget could be released on 1 January 2007 so that the structural funds could be implements. " 2006 is loaded with responsibilities and a genuine partnership would be needed."
The priority of European citizens, he said, was growth and jobs. The spring summit, under the Austrian presidency, would be the first real test to see if Europe has delivered. The Member States, he recalled, had delivered their national action plans and they would be examined during the spring summit. There was consensus on the revised Lisbon strategy, but now it was time to deliver " vision into action and words into deeds to achieve more and better jobs" . The proposed services directive would be key to unlocking Europe's potential and he welcomed Parliament's " balanced approach ". The services sector and SMEs, he said, were key to growth in Europe. The Commission would be coming forward with proposals on research and education, on a European Institute of Technology, and a road map for gender equality.
On energy, Mr Barroso thanked the Austrian presidency for resolving the conflict between Russia and Ukraine. It demonstrated the added value of Europe. The Commission would be coming forward with a new communication on bio-fuels as well as working towards a real pan-European energy policy.
Mr Barroso recalled that he had made sustainable development a Commission priority and welcomed that the Austrian presidency had made climate change a main concern for the forthcoming six months.
The Commission President recalled that in the Spring, the Commission would publish its progress reports on Bulgaria and Romania and their readiness for accession on 1 January 2007. He also welcomed that fact that the Austrian presidency had made progress on relations with the Western Balkans a priority.
In conclusion, on the plan D for democracy and dialogue, Mr Barroso recalled that in 2005, Commissioners had made 68 visits to national parliaments, to listen and to explain. He concluded: " institutions are important, but they are instruments to achieve goals and objectives in a diverse Europe ."
Political group speakers
The leader of the EPP-ED group, Hans-Gert POETTERING (DE), told Mr Schüssel: " We expect a great deal from you. Europe needs confidence and to make progress. We believe you will be ambitious and realistic in your approach to the presidency ." He spoke to the need to reinforce citizens' confidence in European institutions, but also confidence among heads of state and government: " The Council must work together, not each pushing their personal interest ." Mr Poettering strongly rejected the statement from the Netherlands foreign minister that the constitution is dead. He agreed on the need to promote SMEs, not through subsidies but by relief from the tax burden and bureaucracy. His group gave a clear yes to EU legislation on services which combined opening up and protection. " If we don't have single market Europe will be weak in dealing with globalisation ," he said. On the constitution he wanted a timetable to have a result all can accept. Finally on energy, he said prosperity was worth nothing if not based in democracy. " We will not accept a G8 country making difference in price between a democracy like Ukraine and horrific dictatorship like Belarus ."
Martin SCHULZ (DE), leader of the Socialist group, said the presidency must have the necessary perspectives of growth and jobs. He agreed that citizens do not want Javier Solana and Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner having " to pass the hat round to stabilise energy supplies, create stability in hotspots of world, work for peace in the Middle East. We will have citizens on our side if there is an effective fight against terrorism with an effective European police force supporting Member States in tackling organised crime ." He highlighted the fact that Mr Schüssel had supported a budget deal which gave far less funding to these areas than that proposed by the Parliament. He said he could not understand how the Commission President could be satisfied with the deal done by the British presidency. He concluded: " The European Parliament is prepared to work towards the objectives you have set, but only with necessary resources and structures. Europe needs less grey and black and more red !"
ALDE group leader Graham WATSON (UK) told the Austrian Chancellor: " Your main task is to reach agreement on seven year spending plans, but your backed a bid to slash the budget to a level which will not even meet the demands of Europe's leaders, let alone what citizens want. We will vote to reject this deal ." The Council, he said, wanted to cut funding for successful programmes like Erasmus and to cut the research spending that might lead to future successes like Airbus. He called for unspent EU funds to be kept by the EU to improve funding for priority areas, not redistributed to the Member States, and for the budget framework to be set in percentage terms of GNI not in nominal figures, which would provide more funds in growth was better than expected. He continued: " Growth and jobs mean embracing opportunities offered by EU, not shrinking under pressure from protectionists. The Austrian way of life is not under threat from the Court of Justice ." In the year of worker mobility, he condemned Austria's plans to prolong transitional arrangements seeking to prevent workers from the new Member States entering the labour market. He also called on Mr Schüssel to maintain the commitment to transparency in the Council so that citizens will understand Europe better.
Daniel COHN-BENDIT (DE), for the Greens/EFA group, paraphrased Albert Einstein saying it was what was not included in the question which was often the most important. There were clear choices to be made on energy. It was right to increase spending on research but choices had to be made on priorities between renewable energy such as hydrogen based power and solar and hydro energy and old technologies such as nuclear and coal. Mr Cohn-Bendit wanted to know the presidency's position on the country of origin principle and the services directive.
Francis WURTZ (GUE/NGL, FR) commenced by noting that the presidency was "starting at top speed", but warned that the directive on port services, and the Presidency's financial plans would be called into question. He acknowledged Chancellor Schüssel's notion that a European constitution should meet the concerns of the European people but declared that "in the present atmosphere of unease and trust, words are no longer enough" and advised that the Chancellor had to do something tangible: "the proof of the pudding is in the eating". He called on the Commission to withdraw the directive on services, noting that "all Unions reject this; employers in Europe reject this out of hand". He advised that the presidency would not restore the European people's trust "without breaking off from that neo-liberal approach…these are the standards we will judge you by"
Roger KNAPMAN (IND/DEM, UK) opened his speech with "so wonderful was Mr. Blair's presidency to Euro-Sceptics that we had hoped for an encore, but it was not to be". He warned that, after listening to the President's speech, the " Constitution is not dead but merely sleeping". Continuing on this tone, Mr. Knapman quipped that the Presidency should "carry-on" and "never mind the fact that" 70% of Austrians do not approve of what the President had said that morning, that two thirds of Britons cannot see any benefit of remaining in the EU, and that France and the Netherlands voted against a European constitution. He described the European Union as a "very expensive club to belong to" and had a message for the Eastern European newcomers: "sorry - the cheque is not in the post.
Christiana MUSCARDINI (IT), speaking for the UEN group, began by declaring her full confidence in the Austrian Presidency's capacity to fulfil their promises on the EU and to deliver what the European people need. However, she advised that Europe needs a coherent economic policy with competition and openness, and that it "has to find new strengths and the will to work together" . She also urged the presidency to open up the debate on the constitution, to create a streamlined text and to have the "boldness to dare to commit to a more united Europe, with clearly defined tasks and clearly defined powers" . Ms: Muscardini demanded that the presidency consider immigration, security, energy, and the environment as its priorities for the coming term.
Hans-Peter MARTIN (NI, AT) was concerned with the financial aspects of the President's agenda, and noted that "you can do something with money" but "more money doesn't mean you can achieve something better ". He accused the Austrians of favouritism when it came to spending, alleging that 427 Austrian farmers get more than €72,000 in direct payments, and accordingly declared a need for greater transparency: "who's going to get what from the pot?". In creating this transparency he also encouraged taking a look at the media landscape as well, and advised the Austrians to put an end to their silence on domestic policy. He ended by asserting that "EU citizens would thank you for it"
British speakers
Timothy KIRKHOPE (EPP-ED, UK), leader of the British Conservative delegation in the European Parliament, welcomed the Austrian presidency and called on it to focus on the " economic reform agenda which had stalled under the last presidency ." Mr Kirkhope said he was " concerned " about some proposals from the presidency on the services directive including the plans to co-ordinate Europe's social security systems. He also urged the presidency not to alter the UK's opt-out on the working-time directive which had contributed to the UK's recent economic growth. He welcomed Chancellor Wolfgang Schüssel's comments on the European Court of Justice stating that the Court had extended its competences into areas where there was no European law. Mr Kirkhope said that it would be better if the Constitution was not " resurrected ". Europe's citizens were concerned with jobs, growth, the environment, fighting terrorism and crime in order to achieve a better quality of life.
Andrew DUFF (ALDE, UK) gave an overview of various politicians' positions on the Constitution. " President Chirac wanted piece-meal reform, Mr Zarkozy wanted a concentrated version of the Constitution, Prime Minister Juncker of Luxembourg and Prime Minister Verhofstadt of Belgium wanted a renegotiation of the Treaties, Dutch Foreign Minister Bot said the project is finished ." He asked Chancellor Schüssel which of his colleagues was right.
Response to the debate
Responding to points raised in the debate, Mr Schüssel spoke of enlargement and future for the Balkans. The choice was either to export stability or import instability: " The Balkans is a European success story. US defeated Milosevic militarily but 90 per cent of peace keeping troops there are now Europeans. This is Europe's peaceful face, not a military face ."
He called on Iran to go back to its moratorium on nuclear development and not to do anything to destabilise the situation. On energy, he repeated his position that each country must decide for itself, but called for more investment in renewable energy including biofuel, which could be an opportunity for agriculture. He called for more progress on deciding on Trans-European Networks, with at least a decision on the Brenner Pass rail link.
Human rights, he said, were indivisible. "The rule of law is indivisible. This is a major issue for us ... on CIA flights and extraordinary rendition - when law is broken, those who break it must be taken into account, but within out legal framework." He also defended his government's record on rights for minority populations in Austria.
On the labour market, he pointed out that the transitional periods had been agreed by all sides in drawing up the accession treaties, and that should be respected. Regarding the Court of Justice, he said " We need balance on respect for and implementation of community law and subsidiarity. We have national legislation and case law as well as European. The proportionality principle is also important ."
Mr Schüssel continued: " Six months of an Austrian presidency cannot change Europe forever, but can offer impulses, and bring the new Financial Perspective to life." There would be some room for manoeuvre in the negotiations, but first he needed the mandate from the Council, he said. There would be more spending on research and competitiveness than in the past, and the costs of Bulgarian and Romanian accession were already factored in. "So the realistic and practical view is that constructive dialogue can lead to agreement. I have no baton or magic flute, but nothing is as awful as revenge. The great thing is to forgive and work together for Europe ," he concluded.
President Barroso , in his response to the debate, said that the two key points of the Austrian Presidency would be the Spring European Council and the June European Council. At the Spring summit, European leaders would debate the new growth and employment strategy. At the June summit, important decisions would be taken on the future constitutional status of Europe. First, the institutions would have to agree on the EU's budget and there was some limited room for negotiations but the budget had to be ready to be implemented by 1 January 2007 otherwise the new Member States in particular would lose out. President Barroso stressed the importance of the single market and particularly the free movement of persons and said the completion of the single market should be a priority for the EU.
20060113IPR04287
EN
1
PHOTO
20060103PHT04008.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
