Parliament against air service agreement with Russia
Transport
2006-01-17 - 13:02
Parliament adopted an own-initiative report sending a clear message to Russia regarding a future air service agreement. In the report, MEPs insist that no agreement should be concluded without "the immediate and complete abolition of Russian overflight charges". A comprehensive aviation agreement between the European Union and China, however, is considered desirable.
Parliament regards the charges imposed by Russia for flights over its territory a " violation of international law ". Russia is the only country in the world where such payments are made. The annual cost of these fees for European carriers in 2003 amount to €250 million. MEPs also underline that those overflight charges have not been used for the promised improvement of air traffic control management but rather to subsidise its own airline. This is " in breach of competition law " and no comprehensive agreement should therefore be concluded without the immediate and complete abolition of Russian overflight charges.
Also, the House calls on the Commission not to conclude an agreement on the Russian Federation's accession to the World Trade Organisation while Russia continues to charge for Siberian overflights.
MEPs also oppose the Commission's approach to modernise the charging system by 2013 and to ensure that charges applied after the transition period will be transparent, cost-based and not lead to discrimination between airlines. The House, in contrast, insists that " no modified charging scheme should be agreed to replace the current overflight charging regime "
With regard to a future air service agreement with China, one of the most important aviation markets with massive annual growth rates, MEPs are in favour of a comprehensive aviation agreement. Additionally, they call on the Council to extend the Commission's negotiating mandate to cover the provision of the necessary infrastructure in Chinese airports and air traffic control over Chinese airspace. Both are " inadequate at present and pose an obstacle to the development of aviation relations. "
20060117IPR04389 Relations with the Russian Federation and China in the field of air transport
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5247562
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
