Stricter control of mining waste - conciliation approved
Environment
2006-01-18 - 13:50
Parliament voted to approve the conciliation agreement on mining waste. With over 400 million tonnes of waste per year, the European mining industry accounts for around 30% of all waste generated in the EU. Following an agreement reached in conciliation between the European Parliament and the Council, this waste will soon be managed according to rules laid down in a new European directive.
Mining waste is often produced in large quantities and storing it can be hazardous, either because of the sometimes defective techniques used or because it can contain polluting substances such as heavy metals or cyanide. The EU directive was drafted in the wake of the accident in 2000 at Baia Mare in Romania, where quantities of waste water spilled into a river, taking with them 120 tonnes of cyanide. The pollution spread as far as Hungary and into the Danube. In 1998 a similar accident spilled heavy metals in Andalusia. Other disasters, involving landslides, have occurred in Italy in 1985 (268 dead) and Wales in 1966 (144 dead).
The European Parliament had to go to conciliation, the last stage of the codecision procedure, to make the Council accept its main demands. On 29 November the EP delegation to the conciliation committee unanimously approved a deal reached by its negotiators with the Council. The permanent representatives of the Member States had approved the deal on 23 November. If the full Parliament approves this new text, the Member States will then have two years to enact the directive in national law.
Parliament's rapporteur Jonas SJÖSTEDT (GUE/NGL, SE) welcomed the outcome of the conciliation talks: "The new legislation imposes much tougher requirements on several EU Member States and applicant states. Dangerous tailings dams with high concentrations of cyanide, such as in the accident in Baia Mare in Romania, will no longer be allowed. The industry will have to restore the sites of mining activities and provide financial guarantees that they can do this." He added: "With the new directive it will be possible to reduce leaks, not least into water, both from mines in use today and from old closed-down sites".
Dagmar ROTH-BEHRENDT (PES, DE), chair of the EP delegation and vice-president of Parliament, said: "The agreement reached includes a clear guarantee from Bulgaria and Romania that they are ready to take over this part of the body of Community law (the acquis) in the environmental field. The accident a few days ago involving a spillage of cyanide into the Cisla river in Romania underlines the importance - especially in the accession states - of this piece of legislation."
This accident, which was far less serious than that of 2000, happened on 26 November. It is the third of its kind in five years in the same region of Romania with potentially harmful consequences reaching as far as Hungary. MEPs therefore welcomed the fact that the agreement includes a joint statement by Bulgaria and Romania in which these two candidate countries undertake to meet the deadlines laid down for the implementation of the new EU legislation.
Tougher rules on financial guarantees
Thanks to MEPs, the financial guarantees will have to cover not only the waste facility itself but also the land affected by the waste facility; funds must be readily available at any given time for the rehabilitation of the land affected by the waste facility; and the size of the guarantee must be periodically adjusted in accordance with any rehabilitation work needing to be carried out as described in the waste management plan.
Operators must respect the principle of sustainable development. Several aspects of waste management have been tightened up, in particular where the operator places the waste back in excavation voids in order to restore the site. This type of rehabilitation must adhere to strict rules to prevent any contamination of soil and water. In addition, controls, maintenance and corrective measures must be carried out by the operator, who must for example collect and process contaminated water and leachate.
Parliament successfully pushed for the Member States to be required to compile inventories of closed sites, even abandoned ones, so as to identify those most dangerous to the environment and health. These inventories of "historic" waste now included in the legislation will provide a basis for defining measures to be taken in future.
20060113IPR04282 Management of waste from extractive industries
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=233682
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
