MEPs call for zero tolerance to all forms of violence against women
Women's rights/Equal opportunities
2006-02-02 - 12:23
EP urges action to fight violence against women
MEPs voiced their concern about gender-based violence, a problem that affects women of any age, irrespective of education, income or social position, by adopting an own-initiative report asking for "zero tolerance to all forms of violence against women" and proposing EU measures to raise awareness and overcome this complex problem.
The report drafted by Maria CARLSHARME (ALDE, SE) was adopted with 545 votes in favour, 13 against and 56 abstentions. It states that " large-scale prevalence studies in Sweden, Germany and Finland show that at least 30-35% of women between 16 and 67 have at one time been victims of physical or sexual violence" and "surveys show that 65-90 % of prostituted women had already been subjected to sexual abuse as children or later ".
MEPs say that male violence against women should be regarded as a " violation of human rights reflecting unequal gender power relations ". " Unequal distribution of power lies at the root of all violence against women " according to them. They stress that there is a need for proactive and preventive strategies aimed at the perpetrators and those at risk of becoming perpetrators
Parliament urges the Member States to " recognise marital sexual violence as a crime and make rape within marriage a criminal offence ," " not to accept any reference to cultural practice as an extenuating circumstance in cases of men's violence against women such as in crimes of honour and genital mutilation," "to ensure victims' right to safe access to justice " and "to take account of the fact that children who witness their mothers being battered could be regarded as victims."
MEPs stress that preventing and banning female genital mutilation and prosecuting perpetrators must become a priority in all relevant European Union policies and programmes. The report calls on the Commission " to devise a comprehensive strategic approach at European level with the aim of putting an end to the practice of female genital mutilation in the European Union."
There is not enough data available on men's violence against women and so the report calls for a harmonised methodology and the appointment of national rapporteurs to gather information, establishment of a single system of recording instances of assault by all the competent authorities and appropriate education and training for professionals responsible for recording incidents.
MEPs call on the Member States to provide all necessary support to the victims. They also call for specific employment action programmes for the victims of gender-based violence, so as to enable them to enter the labour market and achieve financial independence. The House also says that marginalisation and poverty are basic causes for prostitution and of increased trafficking in women.
In the debate before the vote the rapporteur stressed that there is an urgent need for more studies about violence against women. " Obviously effective measures must be based on correct facts and figures ," she underlined. In her opinion " the magnitude of the problem in itself indicates that all Member States are repeatedly violating the basic rules of civil liberties and the rule of law on a scale that we are yet to understand". What we need to do now is to act. The issue of men's violence against women is not a small issue on the fringe of society, it affects us all. I demand zero tolerance of men's violence against wom en," Mrs Carlshamre concluded.
To mark International Women's Day 2005 (8 March), the European Parliament held a range of events to highlight the problem of violence against women. For more information see the link below to the background note " Turning the spotlight on violence against women ".
20060131IPR04892 Turning the spotlight on violence against women
EN
1
PHOTO
20060201PHT04921.jpg
-//EP//TEXT PRESS BI-20050302-1 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
