Opening of Session and highlights of the Strasbourg plenary
Institutions
2006-02-13 - 18:18
After months of debate outside and inside European Parliament and hundreds of amendments, the plan to open up services to competition is set to be debated at Tuesday's plenary amid public demonstrations. Also on this week's agenda is the growing tension between Iran and the international community over the nuclear issue and a debate on freedom of speech and respect for religious faiths in the wake of the cartoons controversy.
Highlights
At the opening of the session Parliament made one change to the previously published agenda: there will now be a vote on motions for resolution to follow up Wednesday's debate on the right to freedom of expression and respect for religious belief.
The undoubted highlight of this week's plenary session in Strasbourg will be the debate and vote on the Services Directive on Tuesday 14 and Thursday 16 February respectively. Plans to facilitate the provision of services in the EU single market could take a major step forward at Parliament, when MEPs will debate and vote on a first reading report tabled by Evelyne GEBHARDT (PES, DE) for the Internal market Committee. On Wednesday, 8 February, representatives of the two largest political groups reached a draft compromise on some of the key aspects of the directive based on a newly defined principle of " freedom to provide services ." The debate takes place at 3pm on Tuesday, 14 February.
A large demonstration is expected to take place in Strasbourg on 14 February.
On Monday 13 February, the session begins with a debate on a report on welfare standards for chicken farms. MEPs will also be debating the effect of globalisation on the internal market with a call for the EU-15 to open up their labour markets to the 10 new Member States. Michael CASHMAN (PES, UK) will be putting forward an own-initiative report on the confiscation of vehicles by the Greek authorities. Arlene McCARTHY (PES, UK) will also be putting a question on increasing funding for SOLVIT the on-line problem-solving network hosted by the European Commission, facilitates administrative cooperation between Member States.
Tuesday 14 February, starts with a debate on the enforcement of the human rights and democracy clause in EU agreements. Catherine STIHLER (PES, UK) will be putting forward a non-binding report on fisheries, specifically the Shetland Box and Plaice Box, calling for them to be extended for a further three years.
On Wednesday morning, Parliament will discuss the furore surrounding the publication of cartoons featuring the Prophet Mohamed. There will then be Council and Commission statements on the confrontation between Iran and the International Community and the outlook for Bosnia Herzegovina. At the opening of the session Parliament made one change to the previously published agenda: there will now be a vote on motions for resolution to follow up Wednesday's debate on the right to freedom of expression and respect for religious belief.
At midday on Wednesday 15 February, Dr. Heinz FISCHER , the President of Austria, will address the House in a formal sitting.
On Wednesday evening, Mairead McGUINNESS (EPP-ED, IE) will present her report on strategic guidelines for rural development for 2007-2013.
On Thursday morning at 10am, the House will vote on its first reading report on services in the internal market. The session will end as usual with three short debates on human rights matters, this time concerning Azerbaijan, Sri Lanka and Guantanamo Bay.
20060209IPR05096
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
