Cartoons controversy: respect freedom of expression and religious feelings, say MEPs
Fundamental rights
2006-02-16 - 13:37
MEPs stand up for free speech
Freedom of expression and independence of the press are "universal rights" but ones which must be "exercised with responsibility", "within the limits of the law" and with "respect for religious feelings and beliefs". That was the message Parliament delivered in a joint resolution. In the wake of the furore which has surrounded the publication of cartoons of the Prophet Mohammed in some European newspapers.
MEPs also expressed solidarity with Denmark and condemned the burning down of embassies of EU Member States.
In the resolution, the European Parliament " condemns in the strongest possible terms the burning down of embassies of EU Member States ( ...), deplores the failure of some governments to prevent violence and that other governments have tolerated violent attacks ". Furthermore, the Parliament " strongly regrets that there seems to be organised extremist groups both in Europe and in the Muslim world which see an advantage in escalating the present tensions and using the cartoons as a pretext for incitement to violence and discrimination ". Some of the protests and violent unrest had been " orchestrated ", MEPs said.
Support for Denmark
MEPs also expressed their " full support and solidarity " with Denmark and recalled Article 11 of the Treaty of European Union, which establishes that Member States shall support the Union's external and security policy " actively and unreservedly in a spirit of loyalty and mutual solidarity ". Boycott against one Member State is in contradiction with trade agreements concluded with the EU as a whole, MEPs stressed.
Regret for anti-Semitic propaganda
Parliament also " regrets the renewed and increased anti-Semitic and anti-Israeli propaganda in some Arab countries and Iran. The House points out that in these countries degrading and humiliating cartoons of Jews are regularly printed, thus showing they obviously do not apply the same standards to all religious communities ".
Finally, the resolution recalls that the Euro Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly (APEM) " is the appropriate forum " for promoting dialogue and working together with the southern bank of the Mediterranean countries and called for its next session (26-27 of March) " to deal with this problem as a priority ".
20060214IPR05267 MEPs debate freedom of expression and respect for religious beliefs
EN
1
PHOTO
20060215PHT05305.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060214IPR05265 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
