Environment Committee debates air quality and Austrian presidency's programme
Environment
2006-01-31 - 17:51
With several European countries experiencing high levels of pollution as a result of the wintry weather, MEPs on Tuesday embarked on a - highly critical - examination of two new pieces of legislation on air quality and also had a discussion with the Austrian presidency.
As a result of the low temperatures and the intensive use of fossil fuels, easterly winds have dumped large quantities of polluting particles on western areas of the EU in recent days. Thus, the two legislative proposals discussed by Members of the Environment Committee on Tuesday were topics that were very much "in the air". The first was a directive on ambient air quality and cleaner air for Europe and the second was a thematic strategy on air pollution.
The committee chair, Karl-Heinz Florenz (EPP-ED, DE), set the tone by sharply criticising the fact that the two topics had arrived together. He thought it would be better to agree first on a strategy and then define the instruments - i.e. directives - to implement it. "How can we accept the approach of the Commission, which submits to us an overall strategy that has not been debated, followed immediately by a directive? I will never be able to sell this kind of thing to my voters in the Ruhr" .
The rapporteur for the thematic strategy, Dorette Corbey (PES, NL), cited some figures: 48,000 premature deaths attributed to small particles in the EU, 20,000 to ozone, 30 million Europeans who suffer from asthma. She asked, like many other MEPs, why the draft directive put forward such modest targets when the impact study showed that even the most ambitious goals would have a positive impact on health budgets without costing jobs. Holger Krahmer (ALDE, DE), rapporteur on the directive, stressed the scientific uncertainty surrounding the project. As to Satu Hassi (Greens/EFA, FI), she said the Commission's proposals had been received "with horror by European scientists" . Several MEPs called for a public hearing to be held to look into the scientific basis of the proposals and to define better the measures to be taken.
Minister and president not to be confused
It was amid this atmosphere that the Austrian Environment Minister Josef Pröll arrived to debate the priorities for his country's presidency of the EU. He stressed that even though growth and competitiveness were the central policy areas, the other pillars of the Lisbon strategy - environmental sustainability and social development - would not be neglected. The link between growth and the environment would be a key focus of the informal Council on the environment in May. He said that air quality, in particular, would be a "central issue" of the Austrian presidency along with measures to encourage cleaner vehicles.
Some people believed the Commission was too cautious on the environment and Mr Pröll thought it needed to be more ambitious. However, he made a clear distinction between his views as an Austrian environment minister and the positions he expressed as president-in-office of the Council. It was in the latter capacity that he spoke when he noted that for some Member States the Commission's thematic strategies already went too far. Regarding the financial perspective for 2007-2013, he warned MEPs: "Let me be frank. I know that this budget does not match your wishes. We will try to reach a compromise with you. But if we fail, it will not be possible to fund the programmes scheduled from 2007. That applies to Life+" (the special financial instrument for the environment).
Among other priorities, Mr Pröll mentioned the fight against climate change and floods, the thematic strategies on the urban environment and waste management, an action plan for the protection of farm animals (a conference takes place in Brussels in March) and better management of GMOs (conference scheduled for Vienna in April).
2006-01-30 Chair of Committee on the Environment Karl-Heinz Florenz EPP-ED DE
20060131IPR04882
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
