Brussels Plenary - 1-2 February 2006
Institutions
2006-02-02 - 13:08
Summary of various debates and results of main votes
Chorzów tragedy and Slovak air crash - House observes one minute's silence
Road transport - final deal approved - digital tachographs in May 2006
Palestinian elections: MEPs call for new government to renounce violence and recognise Israel
Rules on nominal quantities for pre-packed products: MEPs back deregulation of pre-packed product sizes
EPs call for zero tolerance to all forms of violence against women
Control of EU funds: MEPs want Member States to account for all monies
20060131BKG04855
Chorzów tragedy and Slovak air-crash - minute of silence
Opening the plenary, President BORRELL made reference to two recent tragic events: the crash of a Slovak army plane carrying peacekeepers from the NATO force in Kosovo on Thursday 19 January; and the accident that occurred on Saturday 28 January in Chorzów, when the roof of an exhibition hall collapsed and 62 people died.
On behalf of the European Parliament, President Borrell expressed his solidarity and condolences to the victims' families. He mentioned that both the Slovakian and Polish flags were flying at half-mast and that he had sent a letter of condolences to both Heads of State.
The House then observed one minute of silence.
Fewer driving hours mean fewer accidents - final deal approved - digital tachographs in May 2006
Road accidents caused by driver fatigue should be reduced after Parliament approved measures that will lead to all new trucks and buses in the European Union being fitted with digital tachographs from 1 May 2006. The measure will carefully monitor the hours the vehicle is driven and form part of a package of road safety legislation approved by Parliament that includes for the first time a list of common serious road safety infringements
The package approved after a conciliation agreement concerns two related proposals:
First a regulation on working time, breaks and rest periods for drivers engaged in road transport of goods and passengers; and second, a Directive on the enforcement of the relevant legislation through checks and penalties.
Major points of disagreement between Parliament and Council, affecting both the Regulation and the Directive, concerned the introduction of a common spectrum of penalties for infringements of the relevant legislation, as well as the inclusion of the road transport into the Working Time Directive so that the time a driver spends driving to his place of assignment and/or to (un)load his lorry could also be taken into account. Other key issues concerned the introduction of digital tachographs (which are more difficult to falsify than non-digital tachographs), the number of minimum checks to be carried out by Member States and rest periods and breaks for drivers. Conciliation opened formally on 12 October 2005. The key points of the agreement reached by the Conciliation Committee on 6 December 2005 were:
• from May 2006, all new vehicles will have to be fitted with digital tachographs;
• higher levels of checks will be introduced a year earlier than originally proposed;
• a list of common serious infringements was agreed and the Commission undertook to draw-up in the future a more detailed list of common infringements;
• recitals acknowledging the risks arising from driver fatigue and the importance of the Working Time Directive for the creation of a common market for road safety and for working conditions were included in the text;
• Council and Parliament disagreed on the length of a compulsory daily rest period for drivers: in order not to block the legislation, Parliament finally accepted the figure (11 hours) proposed by Council.
In more detail:
1) Rest periods for drivers
Parliament and Council had disagreed on the definition of a compulsory regulatory daily rest period for drivers. Council wanted this to mean an uninterrupted period of rest of at least 11 hours. Parliament would have preferred 12 hours but finally accepted the Council's figure in order not to block the legislation.
However, it was agreed that this rest period may, as an alternative, be taken in two periods, the first an interrupted period of at least 3 hours and the second an uninterrupted period of at least 9 hours.
2) Minimum checks
At Parliament's insistence, the Council also had to accept that checks carried out by Member States should be increased from 2008 to at least 2% of days worked by drivers falling within the scope of the new legislation, and to at least 3% from 2010. The Council had originally proposed 2% from 2009 and 3% from 2011.
3) Common infringements and penalties
Council could not accept any reference to the harmonisation of penalties, arguing that penalties were a matter for the Member States. Nevertheless at Parliament's insistence, the Council finally agreed to the introduction of a list of common infringements in the annex to the directive. In a declaration issued by the Commission the latter undertakes to provide a detailed list in future, which will be based on proposals by Parliament. Thus, serious infringements against the new regulation will include the following: exceeding the maximum daily, six-day or fortnightly driving time limits by a margin of 20% or more; disregarding the minimum daily or weekly rest period by a margin of 20% or more, disregarding the minimum break by a margin of 33% or more and using a tachograph not fitted in accordance with the requirements of the regulation.
4) Working Time Directive
On this issue, the Council stuck to its common position and refused to accept the inclusion, as Parliament wanted, of a reference to the Working Time Directive (Directive 2002/15/EC on the organisation of the working time of persons performing mobile road transport activities), so that a link could be established with the new legislation. All compromise proposals tabled by the EP delegation on this issue were turned down by the Council and this proved the most difficult issue to solve.
The two institutions finally agreed to include, in the recitals (the preamble) to the new directive, a reference to the importance of the Working Time Directive for the creation of a common market for road safety and for working conditions, and to include in the same directive a new recital stating that the risks from driver fatigue should also be addressed through enforcement of the Working Time Directive.
Comments by EP delegation
Parliament's delegation leader, Vice-President Alejo VIDAL-QUADRAS (EPP-ED, ES), said the outcome of this conciliation agreement was a fair compromise between the two institutions. Rapporteur Helmuth MARKOV (GUE/NGL, DE), however, voted against the final compromise, explaining that he could not accept the conciliation agreement as long as it did not establish a clear link between the new legislation and the Working Time Directive.
Background
The aim of the regulation on driving times, breaks and rest periods, which will abrogate and replace Regulation 3820/85/EC is to update, clarify and simplify the EU legislation for drivers engaged in the carriage of goods and passengers by road.
The accompanying directive dealing with checks and penalties will abrogate and replace Directive 88/599/EC and update and enhance the quality and quantity of enforcement operations relating to road transport activities.
Text adopted
Palestinian elections: MEPs call for new government to renounce violence and recognise Israel
Reacting to the landslide victory by Hamas in the Palestinian elections on 25 January, MEPs said they want the EU to remain the biggest aid donor to the Palestinian Authority, on condition that the new Palestinian government renounces violence and recognises the state of Israel.
The new Palestinian parliament and government were urged to commit themselves to peaceful negotiations on a two-state solution in cooperation with the Quartet consisting of the EU, UN, US and Russia and to the present achievements of the Road Map.
In a resolution adopted by a raise of hands, MEPs welcomed the smooth and peaceful running of the elections. The resulting " radicalisation of the political arena in Palestine " was seen by the Parliament as reflecting strong grievances against the past Palestinian administration as well as a reaction to difficult living conditions under occupation. Therefore, the EU should continue to assist Palestinian economic development and the democratic process, while the international community should focus on resolving the many outstanding issues in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, in order to prevent further radicalisation. One of these issues being East-Jerusalem, MEPs called for a stop to the discriminatory treatment of Palestinian residents and for the re-opening of the Palestinian institutions in East-Jerusalem. In this respect, MEPs referred to a report drawn up by the EU Heads of Mission in Jerusalem and Ramallah on the situation in East Jerusalem, especially on the consequences of the building of the security barrier.
During the debate on 1 February 2006 that preceded the vote, Austrian Minister WINKLER for the EU Presidency said:
" The election took place in due order, the result reflects the will of the people. There is nothing to contest there. The Presidency responded directly and the Council and Quartet have stated identical principles. We made clear that the international community continues to talk about the recognition of Israel and the conditions for lasting conclusion to conflict. We expect unequivocal support for the principles listed - international support for the Palestinian Authority is linked to espousing these principles. We should remind Israel and the Palestinian Authority of their road map commitments. The new Palestinian Legislative Council will need to work towards peaceful resolution of conflict. The EU is willing to continue to support democracy and building of society in Palestine. We should not rush to conclusions. The EU and others should be willing to continue support, providing the preconditions are fulfilled ."
Commissioner Ferrero Waldner said: " We supported these elections with funding and by sending 240 observers. We have made a major commitment to building democratic institutions in the Palestinian territories. Should we now abandon them because we do not like the election results? No, on the contrary, we should call for everyone to respect the outcome. We are ready to work with a government that seeks peace by peaceful means - by which we mean a clear commitment to non-violence, a recognition of the state of Israel and acceptance of the previous commitments of the Palestinian Authority, including the Road Map and the Oslo agreement ." She added that the Commission was ready to continue providing support to the Palestinian authority for the interim period until a new government was formed."
Edward McMillan-Scott (EPP-ED, UK), leader of the EP's Election Observation Delegation, said: " We heard the clamour for choice and change in Palestine. We heard the noise of democracy. As one of my colleagues said, the process was perfect, people went freely to polls, polling stations were well organised, Israeli forces mostly kept out of way. The result reflected the wish of the people. The product reflects despair of Fatah rather than love of Hamas. Certainly the Hamas people we met were not very loveable. We are about to see emergence there and in other parts of the Arab world of a new fundamentalist, Islamist politics. We must work together, but I worry that we have imparted process but not the values of democracy that go with the process - the rule of law, human rights and respect for minorities ."
Veronique de Keyser (PES, BE), Chief EU Election Observer, said: " We now have the difficult task of respecting their choice. They have chosen change and not necessarily radical Islamism. They want to make a success of the peace process. We should all avoid the temptation of unilateralism... Whatever circumstances prevail, we should make a distinction between the Palestinian government and the people who should not be held hostage by their electoral choices. There must be a way to cover their basic needs or we are heading for disaster ." Text adopted
One size doesn't fit all: MEPs back deregulation of pre-packed product sizes - no threat to pint of milk
The European Parliament gave its qualified approval to newly proposed legislation aimed at deregulating package sizes for pre-packed products. Once implemented, the law is certain to affect a wide range of products available to all European consumers.
By deregulating current rules on packaging for all but a few basic product groups (i.e. repealing all existing pack sizes currently under optional harmonisation and consolidating existing legislation in a single act), the Commission aims to optimise competition for industry and to ensure freedom of choice for consumers. The legislation, if adopted, would give industry the opportunity to produce -- and customers the chance to buy -- goods in a potentially infinite range of sizes. In doing so, it would simultaneously prevent Member States from legislating on pack sizes other than those still regulated by EC law.
Such across-the-board deregulation, in the Commission's view, is in line with its global aim of simplifying internal market legislation. As Commissioner Günter VERHEUGEN saw it, “from a legal point of view, the [current] situation is, to put it mildly, quite confusing.”
However, argued committee rapporteur Jacques TOUBON ( EPP-ED, FR) during a Committee debate, "better regulation" should not necessarily mean "no regulation at all". Fellow MEPs agreed and, while welcoming the Commission's initiative, decided to cut away at some of its scope. While the Commission had proposed to retain mandatory sizes for only a handful of goods (spirits, wines, soluble coffee, white sugar and most products sold in aerosols), committee members voted to retain them for six other product groups: drinking milk, butter, ground or unground roasted coffee, dried pasta, rice and brown sugar. Products such as these, as staples of the average consumer's diet, should only be sold in a restricted number of sizes, argued MEPs -- otherwise, consumers (especially the most disadvantaged ones) risk being misled into buying a cheaper bottle of milk or a cheaper stick of butter without realising that it contains a smaller volume. Selling milk in a limited range of quantities where the metric system is place -- and in quantities of 1/3, 1/2, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 pints (in the 1/3 - 6 pint range) where the system of imperial units is in place -- the Parliament believes, would help eliminate such a risk. British Conservative MEP Malcolm HARBOUR noted " a certain amount of entirely misleading controversy ” in the British press on this proposal, especially " about the loss of the traditional British pint ".
The Parliament also voted to exclude " pre-packed bread, spreadable fats or tea " from the scope of the directive. For these products, national rules on nominal quantities will continue to apply.
Whereas the Commission had pushed for a 20-year limit on all such derogations, MEPs adopted a more flexible approach, introducing a clause that would oblige the Commission to revisit the legislation after eight years. This, they claimed, is a more appropriate solution, given that no-one today can possibly predict the market conditions in 2025.
The Commission proposal, as amended, was passed by a very wide majority. It will now be up to the Council to present a common position on the directive. Text adopted
MEPs call for zero tolerance to all forms of violence against women
MEPs voiced their concern about gender-based violence, a problem that affects women of any age, irrespective of education, income or social position, by adopting an own-initiative report asking for " zero tolerance to all forms of violence against women " and proposing EU measures to raise awareness and overcome this complex problem.
The report drafted by Maria CARLSHARME (ALDE, SE) was adopted with 545 votes in favour, 13 against and 56 abstentions. It states that " large-scale prevalence studies in Sweden, Germany and Finland show that at least 30-35% of women between 16 and 67 have at one time been victims of physical or sexual violence " and " surveys show that 65-90 % of prostituted women had already been subjected to sexual abuse as children or later ".
MEPs say that male violence against women should be regarded as a "violation of human rights reflecting unequal gender power relations". " Unequal distribution of power lies at the root of all violence against women " according to them. They stress that there is a need for proactive and preventive strategies aimed at the perpetrators and those at risk of becoming perpetrators
Parliament urges the Member States to " recognise marital sexual violence as a crime and make rape within marriage a criminal offence ," " not to accept any reference to cultural practice as an extenuating circumstance in cases of men's violence against women such as in crimes of honour and genital mutilation ," " to ensure victims' right to safe access to justice" and "to take account of the fact that children who witness their mothers being battered could be regarded as victims ."
MEPs stress that preventing and banning female genital mutilation and prosecuting perpetrators must become a priority in all relevant European Union policies and programmes. The report calls on the Commission " to devise a comprehensive strategic approach at European level with the aim of putting an end to the practice of female genital mutilation in the European Union ."
There is not enough data available on men's violence against women and so the report calls for a harmonised methodology and the appointment of national rapporteurs to gather information, establishment of a single system of recording instances of assault by all the competent authorities and appropriate education and training for professionals responsible for recording incidents.
MEPs call on the Member States to provide all necessary support to the victims. They also call for specific employment action programmes for the victims of gender-based violence, so as to enable them to enter the labour market and achieve financial independence. The House also says that marginalisation and poverty are basic causes for prostitution and of increased trafficking in women.
In the debate before the vote the rapporteur stressed that there is an urgent need for more studies about violence against women. " Obviously effective measures must be based on correct facts and figures," she underlined. In her opinion "the magnitude of the problem in itself indicates that all Member States are repeatedly violating the basic rules of civil liberties and the rule of law on a scale that we are yet to understand ". What we need to do now is to act. The issue of men's violence against women is not a small issue on the fringe of society, it affects us all. I demand zero tolerance of men's violence against women," Mrs Carlshamre concluded.
To mark International Women's Day 2005 (8 March), the European Parliament held a range of events to highlight the problem of violence against women. For more information see the link below to the background note "Turning the spotlight on violence against women".
Text adopted Turning the spotlight on violence against women
Control of EU funds: MEPs want Member States to account for all monies
President-in-Office of the EU Council and Austrian Secretary of State Hans WINKLER remained cautious in his response to an oral question on " national management declarations ". Beyond this rather technical term hides Parliament's firm intention to place Member States on track for an improved system of controls for EU funds.
" I know you are expecting more ", Mr Winkler said, " but so far I can only say that Council has accepted to look at the ideas contained in the Commission's "roadmap to an integrated control framework ".
Commissioner Siim KALLAS has recently launched an ambitious plan to ensure regularity and reliability of payments made from the EU budget.
Authors of this Oral Question on the 2004 discharge rapporteur Jan MULDER (ALDE, NL), his 2003 counter-part Terry WYNN (PES, UK), Budgetary control chair Szabolcs FAZAKAS (PES, HU), as well as Javier Pomez RUIZ (EPP-ED, ES), all voiced their concern at the Member States' lack of action to tackle this problem, which has badly undermined taxpayers' confidence in the EU.
Parliament is likely to re-examine this issue in the course of the 2004 EU budget discharge, up for adoption by the Plenary on 27 April in Brussels. Meanwhile, MEPs adopted a resolution which welcomes the Commission's efforts, on the one hand, but singled out Member States on the other as regards the need to see " better controls rather than more controls " and " assurance coming from national authorities "
Without a major improvement of controls, "the Commission will not be in the position to obtain adequate information on the legality and regularity of transactions", the resolution argues. The relevant political authorities should also "take full responsibility" for the funds placed at their disposal.
Back in November 2005, MEPs stated that they were tired of hearing the same explanation for the 11th year running when the Court of Auditors failed to report a positive Declaration of Assurance (DAS), because of the " scope for doubt in the reliability of underlying operations ".
Parliament has tied this issue with the ongoing talks on the next Financial Perspective and remain hopeful that a breakthrough will be found in due course for improved control systems of EU funds.
Text adopted
MEPs criticise lack of information from Council on foreign policy
In a wide-ranging report on the EU's common foreign and security policy, MEPs express annoyance at the lack of consultation and information from the Council, and are proposing to see if legal action can be taken.
They ask Parliament's Legal Affairs Committee to see whether action can be taken against the Council at the European Court of Justice for a breach of Article 21 of the EU Treaty, which explicitly states that Parliament must be consulted "on the main aspects and the basic choices of the common foreign and security policy" and that its views must be taken into account. MEPs also call on the Council High Representative, Javier Solana, to participate actively in the annual debate on the CFSP. The Council should report to the Foreign Affairs Committee on every Foreign Ministers Council meeting and high-level summit with key international partners. More generally, MEPs say that the future priorities of the CFSP should be the Mediterranean, the Near and Middle East, the Balkans, Eastern Europe and relations with the US, as well as conflict situations, the promotion of peace, security in all its aspects, the fight against terrorism, disarmament and the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. MEPs believe security also includes aspects such as energy, climate change and the spread of poverty. The EU should update its Security Policies with a view to addressing its increasing dependence on energy from ever more unstable countries and regions; the recent unilateral gas delivery suspensions by Russia call for a strategic response from the EU. MEPs call for a solution to the future status of Kosovo which respects its territorial integrity, upholds minority rights and does not endanger the EU's overall policy for the Balkans. The EU should try and achieve an agreement between the political forces and public opinion in Bosnia-Herzegovina for going beyond the Dayton accords in order to rationalise the institutional architecture and create a more efficient and self-sustainable state. Special attention should be given to the development of Africa. MEPs expressed their deep concern over the large-scale war crimes and human rights violations "which can be construed as genocide" in Darfur. Parliament asks the Council to examine carefully the possibility of sending a military mission to Congo as a contribution to the security of upcoming elections in Congo. Parliament criticises the present partnership with Russia as reflecting "common economic interests without achieving any progress as regards human rights and the rule of law". The EU policy towards Belarus has achieved few results, MEPs state; therefore new measures should be proposed to strengthen links with the people of Belarus. MEPs also express their hope that Russia will take a more transparent and even-handed approach towards the EU's and Russia's common neighbours. Relations with China should be advanced in such a way that progress is also made on human rights and democracy. MEPs call on the Council to renew efforts for a revival of negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians and to set up a comprehensive strategy for the broader region of the Middle East. Regarding Afghanistan, MEPs warn that ISAF's reconstruction mission should not be merged with the US Enduring Freedom operation. Finally, Parliament recommends that joint costs for military operations in the framework of the European Security and Defence Policy should come from the Community budget, doing away with the current Member States' subsidiary budgets. This should also be the case for any future ESDP operations in the fight against terrorism. Parliament deplores Council's position for the Financial Perspective, the EU's long-term budget until 2013, which would cut spending on external actions and policies. This sends out the wrong signal on the EU's policy priorities and its willingness to deliver results in the CFSP. Text adopted
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert.do#
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert.do#
EN
3
LINK
/activities/expert.do#
EN
4
LINK
/activities/expert.do#
EN
6
LINK
/activities/expert.do#
EN
7
LINK
/activities/expert.do#
-//EP//TEXT PRESS BI-20050302-1 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
