MEPs call on Member States to open up their labour markets
Research and innovation
2006-02-14 - 13:28
The European Parliament gave wide approval to an own-initiative report on the effects of globalisation on the Internal Market, drafted by Edit Herczog (PES, HU) on the heels of a public hearing held last October.
Noting that the EU, over the past few years, has been facing challenges to retain its leading position in areas such as economic growth, labour market performance, research and innovation, MEPs argue that the key to solving these problems lies in the completion of the internal market, " the EU's strongest asset to maximise the advantages of globalisation ". In calling for bold steps to complete the internal market the report " applauds those Member States which have opened up their labour markets for citizens from the new Member States " and " urges those Member States which still maintain restrictions in this regard to eliminate existing obstacles to the free movement of labour ". As a Commission official observed during a debate at committee level, -- and as MEPs went on to contend in their report -- the EU must ensure that the internal market "remains an attractive place to invest". At the same time, as the Parliament states, a flexible and globally-oriented internal market should go hand in hand with efforts "to deliver growth, jobs, social justice and respect for ecological balance while maintaining [Europe's] values and [its] social model."
As Konrad Szymański (UEN, PL) saw it, Thursday's vote on the controversial services directive will be the "first test of our true intentions". The vote, he underlined, will give the EP "a chance to show whether it wants a genuine internal market ".
If Globalisation is the question...
" Protectionism is not the answer ," argued Commissioner for the Internal Market and Services Charlie McCreevy , speaking before the plenary. As international integration accelerates, he remarked, "the concept of open markets and a globalising economy have come under attack." " I am not denying that many industries go through difficult and sometimes painful transitions " he added, noting "legitimate" concerns about globalisation, " but it does no good to try to shift the balance elsewhere – foreign takeovers, cheap imports, and migrant workers ".
Lisbon not enough
Noting the EU's struggle to attain the goals set forth by the Lisbon Agenda, MEPs assert that the Lisbon Strategy, as a general economic plan, " may not be enough to handle globalisation ". It is for this reason that the Parliament -- citing the Globalisation Adjustment Fund as an example -- calls for " other action lines " to cushion the negative effects, and to take advantage of the positive effects, of globalisation.
Securing the EU's competitive advantage
As Mrs. Herczog had remarked during last year's public hearing, the EU, if it wishes to compete in the know-how sector, must be able not only to generate, but also to safeguard, knowledge and innovation. Patents, copyright laws and anti-piracy policies are fundamental in this context. To that end, the present report underlines the importance of " clear labelling rules and observance of denominations of origin as means of guaranteeing the protection of European goods and values ". Intellectual and industrial property rights must be secured, the Parliament insists -- through the setting up of patenting schemes or the implementation of effective controls on counterfeiting.
20060209IPR05132 The effect of globalisation on the internal market
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5211262
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
