MEPs infuriated by Commission's draft agreement for Financial Perspective
Budget
2006-02-02 - 18:58
Members of the Budgets Committee severely criticised the European Commission on Thursday for submitting a draft Inter-Institutional Agreement on the 2007-2013 Financial Perspective which largely ignores Parliament's demands. MEPs also raised doubts about the Commission's role in the negotiations.
Budgets Committee chair Janusz Lewandowski (EPP-ED, PL) expressed his concern at the Commission's draft Inter-Institutional Agreement (IIA), which he described as " very little help in the current context ". This draft IIA underpins the next Financial Perspective as a whole and must be agreed by Parliament and Council to close the deal.
Parliament's rapporteur on Financial Perspective Reimer Böge (EPP-ED, DE) urged the Commission to " come up with a revised IIA ". If that request is ignored, then " Parliament would have no choice but to present its own revised version at the next trilateral meeting ", set for 21 February. Mr Böge said he did not understand why " the EP's priorities had been neglected by the Commission ", nor why the IIA " contained solely elements from last December's European Council ".
Mr Böge also explained that he had expected "a little more support from the Commission ".
Similar criticism came from Budgets Committee vice-chair Ralf Walter (PES, DE): " This Commission proposal for a new IIA does not deserve our support. Why are Parliament's requests less important than those of Council? This is unacceptable" , he argued.
Greens/EFA coordinator Helga Trüpel (DE) joined the chorus of criticism: " It looks as if the Commission is swinging from one position to another in the FP debate. There has been no consistency from the College in the last few months. It's pointless to carry on like that if the Commission is not a serious partner".
The Commission had revised upwards some key elements such as the " flexibility instrument " (from €200m currently to €700m per year for 2007-2013) in its draft Inter-Institutional Agreement, unveiled yesterday. Yet MEPs had expected more support from the Commission for other items, such as the inclusion of a number of extra reserves and a firm commitment to involve Parliament in the revision of the EU Budget in 2008-09.
2006-02-02 Committee on Budgets Chair Janusz Lewandowski EPP-ED PL
20060202IPR04980
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
