Parliaments on the road to Lisbon
Employment policy
2006-02-01 - 14:44
National parliamentarians from the EU Member States and candidate countries met with MEPs over two days to assess progress made on the Lisbon strategy, which is intended to boost the EU's economic competitiveness. Topics under discussion included budgetary issues, energy, research, education and the services directive.
This was the second interparliamentary meeting organised on the Lisbon strategy. Opening the meeting, European Parliament President Josep BORRELL said " the situation in Europe today seems much more complicated and the challenges we face much sterner ". He mentioned the setback for the constitution and drew the attention to the lack of a global vision for Europe. " We are still caught up in our national concerns ", he said, citing the current VAT war as an example.
On the financial perspective and own resources Mr Borrell said " Let us speak plainly. With a budget amounting to 1.045% of European GDP, it is not easy to meet the challenges facing Europe . Member States now think almost exclusively in accountancy terms: 'how much do we pay and how much do we get in return'. " Various speakers called for a budget to match the needs in key areas such as research and development and education and life-long learning. Chancellor Wolfgang SCHÜSSEL, for the Austrian presidency, stressed that little room for manoeuvre remained. Ninety percent of the model is financed by national budgets. " This is not the way to finance Europe ", said Mr Schüssel and he called for a " debate on own resources " if we want a strong Europe. Commission President José Manuel BARROSO said the Council's agreement in December had been an important step forward. The Commission was working with Parliament to improve it, but: "We need to inject a note of realism. Any delay would lead to a delay in implementing the budget, which would have greatest effect on those regions needing our solidarity."
The question of energy was brought up by many speakers. Mr Borrell stressed that " the EU has shown its vulnerability in this area. We can choose between maintaining national sovereignty, an approach already overtaken by events, or we can build a Community energy policy ". Chancellor Schüssel said that the energy crisis triggered by the Russian-Ukrainian gas dispute clearly showed that a " discussion is needed on European level on how to ensure energy supplies" taking into account long-term needs. Mr Barroso said the Commission had already been working on proposals before the Russia-Ukraine dispute: "We need to improve coordination of national energy networks and boost competition. This is also linked to increasing research spending, to find clean and sustainable energy sources."
On the services directive, which was also raised several times, President Borrell said " This is a debate on the model for European society which we cannot shun ." According to Mr Schüssel, if Parliament's plenary vote in February produces a broad majority on the directive, a solution will be found on that basis but if not there will be no new proposal. For President Barroso, "without the services directive our commitment to Lisbon will not be credible. We need a more modern, integrated services market, but one with balance. I am pleased that the European Trades Union Congress says it wants a better services directive - that is what we want to." He said the Commission would look closely at Parliament's first reading opinion and revise its proposal in the light of the EP's views.
Regarding the EU's economic situation President Borrell noted that although it is hoped that growth in GDP, at 2.1% will be higher this year than last, it will be lower than expected growth in the United States, and unemployment levels will be around 8.8% in 2006. Chancellor Schüssel deplored that Europe is a long way behind its goal for research and development 3% (in the region of 2% in 2006 compared to 2.9% in the United States and 3% in Japan).
Mr Borrell emphasise that " the Lisbon Strategy must be an integral part of the great debate we have launched on the future of Europe. Europe must aim for high-value growth, incorporating environmental and social costs".
Mr Schüssel agreed that the public must be involved in the dialogue on the Lisbon strategy. " We can set objectives but we need people to believe ". He did not agree that Europe was doing badly and highlighted recent achievements such as the successful launch of the euro and enlargement. Lastly, he emphasised that EU is stronger when it works together. Europe is like " an orchestra need more than the sum of its soloists. We need more harmony and to be politically in tune with one another ".
Mr Barroso said the Commission had already implemented two thirds of the Community Lisbon strategy, and that the 25 national reform programmes were a sign of Member States' commitment to the strategy, which was essential for success. The Member States' main macro priority was to deal with the viability of public finances in the face of ageing populations, while on the micro side they emphasised research and entrepreneurship: "There are some gaps in the programmes. Many Member States want to boost research and development spending, but cannot reach the EU's 3% GDP goal. Many fail to look closely enough at national measures which hamper market access and competition. But the plans are generally a sound basis for progress - and we will propose remedies for the gaps."
Support for, and awareness of the needs of, small and mediums sized enterprises was raised several times on Wednesday. Mr Barroso welcomed the idea of Member States having some sort of positive discrimination in favour of SMEs, and said he would look at ways to boost the profile of the Commission's links to SMEs.
Klaus-Heiner LEHNE (EPP-ED, DE), one of the European Parliament's co-rapporteurs on the Lisbon Strategy, agreed that the national programmes represented real progress. He said Parliament's resolution ahead of the Spring summit should focus on research and development, innovation, intellectual property issues and energy policy. "There is no point in a 'name and shame' approach. Instead, we should be highlighting examples of excellence and best practice." The other co-rapporteur, Robert GOEBBELS (PES, LU) stressed the positive aspects of Europe's economic situation: "Even growth of 2 per cent in Europe adds wealth equivalent to the whole economy of Saudi Arabia," he said. "Strong trees take longer to grow than bushes." He quoted Jacques Delors, saying that social affairs were a factor in growth, not a by-product of growth.
According to Werner FASSLABEND, Chairman of the European Affairs Committee of the Austrian Nationalrat, SMEs needed improvements in the complex economic and administrative systems. He highlighted a study in Austria which showed ninety per cent of EU funds went to public bodies, with only six per cent for SMEs. "They just don't want to bother with all the red tape," he said. He also argued that the goals for knowledge and innovation were both achievable and controllable. Antti KAIKKONEN, Vice-Chairman of the Grand Committee of Finland's Eduskunta, said: "The Nordic model can be an example for the whole of Europe. We have worked hard to make progress in Finland." He stressed the role of innovation in driving growth, which was essential to preserve citizens' welfare and the social model.
President Borrell ended the meeting with a call for it to be repeated in the future. He said there should also be a similar gathering to bring the social partners more closely into the EU level debate on the Lisbon Strategy.
2006-01-31 President of the European Parliament Josep Borrell PES ES
Andreas Kohl, Speaker of the Austrian Nationalrat
Sissy Roth-Haiva, Speaker of the Austrian Bundesrat
20060130IPR04825
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
