Financial Perspective 2007-13: "Further work needed"
Budget
2006-02-22 - 15:33
The second trialogue between the European Parliament's negotiating team, the Austrian Presidency and the European Commission, held on Tuesday 21 February, acknowledged that "further work is needed" to reach an agreement on the next Financial Perspective. No actual progress emerged from the meeting but "contacts will now intensify" between the institutions.
"The EP, Council and the Commission agree to continue work in a higher gear in order to achieve the goal of reaching agreement on the multi-annual financial framework in April" , says a joint declaration issued after Tuesday's meeting.
MEPs feel that all elements are on the table to strike a deal and expect a mandate to be given to the Austrian Presidency.
" Parliament has been criticised for allegedly blocking the way to a quick agreement ", Budgets Committee chair Janusz Lewandowski (EPP-ED, PL) said, " but we are in fact looking to protect the interests of the citizens. The major cuts proposed after the December Summit will lead to big cuts for a number of programmes which are crucial for the people. This comes at a time when the EU needs to do more for citizens. But how can do you do more with less money? "
The Council cuts mean a reduction of 50%, compared to what Parliament proposed, for programmes for SMEs, for Lifelong Learning, the start-up of Galileo and TENS, of 20% for programmes strengthening internal security (external border controls, the fight against terrorism, immigration and refugee policies), of 40% for the youth and culture programmes and of 20% for external and security policies.
While Parliament is realistic about the scope for any increase, there is a need to improve the quality of implementation of the budget. Parliament's rapporteur on the next Financial Perspective, Reimer BÖGE (EPP-ED, DE), is a firm supporter of this idea: " We are adamant that the budget must be implemented in an improved fashion and modernised. More money for unforeseen events and greater flexibility to re-use unspent EU money from one year to the other are other key elements the next FP should contain ".
Parliament also insists on being involved in the overall review of the Budget in 2008-09.
Finally, it should be recalled that Parliament was ready to negotiate when it adopted its position on the next Financial Perspective back in June 2005. The EP had to await the Council's position for six months before the negotiations could begin.
Parliament's negotiating team comprises Mr Lewandowski and Mr Böge, as well as Budgets Committee vice-chairs Ralf Walter (PES, DE) and Jan Mulder (ALDE, NL). The next tri-lateral meeting of the institutions is set to take place on Tuesday 21 March.
2006-02-21 Committee on Budgets Chair Janusz Lewandowski EPP-ED PL 20060220IPR05488
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
