Agriculture Committee questions Commission response to avian influenza
Agriculture
2006-02-21 - 09:11
The Agriculture Committee hosted Health and Consumer Protection Commissioner Markos Kyprianou on Monday, to gain assurance that the Commission is responding adequately to the threat posed by avian influenza. MEPs were especially interested in the question of vaccinations, EU aid to third countries, and the dissemination of information to avoid panic in the population.
Commissioner Kyprianou explained that the recent discoveries of wild birds infected with the high-pathogenic H5N1 strain of avian influenza were in fact a promising sign. The rapid detection of the birds and the subsequent analysis of their samples showed that the monitoring and early information systems put in place by the Community were doing their job properly. Mr Kyprianou stressed that he was very satisfied with the cooperation of Member States, and that many current questions will only be resolved after further research is undertaken on the virus.
Mr Kyprianou urged MEPs to help fight the growing panic in the general population, by explaining to their constituencies that there is no risk in eating poultry and eggs in the European Union. The Commissioner reminded Members of the high level of food safety regulations in the EU, which would not allow sick birds to be sold. He underlined that basic hygiene is enough to protect people from exposure to the virus, and that the topic of avian influenza should systematically be treated as an animal disease .
MEPs raised several concerns. Firstly, they wished to know the Commission's stance on the request made earlier in the day by the Netherlands and France for the approval of a vaccination programme for poultry holdings. This issue is divisive, since vaccinations could protect poultry populations exposed to bird flu, but they can therefore become carriers of the virus without showing symptoms. In addition, excessive vaccinations may lead to the mutation of the virus into a form that could potentially be transmitted from humans to humans.
Katerina Batzeli (PES, EL) wondered when the financial support regulation would be coming online. To date, the direct costs of culling infected birds is born by the Community (with co-financing from Member States). Yet the indirect costs of the decrease in demand for poultry meat by consumers is currently not reimbursed to farmers. Jan Mulder (ALDE, NL) suggested that much more aid be offered to third countries fighting the disease, especially in Africa. He said that the general state of medical and veterinary services in Nigeria, for instance, would be insufficient to detect and respond to avian flu outbreaks in the region.
The Commission responded by explaining that although the directive dealing with bird flu would only be coming into force next year, most of the relevant measures have been adopted as emergency measures. Mr Kyprianou mentioned that 30 million euros have been earmarked for financial support to African countries to allow them to better perform surveillance of bird populations.
20060220IPR05515 Directive on Community measures for the control of avian influenza
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5246242&noticeType=null&language=en
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
