The Services Directive: an Irish perspective
Free movement of services
Ireland
2006-02-10 - 11:05
Services Directive, what will it mean for Europe's economy?
It has been almost six years since the current debate on the free movement of services in the internal market first began at the 2000 Spring European Summit in Lisbon. Now, as the European Parliament prepares to vote on an amended Commission proposal for a "Directive on Services in the Internal Market", the debate on the possible implications of its introduction has intensified in Ireland and across the EU.
Supporters of the Services Directive argue it will benefit European consumers by enhancing competition in the services sector in the EU, a sector which accounts for 70% of European jobs. Opponents of the proposed legislation argue that the current Directive has not taken adequate account of the concerns of workers, and could facilitate the exploitation of workers.
Speaking in a Dáil debate on the issue on 25 January, Independent MEP Marian Harkin (North West) tabled a motion against the current draft Services Directive, stating:
"I do not contend that there should be no liberalisation of services. It is impossible, however, that one directive - a single piece of legislation - should be adequate to deal with all the different and complex issues, particularly when that legislation is firmly based in the country of origin principle....A directive on services is required but not the directive as currently proposed".
In response, the Government Chief Whip, Tom Kitt TD (FF/UEN) said that the services directive would not permit social dumping or the exploitation of workers, and would not be supported by the government if it did.
January 2006 also saw Ireland's two biggest trade unions organise seminars in Dublin to debate the proposed directive. The first seminar was organised by SIPTU (Services, Industrial, Professional and Technical Union) which has come out strongly in opposition to the directive. SIPTU President Jack O'Connor has publicly stated that it would lead to " slave wages " being paid in Ireland.
The second seminar was organised by ICTU (the Irish Congress of Trade Unions) which also fears that the introduction of this Directive would accelerate the so-called "race to the bottom" in the jobs market and would undermine Ireland's social partnership process.
At the ICTU seminar, Irish MEPS clashed on the issue. Proinsias de Rossa MEP (Labour, Dublin) said the Directive was " unacceptable " in its current form and said no Irish MEP could seriously claim to represent all the Irish people by supporting it.
Fine Gael MEP Simon Coveney (South) said that in principle, the Directive was " a very good thing ". He added that the current proposals contained certain safeguards, including a guarantee that companies operating in the State would be subject to Irish employment law.
Dublin MEP Eoin Ryan (Fianna Fáil) said there was " no way " the original Commission text would be accepted but said he supported a compromise text as the Directive has " huge potential " to create jobs for people in Ireland for many decades.
The debate now moves to the floor of the European Parliament, where the Directive will be voted upon on 16 February. Once Parliament has expressed its opinion on the draft Directive, the European Commission is expected to come up with a reworked proposal.
20060209IPR05122 Dáil debate on the Services Directive European Parliament Office - Dublin
EN
1
PHOTO
20050818PHT00030.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://debates.oireachtas.ie/DDebate.aspx?F=DAL20060125.xml&Node=H22-1#H22-1
EN
3
LINK
http://www.europarl.ie
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
