Making human rights clauses more effective
Human rights
2006-02-14 - 14:30
MEPs adopted a non-binding report on the human rights and democracy clause in EU agreements. It points out that the clause had now been introduced into more than 50 of the EU's international agreements.
Ten years after it was first drafted, it is now time to evaluate how it has been implemented and how it could be improved.
The report notes that many sectoral agreements, such as those on textiles, agriculture and fisheries, as well as agreements with developed countries, still lack the clause. MEPs warn that Parliament is " no longer prepared to give its assent to new international agreements that do not contain a human rights and democracy clause ". It points out that, on many occasions, the EU had not been able to respond adequately to serious and persistent violations of human rights and democratic principles. The House concludes that the EU must draw up new procedures and new criteria for applying the human rights and democracy clause, which must apply without discrimination between States or between their levels of development.
The report also calls for the establishment of human rights subcommittees under EU-third country agreements, to be responsible for reviewing compliance with the clause, monitoring its application and implementation, and proposing actions to address democracy and human rights problems.
MEPs say that one of the factors which has compromised the application of the clause was its vague language, which did not spell out detailed procedures for ' positive ' and ' negative ' interventions in EU/third country cooperation - unlike the democracy clauses in the Cotonou Agreements with the ACP States which had been very effective. MEPs also call for the expansion of the positive dimension of the human rights clause, which entails the need to take effective measures to contribute to the enjoyment of human rights within and by the respective parties, to include an ongoing assessment and monitoring of the impact of the agreement itself on the enjoyment of human rights, as well as to adopt a human rights approach when implementing all aspects of the agreement.
Parliament says if one of the governments concerned in the human right clause, the European Parliament or the national parliaments concerned or, in the case of ACP countries, the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly, calls for the human rights and democracy clause to be invoked, through the suspension of a bilateral agreement or the implementation of dialogue or other appropriate measures, the Association Council should automatically include that debate on its agenda.
MEPs note that the European Parliament has formally expressed its view to that effect in several cases, but that the Association Council has simply ignored those requests.
In order to ensure a more coherent, effective and transparent approach to European human rights policy, a revision of the current wording is indispensable, says the Parliament. The revised text should take into account the following principles: reciprocity, with regard both to the territory of the EU and that of the other countries involved; gender equality and women's rights; no discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation or disability; temporary suspension of a cooperation agreement as well as a " warning mechanism " in response to a breach of the clause; and consultations between all parties.
MEPs stress that, for elections to be considered democratic, free and fair, certain preconditions must be met, including, inter alia, respect for political and civic rights, respect for freedom of expression and information, equal access to the media and respect for political pluralism, so as to offer electors a real choice.
Lastly, MEPs wants Parliament to be involved to a much greater extent in drawing up the negotiating mandate for EU/third country agreements, and insists on the need for it to be a joint decision-maker with the Commission and the Council when it comes to initiating consultations, suspending an agreement or suspending any negative measures already imposed on a country.
20060209IPR05135 The Human Rights and Democracy Clause in EU agreements
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5242292
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
