Protecting local food and drink
Agriculture
United Kingdom
2006-03-13 - 18:02
Look out for this logo on speciality food and drink
When we buy our Orkney beef for dinner or pick up a Camembert de Normandie at the supermarket, we can be sure it has been produced using traditional local methods, because these and hundreds of other food and drink products have gained the EU's Protected Geographical Indication or Protected Designation of Origin. In the UK, there are currently 29 products, from Stilton cheese to Arbroath smokies, and from Newcastle Brown Ale to Cornish clotted cream with special protected EU status.
The system provides protection for consumers and producers against imitation and raises awareness of regional products. But the system is about to be reformed and MEPs will be discussing the proposed changes in Strasbourg on Wednesday, 15 March. A recent ruling by the WTO required the Commission to improve access by non-EU nationals to the EU system of granting these protected labels.
The Protected Designation of Origin (PDO) status means that a product has been produced and processed and prepared in the region and through the method in question. To obtain Protected Geographical Indication (PGI) status a product has to have undergone at least one of the production, processing or preparation stages in the region and through the method mentioned in the name.
In the UK, the 29 products, organised by region, are as follows:
East Midlands
Buxton Blue cheese (PDO)
White stilton cheese - Blue stilton cheese (PDO)
Rutland Bitter (PGI)
Dovedale cheese (PDO)
North East
Newcastle Brown Ale (PGI)
North West
Beacon Fell traditional Lancashire cheese (PDO)
Scotland
Bonchester cheese (PDO)
Teviotdale cheese (PGI)
Orkney beef (PDO)
Orkney lamb (PDO)
Scotch beef (PGI)
Scotch lamb (PGI)
Shetland lamb (PDO)
Arbroath Smokies (PGI)
Scottish farmed salmon (PGI)
South East
Whitstable oysters (PGI)
Kentish ale (PGI)
South West
Dorset Blue cheese (PGI)
Exmoor Blue cheese (PGI)
Single Gloucester cheese (PDO)
West Country farmhouse Cheddar (PDO)
Cornish clotted cream (PDO)
Gloucestershire cider/perry (PGI)
Herefordshire cider/perry (PGI)
Worcestershire cider/perry (PGI)
Wales
Welsh beef (PGI)
Welsh lamb (PGI)
Yorkshire & The Humber
Swaledale cheese/Swaledale ewes' cheese (PDO)
Jersey Royal potatoes are also classified as PDO but the Channel Islands are not part of the EU and so are not listed here.
The UK and the current system
So, how does a local producer go about applying for these EU quality marks? The first stage for a product from England is to apply through the Department for the Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra). For Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, there are separate bodies, which can be found at this link. It is Defra which makes the formal submission to the European Commission for all UK products and the Commission in turn seeks advice from its scientific committee before deciding on whether or not to grant the status. The whole registration process can take 18 months.
Once the status is agreed, inspections, to ensure quality standards, are carried out in the UK by local authority trading standards or environmental health officers.
Speaking of the system, Andrea Martinez-Inchausti, Assistant Director, Food Policy with the British Retail Consortium says: "The accuracy of the approval process is crucial. It is important that the provisions of the Regulation are interpreted correctly by all the member states. We believe these designations should be used appropriately and only where it can be clearly justified that consumers believe that a product must be associated with a specific geographical region and has been produced in that region by a traditional process. There are numerous examples of foodstuffs that, despite having a geographical indication in their title, have become more generic. For example, Yorkshire puddings have been produced across the UK for decades, without detriment to their taste or quality. Indeed, consumers do not expect this product to only be produced in Yorkshire. In this situation, registering as PDO or PGIs would be inappropriate, since as specified under the legislation “a name that has become generic means the name of an agricultural product or a foodstuff which, although it relates to the place or the region where this product or foodstuff was originally produced or marketed, has become the common name of an agricultural product or a foodstuff”.
Of course, the system can also work against UK producers. The European Court of Justice recently ruled that feta cheese could only be produced in Greece and this inevitably had an impact on the Yorkshire-based producers of so-called 'Yorkshire Feta'
What reforms are being proposed?
The European Commission was obliged to propose a reform to the current system, following complaints to the World Trade Organisation from the USA and Australia that the system represents a barrier to trade with non-EU countries. Indeed, to comply with the WTO Disputes Panel, the EU regulations have to be amended by 20 April 2006. Much of the Commission's proposal therefore relates to access to EU markets for non-EU products.
However, the Commission is also proposing some changes to the current system for registering products with a view to speeding up the process and increasing its visibility. In particular it is proposed to streamline the application procedure once it has left the Member State authority with much more emphasis on the national authorities to judge the suitability of the product for achieving PDO or PGI status. Once PDO or PGI is granted, it is also proposed that the relevant logo should always be shown on the finished product.
MEPs in the Parliament's Agriculture Committee adopted 39 amendments to the Commission's proposal stressing in particular:
the need for non-EU countries to recognise the quality of PDO and PGI status;
adding packaging, where appropriate, to the production, processing and preparation stages necessary for PGI and PDO;
setting time limits on the different stages of applications to prevent them dragging on indefinitely, as can be the case at the moment.
20060307IPR05886 This webpage has general information, including a brief description of what you have to do to get something registered. DEFRA website has a leaflet on product registration. The British Retail Consortium is the lead UK trade association representing the whole range of retailers, from the large multiples and department stores through to independents, selling a wide selection of products through centre of town, out of town, rural and virtual stores. Agricultural products and foodstuffs as traditional specialities guaranteed Protection of geographical indications and designations of origin for agricultural products and foodstuffs
EN
1
PHOTO
20060310PHT06091.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/agriculture/foodqual/quali1_en.htm
EN
3
LINK
http://www.defra.gov.uk/foodrin/foodname/guidance.pdf
EN
4
LINK
http://www.brc.org.uk
EN
5
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5301672
EN
6
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5301662
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
