MEPs want a broader approach to disaster reaction
Civil protection
2006-03-14 - 14:13
In adopting a resolution on the Commission's plans for a "rapid response and preparedness instrument" Parliament wants to widen the scope of EU action to prepare for and respond to natural disasters.
A series of natural disasters in 2004-5, including the tsunami in Asia, the cyclone in Louisiana, floods in Central Europe and drought and fires in Spain and Portugal have led to calls for a more efficient European Union response to such crises, whether within the EU or elsewhere.
This new 'instrument' will be the legal basis for EU funding to support civil protection measures after natural disasters. It brings together a number of existing instruments, widening and setting out more detail on what can be funded. The Committee is seeking three sets of changes: to legal base for the legislation, to the scope of the activity involved and to the budget.
On the legal base, the Parliament wants the measure adopted as public heath and environment legislation (under the codecision procedure) rather than the Commission's plan to use article 308 of the Treaty, which allows for action at community level not specifically provided for elsewhere in the Treaty, but only with unanimity in the Council and just consultation of Parliament.
The original proposal did not address prevention, but the House believes preventive measures are essential in this field and proposes amending the title and objectives accordingly. It also extended the scope of the proposal in other ways, so as to include a rapid response to emergencies, not only inside but also outside the Community, which have or may have "adverse impact on people, public health and safety, property, cultural heritage or the environment caused by natural, industrial or technological disasters, including marine pollution, or acts of terrorism".
As a result of the amendments extending the scope to include prevention and financing of actions outside the Community, the House calls for the budget initially proposed by the Commission (€173 million for the period 2007-2013) to be increased by €105 million, bringing it up to €278 m. These budgetary provisions remain indicative, pending an agreement on the Financial Perspective for 2007-2013.
A report on the related European Union Solidarity Fund proposal has been drawn up by the Regional Development Committee and is due for debate at the April plenary session in Strasbourg. On 20 March, the Environment, Agriculture and Regional Development Committees will be holding a joint public hearing on natural disasters.
20060309IPR06020 Civil protection: establishment of a Rapid Response and Preparedness Instrument for major emergencies
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5245132
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
