Initiatives to end sex trafficking: MEPs call for a launch of an Anti-Trafficking Day
Women's rights/Equal opportunities
2006-03-15 - 16:43
Parliament gets tough on trafficking
MEPs reaffirm their firm condemnation of trafficking in human beings, in particular of women and children for sexual purposes. In a resolution adopted today, following up last week's EP seminar on forced prostitution during sports events, MEPs propose strategies to combat this ghastly problem.
The European Parliament calls for a European wide campaign to inform the general public and to reduce the demand. MEPs also propose an Anti-Trafficking Day to raise awareness on the issue of trafficking in all its aspects.
The European Parliament urges the European Commission and the Member States to launch a European-wide campaign to inform and educate the general public and particularly sports people , sports fans and supporters about the growing problem of forced prostitution during big sports events. The campaign should provide the necessary information, counselling, safe housing and legal aid to women and children and other victims forced into prostitution. MEPs agree that media and famous people from the sports world also have to be involved in the awareness raising campaign to positively influence the changes in public mentality and behaviour. They also appeal for a prevention campaign targeted at potential victims providing them with information as to their rights and where they can obtain assistance in countries of destination.
In light of the forthcoming World Football Cup, MEPs call on Member States to set up a multilingual telephone hotline and visible communication campaign to help women forced into prostitution and other victims who are isolated and unable to speak the language of the country of transit or destination. They also urge the International Olympic Committee, FIFA, UEFA, the German Football Association and others as well as sportsmen to express support for the campaign launched by the German National Council of Women.
MEPs request the launch of an Anti-Trafficking Day starting from this year. Its aim would be to raise awareness on the issue of trafficking in all its aspects. They urge all Member States to ratify the Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human beings which sets out minimum standards for the protection of the victims of trafficking in human beings for the purposes of sexual exploitation. The European Parliament also calls on the Member States which have not respected the deadline of 1 August 2004 for the implementation of Council Framework Decision 2002/629/JHA on combating trafficking in human beings to take immediate action. Furthermore, MEPs urge the Commission and the Council to urgently produce the assessment report as foreseen by the Framework Decision.
20060309IPR06017 Motion for a resolution - Forced prostitution in the context of world sports events
EN
1
PHOTO
20060313PHT06103.jpg
-//EP//TEXT MOTION B6-2006-0160 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
