Opening of the session: International Women's Day and European Day for the Victims of Terrorism
Institutions
2006-03-14 - 10:03
EP President Josep Borrell opened the session by commenting on International Women's Day and the European Day for the Victims of Terrorism, 8 and 10 March respectively:
" Last Wednesday was International Women's Day - and I want to express, on behalf of the whole Parliament, our rejection of the violence used by police in Tehran against peaceful group of women protesters. We express our solidarity with women throughout the world who campaign peacefully for their rights ." The President congratulated the Women's Rights and Gender Equality Committee for the seminar it held last week on the issue of forced prostitution around major sporting events.
" Friday was the second European Day for the Victims of Terrorism . Parliament again marked the occasion with a ceremony, which was attended by 600 pupils from schools in London and Brussels. Two years have now gone by since the attacks which killed 192 people in Spain - and we think also about the deaths in London last July. We must continue to fight terrorism in whatever form it takes. The European Parliament has always supported the dignity of human beings. No country can deal with this alone - it is only European democrats united who can stand up to this threat ," he said.
Withdrawal of port services directive
Recalling that the Parliament had rejected the port services directive during the January plenary session in Strasbourg, President Borrell informed the House of the Commission decision to withdraw the text. The legislative procedure is therefore now definitively closed.
Change to the agenda
Parliament adopted one minor change to the agenda. The vote on the Jean Louis COTTIGNY (PES, FR) report on restructuring and employment will now take place on Wednesda y rather than Tuesday.
20060309IPR06016
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
