EU mercury strategy - MEPs want an export ban by 2010
Environment
2006-03-14 - 18:03
Parliament adopted an own-initiative report on the EU's future approach to the hazards of mercury. Parliament says it is "an economic, political and moral imperative" for the EU to take the lead in dealing with global mercury problems.
While welcoming the Commission's strategy on mercury, MEPs want the EU to take a series of specific measures to tackle the problems caused by the substance, of which the EU is the world's largest exporter. They want an export ban in place by 2010 at the latest and for measures to enforce safe storage of mercury produced by the chlor-alkali industry. The report says the Commission should apply the 'polluter pays' principle, in particular when it comes to the costs of storage.
MEPs recommend that compensation should be offered to the Almadén area in Spain, to tackle the environmental and social problems arising from the closure of the long established mercury mines there.
Parliament also wants to establish emission limit values for mercury released through burning coal, and restrictions on the use of mercury in measuring and control equipment. Among other points, they call for the issue of mercury use in vaccine production to be addressed and for information campaigns to increase awareness of the risks associated with mercury.
MEPs ask the Commission to restrict the marketing and use of mercury in all measuring and control equipment for both consumer and professional uses (especially in households, healthcare facilities, schools and scientific and research institutions), but allowing for some exemptions where adequate alternatives are not yet available. Such exemptions should also apply, say MEPs, to the rare cases of maintenance of traditional barometers, museum collections and industrial heritage. Furthermore, a small number of professional companies in the EU produce traditional measuring instrumentation using small quantities of mercury and this use should continue to be permitted in carefully controlled and licensed environments.
On 21 February, the Commission tabled a proposal to amend the 76/769 directive on hazardous substances in order to set the terms of any future ban on mercury. This proposal will be dealt with by the European Parliament under co-decision in the coming months.
20060309IPR06021
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
