Shetland Fisheries Box safe with MEPs support
Fisheries
United Kingdom
2006-02-23 - 16:54
Shetland Box safe for another three years
In an own-initiative report on the current restrictions within the Common Fisheries Policy, MEPs welcomed the Commission's decision to "maintain the Shetland Box for a further three years" and to "retain the Plaice Box and associated access restrictions pending further study". The report was authored by Catherine Stihler MEP (Labour, Scotland)
The own-initiative report on the review of certain access restrictions in the Common Fisheries Policy (Shetland Box and Plaice Box) - was adopted in Strasbourg on 14 February 2006 with 560 in favour, 56 against and 15 abstentions.
The Shetland Box was introduced in July 1983 and involves a licensing system which limits access to most demersal species to vessels over 26 metres in length from the UK, France, Germany and Belgium, with the number of vessels fishing at any one time being restricted (to 62 UK, 52 French, 12 German and 2 Belgian vessels.)
In the debate prior to the vote, Ms Stihler made a brief intervention calling on colleagues "to give their full support to this report on access restrictions to the Common Fisheries Polict, which cover the Shetland Box and the Plaice Box. This report is good news for sustainable EU fisheries policy as it recognises the need to make sensitive use of access restrictions. The restrictions covered by this report are of obvious importance and I call on all colleagues to vote for the resolution as a whole."
The report welcomes the Commission's cooperation with the fishing industry, whilst noting the support for the maintenance of the Shetland box given by the Scientific, Technical and Economic Committee for Fisheries (STECF) and by the North Sea Regional Advisory Council (NSRAC). It further notes how the Commission's Expert Working Group highlighted the "socio-economic importance of the boxes" and that one of the intentions of the Shetland Box is to "provide protection for fisheries-dependent communities in the north of Scotland".
The report also "welcomes the decision of the Commission to maintain the Shetland Box for a further three years while further evaluations of the Box are undertaken" and " calls on the Commission to make a quantitative evaluation of the likely implications of any changes to the Shetland box and recommends that in the case of these evaluations taking longer than the anticipated three years, it recommends that the current legislation should remain in force."
In a news release following the report's adoption, Catherine Stihler said : " The Shetland box is safe for the next three years, good news for fishing stocks and the fishing community in Scotland ". She added : " I am very happy to see the European Parliament endorse my report which secures Scottish jobs and conserves fish stocks. We need to fight to retain the Shetland box for Scottish fishermen so there's enough fish for future generations. That's what we've done today and I'm proud of our achievement ."
Scottish Conservative MEP, Straun Stevenson said after the vote in the European Parliament: " We have fought off the challenge of Spanish, French and Mediterranean MEPs who wanted to send their armada of fishing fleets into one of the most sensitive marine areas around Britain. Conservative MEPs were part of a crucial coalition that ensured the box will continue. Many fishermen depend on this conservation zone for their livelihood and ending the Shetland Box would have added yet more to the mounting pressure faced by our whitefish fleet."
SNP President Ian Hudghton said : "The Commission must now recognise that the principle of unrestricted access to waters is unsustainable. Fishing rights must be allocated to the communities who depend on them. That is now the political will of the European Parliament and no amount of Spanish lobbying should be allowed to undermine that.
"I have spent the last few weeks speaking to parliamentary colleagues from around Europe and am grateful for the support they have given Scotland's fishing communities today. The parliament's vote is a rare example of good news coming from Europe for Scotland's fishermen - and in the future we must build on the good will demonstrated towards our coastal communities".
Scottish Liberal Democrat, Elspeth Attwooll , commented: " I would like to congratulate my Scottish colleague Catherine Stihler in successfully piloting the report through the Parliament. She has done well to resist Spanish pressure on the issue. The Shetland Box is crucial for both conservation and socio-economic reasons. Furthermore, I think it is important that the European Parliament and the European Commission have followed the advice of the North Sea Regional Advisory Council in particular to maintain the restrictions for the time being. "
Back in Scotland, the shadow fisheries spokesman in the Scottish Parliament, Richard Lochhead (SNP), has called on fellow MSPs to fight for the long-term protection of the Shetland Box. He said keeping the protected status for the area was vital for Scotland's economy and environment. Mr Lochhead's move comes amid continuing fears that pressure is being applied by some EU countries to have the Shetland Box scrapped.
In 1989, the Commission established the Plaice Box , an area closed to beam trawlers of more than 300 horsepower (hp) or 221kW. The restrictions were implemented in order to reduce the levels of discards of flat fish in the North Sea fisheries. At first, the closure applied only in the second and third quarters of the year, but in 1994 it was extended to the fourth and since 1995, the box has been closed the whole year round.
While the Commission could not demonstrate any positive effects of the Box on the development of the most commercially important stocks (h addock, cod, whiting, saithe and monkfish), which have generally declined since it was introduced, it concluded that, if the licensing system for vessels of greater than 26 metres in length were to be relaxed, this could have a detrimental effect, since these larger vessels operate at the periphery of the Box.
This is acknowledged in the report which observes that the UK government, along with the German government, believes that any changes regarding the Shetland box are " neither necessary nor desirable " and that " any decision should be taken in the context of future flatfish management and the advice of the North Sea Regional Advisory Council (NSRAC )".
20060223IPR05644 European Parliament resolution on the review of certain access restrictions in the Common Fisheries Policy (Shetland Box and Plaice Box)
EN
1
PHOTO
20050818PHT00435.jpg
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2006-0057 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
