The Week Ahead - 6-12 March 2006
Institutions
2006-03-01 - 20:31
The weekly summary of the main events at the European Parliament over the next seven days is now available.
Women's Day. To mark International Women's Day on 8 March, Parliament is holding a seminar on the growing phenomenon of forced prostitution at major international sports events, looking ahead in particular to this summer's World Cup in Germany. The Vice-President of UEFA and several European Commissioners are scheduled to speak. (Wednesday)
President Borrell in Algeria. Parliament's President Josep Borrell makes an official visit to Algeria, during which he will meet the president and prime minister. (Monday to Wednesday)
Financial Perspective. The Budgets Committee meets to assess the state of play in the talks on the next Financial Perspective. (Monday)
Victims of terrorism. A ceremony takes place at Parliament to commemorate the victims of terrorist attacks in Europe, notably those in Madrid and London. (Friday)
CIA. The temporary committee investigating allegations that the CIA illegally transported prisoners around Europe continues its work. (Monday)
Euromed. The sensitive issue of freedom of speech and respect for religious beliefs is among topics on the agenda of the Euro-mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly's political affairs committee. (Monday)
Strasbourg session. Parliament's political groups will devote most of the coming week to preparations for the Strasbourg plenary session of 13-16 March, during which the President of the Palestinian Authority, Mahmoud Abbas, and the President of Germany, Horst Köhler, will both address the House. Parliament will also discuss the upcoming European Council and hold debates on the free movement of workers, company relocations and trafficking in human beings (see above - Women's Day).
Any changes to the plenary agenda decided by the Conference of Presidents will be announced at the press briefing on Friday 10 March.
20060301IPR05730 For full details, see the Agenda
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061000AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
