The Week Ahead 13-19 March 2006
Institutions
2006-03-10 - 16:10
The weekly summary of the main events at the European Parliament over the next seven days is now available.
Strasbourg - Plenary Session
Official visits. Horst Köhler, Federal President of Germany, will address MEPs in a formal sitting. (Tuesday) The President of the Palestinian National Authority, Mahmoud Abbas, will also be making an official visit to Parliament and addressing the House. (Wednesday) Spring Council and Lisbon Strategy. MEPs will discuss the prospects for the European economy ahead of the annual meeting of EU leaders devoted to the issue. (Wednesday) Merger policy. Following controversy over recent takeover bids, the Commissioner for Competition will make a statement to Parliament on mergers in the internal market. (Wednesday) Forced Prostitution and sports events. Ahead of the football World Cup in Germany, Parliament will be debating ways to combat forced prostitution and human trafficking, which often increase at the time of major sporting events. (debate Monday, vote Tuesday) Labour market - freedom of movement. MEPs will debate the transitional periods which restrict access for workers from the ten 'new' Members States countries to many of the labour markets of the 'old' EU15. (Monday) Relocation of industry. The issues of businesses relocating to cheaper parts of the EU and to third countries and the jobs impact of industrial restructuring will be addressed in two debates. (debates Monday and Tuesday, votes Tuesday) Enlargement. MEPs will debate a report from the Foreign Affairs committee calling on the EU to keep its promises on enlargement, but also to bear in mind its absorption capacity. (debate Wednesday, vote Thursday) CIA. The temporary committee investigating allegations of illegal detention and transport of prisoners by the CIA will hear from Khaled el-Masri, who is suing the US intelligence agency, saying he was abducted and sent to Afghanistan. (Monday)
20060310IPR06055 For full details, see The Agenda
EN
1
LINK
/news/expert/event_top_page/default/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
