Address by Mr Horst Köhler, President of the Federal Republic of Germany
Institutions
2006-03-15 - 09:09
President Josep BORRELL introduced the German President by recalling his personal commitment to the building of Europe. He noted that the situation in Europe is perplexing to its citizens, but that President Köhler has displayed a real conviction and commitment to pursuing initiatives to resolve this.
He talked of the President's practical strategies that have helped widen and deepen the debate on the Union. He said "everyday you work on practical points that are on the agenda" and called him "a paradigm of a European citizen".
The puzzle of Europe
President Köhler opened his speech by commenting that the Parliament is the centre of public politics and democratic opinion for the EU, and that correspondingly, he was grateful to have the opportunity to have it as his platform. He echoed President Borrell's notion of the EU as a "bit of puzzle", and asked why given all the advantages, strengths and economic success it has had, it shows such a degree of despondency. He mentioned that, after having looked at Europe from the outside, he was in a position to see the unbelievable achievements it has made, but warned that outsiders mix their admiration for these achievements with impatience: "Europe, if you're tired, step aside, we want to move forward" . Nevertheless, President Köhler reassured Europe that due to its creative ferment, it will always have the capacity to move forward and keep pace with the rest. He considered the European history as a vital factor in the unification of Europeans now. He noted that the value of inalienable human rights is at the core of European thinking, that the constant process of enlightenment the Europeans pursue and their understanding of self-autonomy and social cohesion all ensure a united mentality that strengthens the potential for the future of the Union. He also praised the Europeans' active love of their neighbours and their striving for social justice, their love of freedom and truth, their creative restlessness and their solidarity.
The challenges and Europe's capacity to face them
However, President Köhler also referred to the major challenges that the Union faces today: the many new regions of growth; new conditions of competition; unbearably high levels of unemployment in some areas; the intangible alienation of citizens; and the recent rejection of the proposed constitution by the members of two European States. Nevertheless, the President considered pessimism as unnecessary when it comes to these challenges. He cited the example of the Dutch Foreign Minister Van Stoel, thirty tears ago, claiming that the European motto " completion, involvement and expansion " had been replaced by " standstill, setback and flight“. He noted that thirty years ago Europe was in a deep economic crisis with many obstacles apparent against the free movement of goods, people, services and capital. However, by the mid 90s, the goal of an internal market had been completed. "Now ", President Köhler noted, "the EU countries produce for a domestic market of 450 million" . He gave his support for the adoption of a single currency, remarking that it allows consumers to make price comparisons, relieving them of the expense of converting currency and gives businesses - as well as the Union as a whole - the stability and security to pursue successful economic transactions.
The conditions needed
President Köhler considered there to be certain conditions under which the Union must act if it is to "change its challenges into opportunities": it must not "water-down its policies" , and it needs to "put into order that which needs ordering". He asserted that Europe needs structural reform and called for this to be pursued at a local level as well as at the EU level: " the principle of subsidiary must be respected ". He said that bureaucracy must be kept to a limit, that there is "a need to reduce the red-tape of legislation" , and commended the EU programme designed to reduce this red-tape. He postulated that "citizens would appreciate more transparency" , as "many citizens cannot understand who is responsible for what" , causing a distrust of the Union. The resulting principles of democracy, participation and transparency that are needed, were all, President Köhler noted, contained in the proposed constitution. He therefore advised that "it should not be given-up on lightly" . He recommended that Europeans use this "period of reflection" to consider what Europe stands for, and what needs to be done in order to strengthen it. He expressed his confidence in the European citizens' capacity to do this.
President Köhler noted that it was important to have a Union for political clout - "one voice is stronger" . He talked of his belief that European citizens would welcome new goals and new measures, and expressed his support for the Commission's green paper on energy. In addition, he noted that, if we want to help the youth of Europe and remedy the high unemployment levels of some areas, we need an EU to do this, but we also need to reorganise the EU budget to prioritise research and education. He commended the Erasmus exchange programme and the impressive ideology displayed by many young Europeans. He urged Europe to learn from the example of these idealists, "let us be influenced by creative turmoil…turn challenges into opportunities". He closed with the notion that the EU should be "a place of good, where we want to live…a force of good in this one world we live in."
20060309IPR06029
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
