The EU’s use of force outside its borders
Security and defence
2006-03-06 - 16:52
Is the EU going to send soldiers to the Democratic Republic of the Congo? A decision is due soon. This wouldn’t be the first European mission of this type, as the EU has intervened militarily outside its borders in the recent past. What is the justification for the EU’s use of force? What are the criteria for intervening? What is Parliament’s role? These were the questions raised during a public hearing organised by Parliament’s Security &amp; Defence Subcommittee.
The European Union has had a common security policy (ECSP) since 1992 and, since 1999, it has also had a security and defence policy (ESDP). The EU thus has the policies but what is still missing is, in a nutshell, a common defence capability. However, by virtue of being a world economic power and a political entity, it is a major player on the world stage with its interests, values and positions to defend. Until recently, it didn’t really have the means of doing so. It was the war in the former Yugoslavia in the 1990s which brought home the stark realisation that the EU was incapable of providing an adequate response to conflicts like this. As a result, at the 1999 Helsinki Summit, Member States decided to establish “an independent capacity for action backed by credible military forces.” However, the goal of having the capability to deploy up to 60,000 military personnel has not been reached. At the present time, the EU intervenes externally through units known as “battle groups”, which are made up of between 30 to 1500 personnel. Since 2003, the ESDP has been in operation for both civilian and military crisis management. Thus the EU has been able to intervene in various ways in Bosnia-Herzegovina, Macedonia, the Congo, Georgia, Sudan, Iraq, Indonesia, in Palestine and Gaza and on the border between Ukraine and Moldova.
The whys and wherefores
As the EU’s economic and political weight increases on the international scene, its responsibilities become greater and the use of force is sometimes essential when assuming these responsibilities. As Ambassador Franz Cede, who spoke on behalf of the Austrian EU Presidency, said during the 23 February parliamentary hearing, EU action has to conform to the UN Charter. While the Charter bans the use of force in principle, it can be justified in cases of collective and self-defence. The EU can also undertake so-called Petersberg Missions (evacuation and humanitarian missions, peacekeeping missions and combat missions to restore peace). But it is not always easy to make a clear distinction between prevention and intervention. As Stefano Silvestri (President of the Institute of International Affairs in Rome) noted, all crisis-control measures depend on how the crisis evolves. In his view, “the idea of waiting until a crisis erupts is suicidal and will lead to a more frequent, less controlled and less effective use of force.” An incremental approach in terms of measures taken (civil and military sanctions and intervention) is natural since it corresponds to the different stages of a conflict. Johannes M. Becker, of the Centre for Conflict Studies, said that in the majority of cases it is precisely for reasons of prevention that there is a need to focus on development and social issues rather than the use of force, because “80% of wars do not arise from ethnic or religious differences but from global inequalities in the distribution of wealth.”
Framework and mandate
Interventions made on behalf of the EU are not supranational in nature, they are subject to the decision of the Council. André Dumoulin, professor at the Belgian Royal Military Academy, pointed out that the real legitimacy for intervention always springs from the nation state. Several speakers concluded that, while abiding by the principles of the UN Charter, Member States do not always wait for a UN resolution before intervening. In this regard, Martin Ortega, a researcher at the Paris-based EU Institute for Security Studies, highlighted the distinction between the legality and the legitimacy of an intervention. According to Stefano Sannino of the European Commission, action can be legitimate even if its legal status is unclear. The sensitive issue of a future European defence force co-existing with the Atlantic Alliance came up on several occasions. For example, Roman Kuzniar, Director of the Polish Institute of International Affairs, rejected the assumption that NATO and the EU work in concert. The USA sets the tone for NATO and cultural, structural and power differences between it and the EU are too great to expect the two partners’ attitudes to be identical. Responding to this, the NATO representative, Jamie Shea, said that ”we are not Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde – the EU and the Alliance also co-operate at the civilian level and we can carry on doing so.”
Democratic control
The MEPs who spoke during the session also raised the issue of the democratic control of interventions. Karl von Wogau, the German Christian Democrat who chairs the Security and Defence Subcommittee, criticised the current state of affairs, saying that Parliament’s role in the decision to send troops and in the oversight of EU missions bore no relation at all to the democratic standards applicable to a nation state.
20060306STO05772 The European Union’s external relations: a player on the world stage European Defence Agency European Parliament Foreign Affairs Committee MEPs debate the use of force in international relations Security and Defence Committee
EN
1
PHOTO
20050818PHT00048.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/publications/booklets/move/47/index_en.htm
EN
3
LINK
http://www.eda.europa.eu/
EN
4
LINK
/activities/expert/committees/presentation.do?committee=1232&language=EN
EN
6
LINK
/activities/expert/committees/presentation.do?committee=1301&language=EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060220IPR05419 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
