What price for the health of Europe's citizens?
Public health
2006-03-16 - 14:17
EP pushes for European health programme
The European Parliament, adopted a legislative report allocating €1,500 million over seven years to the new Community action programme on health. Although healthcare services are run entirely by the individual Member States, the European Union has a complementary role in health issues. The Parliament wants the EU to play this role to the fullest.
Parliament had already expressed opposition to the figures proposed by the December European Council for the 2007-2013 financial perspective, which MEPs regard as too low. The Environment and Health Committee, for its part, had no intention of scaling down the EU's ambitions in areas closely affecting the welfare of its people, one of them being health. According to rapporteur Antonios Trakatellis (EPP-ED, EL), "objectives must always be matched by the resources available to achieve them. In my view, there is no guaranteed match between these two in the proposed programme. I therefore propose that the funding be increased, in the certainty that the Council and the Commission will realise that this proposal is perfectly reasonable." The report, having won overwhelming backing from the ENVI committee, also managed to secure wide support from the plenary, which voted by show of hands.
Health and Consumer Protection Commissioner Markos Kyprianou , speaking in plenary, welcomed many of the amendments introduced by Parliament but cautioned MEPs that the budget for the programme is likely to face major cuts following an agreement on the financial perspective. If things remain as they stood in December, he remarked, then we "will not have sufficient funding," but will end up with less money in 2007 than we had in 2006. With such a "dramatic" decrease in funding, he warned, many of the proposed actions -- much as they may "enrich and broaden" the programme -- will have to be cut. "We will have to reassess the program after agreement is reached on the financial perspective", he said.
The European Commission had originally suggested a single action programme for health and consumer protection, with an overall budget of €1,203 million, of which €969 million were earmarked for health. The Commission hoped to achieve more efficiency by combining the two areas but Parliament, while in favour of pooling administrative resources, decided that the two areas, which come under different legal bases (Articles 152 and 153 of the EC Treaty) in which the EU has different powers, should be split into two separate programmes. The Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection (IMCO) thus dealt only with consumer protection, while the Environment and Public Health Committee (ENVI) was left to address the health component.
Commissioner Kyprianou still insisted on the original approach. "We continue to believe that there is a benefit from a single program", he argued, rejecting amendments that split the programme.
The European Parliament sees health as an extremely important area, one where the public has much to gain from an ambitious European policy, even if the organisation of healthcare and the funding thereof lies in the hands of the individual Member States. The new EU programme is designed to protect the public against threats to health, to make national healthcare systems more effective and to encourage healthy lifestyles. Noting major differences between new and old Member States in terms of the average lifespan of citizens, their state of health and their access to healthcare, members also highlighted the need for measures to reduce such inequalities.
MEPs also believe that a higher standard of health protection should be a goal of all EU policies. They wish to reduce inequality between and within Member States by guaranteeing access to healthcare for all according to comparable standards and without discrimination, and they wish to facilitate patient mobility. To achieve this, transparency between national healthcare systems must be improved. MEPs want to see greater cross-border cooperation, in particular for the treatment of rare diseases, plus exchanges of information on the services and treatments available and on reimbursements. The programme also includes special measures on risk prevention, information for practitioners and the public and the exchange of best practice. MEPs also backed an amendment calling for support for "complementary and alternative medicine" to be included in the actions supported by the Programme.
" We know the public is sceptical about Europe" -- noted Linda McAvan (PES, UK) arguing in favour of an ambitious health programme -- "but if people see us acting on things they care about, they might feel friendlier towards Europe".
It is now up to the Council of Ministers, as joint legislator with Parliament, to decide its position on the amendments adopted by MEPs. If all of Parliament's amendments are acceptable to the Council, the legislation will be adopted in its modified form. If the Council rejects any of Parliament's amendments or adds any of its own, the text will return to Parliament for a second reading.
The vote on the Thyssen report on the programme of Community action in the field of consumer protection, meanwhile, was postponed to the March mini-session in Brussels.
20060310IPR06061 Community action programme in the field of health (2007-2013)
EN
1
PHOTO
20060315PHT06393.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5243402
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
