MEPs debate the use of force in international relations
Security and defence
2006-02-24 - 09:34
A public hearing by the EP's Subcommittee on Security and Defence on Thursday brought together MEPs, Commission and Council representatives as well as academics to discuss the international legal norms surrounding military interventions. The main points of debate centred around the necessity of obtaining UN Security Council resolutions for EU missions, the possibility of pre-emptive strikes and the role of Parliament in the legitimation of military operations.
The central question of the public hearing today on The EU and the Use of Force: Criteria for Intervention was whether the EU could resort to the use of military force without first obtaining a mandate from the United Nations. Dr. Franz Cede, representing the Austrian Presidency, argued that although " the UN Charter should be the base of all decisions on intervention...the Charter could not foresee the big changes in international relations since the end of World War II ." He mentioned that the UN was created in a very different international climate 60 years ago, and that from his legal point of view, the Common Foreign Security Policy (CFSP) " does not require an explicit UN mandate " for a military operation.
Dr. Martin Ortega, a research fellow at the EU Institute for Security Studies in Paris, came to the same conclusion through a different path. He argued that the 1999 NATO intervention in Kosovo was a " poster-child " for a humanitarian intervention that was legitimate, but not necessarily legal (since it was not preceded by a UN mandate). Dr. Ortega differentiated legality from legitimacy by suggesting that " legitimacy will be decided in an international public sphere, a global 'agora' ". He cited the example of genocide on European soil as a case in which he can imagine European action even without UN backing.
Prof. André Dumoulin, from the Belgian Royal Military Academy in Brussels, proposed that the real legitimacy for intervention sprang from the nation-state, and that governments today were generally reluctant to send troops into harm's way, due to the reduced tolerance of today's public opinion for military casualties.
On the topic of preventive use of force, Prof. Stefano Silvestri rejected the strict separation between pre-emption and intervention, and underlined that these were but different endpoints of a messy continuum. He reminded Members that the European Security Strategy (ESS) spoke very sparingly of pre-emption, but that " the idea of waiting until a crisis erupts is suicidal, and will lead to a more frequent, less controlled and less effective use of force ." Mr. Jamie Shea, Director of Policy Planning at the Private Office of the Secretary General of NATO, suggested that preventive military action only be undertaken by an invitation of the parties concerned, such as in the recent case of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (fYRoM).
Dr. Johannes M. Becker of the Centre for Conflict Studies argued that the entire discussion was on the wrong track, because military intervention has " never provided a long-term solution to the world's problems ." He suggested that the EU should concentrate on becoming a " shining example of sound environmental, trade and development policy to the world ," using its resources to alleviate the underlying global social problems, and preventing conflicts from arising in the first place.
Among the MEPs who spoke, Tobias Pflüger (GUE/NGL, DE) was very concerned that legitimacy could spring " from the streets of the international community ," explaining that this threatened to upset traditional notions of international law. Girts Valdis Kristovskis (UEN, LV) emphasized that with future EU capabilities such as the Rapid Reaction Force--deployable on 15 days' notice--the real question will become how the EU takes the political decisions on when to intervene.
Chairman of the Subcommittee Karl von Wogau (EPP-ED, DE) also underlined the importance of the political dimension. He mentioned that the role of the European Parliament in the deployment decisions and oversight of EU missions was very limited, and did not meet basic standards of democracy that would apply to a nation-state. The Chairman also indicated that the European Parliament will take up the topic of military intervention criteria in a plenary debate during one of the March sessions, and plans to adopt a resolution. Mr. Wogau hoped that this could be achieved before the Council reaches a decision on whether or not to approve an EU military mission in the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
2006-02-23
Public Hearing
Committee on Foreign Affairs / Subcommittee on Security and Defence
In the Chair: Karl von Wogau (EPP-ED, DE)
20060220IPR05419 Website of the High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy of the EU: Website of the European Union Institute for Security Studies: Full text of the European Security Strategy
EN
1
LINK
http://ue.eu.int/cms3_applications/applications/solana/index.asp?lang=EN&cmsid=246
EN
2
LINK
http://www.iss-eu.org/
EN
3
LINK
http://ue.eu.int/cms3_fo/showPage.ASP?id=266&lang=EN&mode=g
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
