EP supports more stringent labelling for foodstuffs with quality indications
Agriculture
2006-03-16 - 13:25
European regional specialties and traditional products should be more clearly labelled as originating in the Union, say MEPs in two reports adopted in Strasbourg. MEPs also argued for a clearer distinction between different types of quality indications, and stricter enforcement of the origin of all raw materials used in production.
Parliament approved two consultation reports by Friedrich-Wilhelm Graefe zu Baringdorf (Greens-EFA, DE) on protected designation of origin (PDO), protected geographical indication (PGI), and traditional speciality guaranteed (TSG) agricultural products and foodstuffs. Parliament approved the Commission proposal to amend the relevant regulations, but insisted that high standards be maintained for these products.
PDOs (such as Roquefort cheese) must be produced, processed and prepared in a given geographical area using a recognised, specified method. PGIs (such as Newcastle Brown Ale) require a link between at least one stage of production, processing or preparation and the region, place or country of origin. TSGs (such as the Belgian cherry-flavoured beer Kriek) highlight the traditional composition or a traditional method of processing or preparation of a product.
A recent ruling by the WTO required the Commission to improve access by non-EU nationals to the Community system of granting these protected labels. Under the terms of this ruling, third country producers can apply for protected designations from the Commission -- although logically only for regions that lie outside of the Union. The EU's PDO, PGI and TSG labels, however, can cause consumers to think that these products in question were produced in the Community.
MEPs therefore suggest changing the labelling system of PDOs, PGIs and TSGs to reflect the actual origin of the product, arguing for "the places of origin and processing of each agricultural product or foodstuff marketed" under Community protection to "be clearly and visibly indicated on the label." They also suggested a better differentiation between the respective labels for PDOs, PGIs and TSGs, which at present look confusingly similar, "by means of colour codes specific to each symbol."
Parliament demanded that after at most 10 years of a transitional period, all raw materials used in a PGI be produced in the designated region, with only very stringently controlled exceptions to be granted to this rule. For TSGs, the EP suggested that only products that have been on the market "since before the Second World War" should be eligible for the appropriate label. MEPs also called on the Commission to publish the registry on the Internet.
20060309IPR06041 Agricultural products and foodstuffs as traditional specialities guaranteed Protection of geographical indications and designations of origin for agricultural products and foodstuffs For the list of PDOs, PGIs and TSGs, please visit the Commission's Register:
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5301672
EN
2
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5301662
EN
3
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/agriculture/foodqual/quali1_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
