Amendment of the 2nd Company Law Directive: maintenance of capital for public limited liability companies (PLLCs)
Free movement of capital
2006-03-14 - 13:26
By approving, the report by Piia-Noora Kauppi (EPP-ED, FI), Parliament supports the Commission initiative to improve European companies' competitiveness without hampering creditors' rights. By amending the 2nd Company Law Directive, in fact, MEPs want to reduce the regulatory burden imposed to public limited liability companies (PLLCs), particularly with regards to external reporting and shareholders' consultation.
The aim is to give the European PLLCs the possibility to react in a more flexible way to market developments that require a change both in capital and in the ownership of the company.
The directive, dating from 1976, provides rules on the maintenance of companies' capital and on the way shares must be acquired and sold. Moreover, it provides for the obligation to inform and report on these activities to shareholders and creditors. Nevertheless, the 2nd Company Law Directive has proven, according to Company Law SLIM group (Simpler Legislation for the Internal Market), to have brought unnecessary administrative obligations to PLLCs. The Commission therefore proposed to amend the Directive without weakening the right of shareholders and creditors to receive full disclosure on the companies' decisions in the field of capital maintenance.
MEPs decided to follow the rapporteur's opinion and to further decrease bureaucracy and reporting duties. Particularly, MEPs eliminate the sell-out and squeeze-out rights from the scope of the directive. Those rights are designed to protect minority shareholders in case of a successful bid and the consequent change in the ownership of the company's capital. In fact, squeeze-out rights oblige the successful bidder to acquire the shares of minority shareholders who have not accepted the bid. Sell-out rights enable minority shareholders to force majority shareholder to purchase their shares, after such a successful bid. Nevertheless, MEPs thought that these rights did not reduce the regulatory burden, as the scope of the proposal requires.
The Commission proposal is part of the Company Law Action Plan for modernising the EU company law. At present, consultations with stakeholders for further improvements are on the way.
20060309IPR06028
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
