Equitable Life: UK authorities in the dock
Institutions
United Kingdom
2006-03-28 - 21:28
EP committee investigates collapse of Equitable Life
The UK government and its financial industry regulators came under attack from representatives of Equitable Life policyholders at a meeting of the Committee of Inquiry into the Collapse of the Equitable Life Assurance Society, which was for the first time hearing evidence from victims of the company's collapse.
MEPs were told that Equitable Life policyholders had in fact been victims of poor implementation of EU law by the British government, which failed to take the steps required under Community life insurance directives to ensure a minimum standard of supervision of the company's finances, such as checking whether it had sufficient reserves to meet its liabilities.
The accusations were made by Tom Lake and Paul Braithwaite, of the Equitable Members' Action Group (EMAG), which claims to represent 18,000 policyholders. Mr Lake pointed to a range of problems. The UK, by "adhering to its traditional 'light touch' approach" to regulation, had "failed in implementation as well as in execution" of the directives, he said. "Insurance regulators were seriously under-resourced throughout the 1990s." This led to "lateness and superficiality of scrutiny of returns".
Under UK law, insurers had to appoint a qualified actuary to advise on reserving, bonuses, expectations, etc. In the case of Equitable Life, in 1992 the individual in question "became chief executive of Equitable Life without relinquishing the role of Appointed Actuary" but UK legislation did not provide for his removal simply because he held two conflicting roles.
In British law, "policyholders reasonable expectations" are supposed to be safeguarded by strict accounting requirements but "it was not until 2006 that proper accounting for policyholders' expectations was introduced into British practice. The UK was in breach of European law, through not enforcing its own law, until that point."
Moreover, says EMAG, in a number of ways "the UK's laws do not provide equal treatment to all citizens of the EU in respect of claims for remedy against breaches of Community or UK law in life insurance" . The result is "to distort the workings of the single market" . Although most of the 1 million-plus victims are UK-based, more than 15,000 are from other EU countries, notably Ireland and Germany.
As regards the regulatory bodies, EMAG believes the UK Financial Services Authority "falls between two of its legal objectives, maintenance of confidence in markets and protection of consumers". And as to legal remedies, "civil action against the UK government can only succeed if misfeasance, that is malicious practice, is proven. This is extraordinarily difficult" .
The eagerly awaited second report by the UK Parliamentary Ombudsman will be more wide-ranging in its scope than an earlier report. However, this will not be able to assess the status of claims by non-UK citizens. And according to EMAG, its findings may well be rebuffed by the UK government. Thus, says EMAG, "This [European Parliament] committee represents policyholders' last hope".
Monitoring of UK Law by the Commission
Experts from the European Commission told MEPs about the Commission's role in monitoring the implementation of the EU directives. The UK had certainly met the deadlines for enacting the legislation. The task of checking whether UK law correctly transposed the directives had been contracted to an outside firm, which found no major shortcomings in the UK's implementation. Rapporteur Diana Wallis (ALDE, UK) asked whether the Commission had "looked in detail at the regulatory framework" while Proinsias De Rossa (PES, IE), who drew attention to the plight of non-UK policyholders, wondered whether it "should have been more proactive in reviewing implementation" . The Commission replied that, after checking that the legislation had been enacted, it could only contemplate taking action if shortcomings were brought to its notice, for example if someone made a complaint.
Next steps
The purpose of the European Parliament's inquiry is to investigate alleged contraventions or maladministration in the application of Community law in the Equitable Life case. At the end of the meeting the committee adopted its "lines of action" based on the mandate laid down for it by the full Parliament. Its work will be structured around the following headings:
- transposition/implementation by the UK of Community law on life assurance;
- assessment of the UK regulatory regime in respect of Equitable Life;
- status of policyholders' claims and of redress mechanisms available to them;
- the question of the Commission's role.
The committee, which next meets on 25 April, has twelve months to complete its work, during which time it plans to conduct a series of hearings with interested parties. An interim report is due before the summer, probably in July. But, partly at the suggestion of EMAG, the committee decided its final report should not be adopted until it has been able to study the findings of the UK Parliamentary Ombudsman's second report, due for publication in October.
20060321IPR06582 Mandate and membership of Committee of Inquiry into Equitable Life Homepage of Committee of Inquiry into Equitable Life
EN
1
PHOTO
20060309PHT06035.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/comparl/tempcom/equi/default_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060118IPR04465 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
