Reinforcing Euro-Mediterranean dialogue
External relations
2006-03-30 - 19:21
EP President Borrell and President of the Tunisian Chamber of Deputies Mebazaa
This week the plenary session of the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly (EMPA) met in Brussels. MPs from 35 countries discussed issues of common concern to people from both shores of the Mediterranean: the Israeli-Palestinian peace process, freedom of speech, respect for religious beliefs and development. This session marked the end of the European Parliament's presidency of the Assembly.
At the meeting EP President Josep Borrell said he "still did not fully understand all the complexities of the Mediterranean, which is a concentrate of all the problems facing humanity." However, he was "more convinced than ever that Europe's relations with the Muslim world will be the major challenge facing Europe in the years ahead", explaining that the Mediterranean region is on the one hand "extremely dynamic" and on the other hand "becoming increasingly fragile".
Important forum for discussion
EMPA is part of the Barcelona-process, launched in 1995, and it aims to play a strong role in bringing citizens from the two shores of the Mediterranean closer to one another. Its approach is to replace an atmosphere of confrontation with one of dialogue. It is an important forum for in-depth discussions and almost the only opportunity for Palestinian and Israeli representatives to meet as equals. The 240-strong EMPA brings together Members of the European Parliament, EU national parliaments and parliaments of the EU's 10 partner countries around the Mediterranean (Algeria, Egypt, Israel, Lebanon, Jordan, Morocco, Palestinian Authority, Syria, Tunisia and Turkey).
Mr Borrell explained that "our aim is to establish an 'Alliance of Civilisations' at the very time when some people are seeking to promote a 'Clash of Civilisations'". The creation of the “Anna Lindh Euro-Mediterranean Foundation for the Dialogue between Cultures” is an example of an important action in this direction. The Foundation promotes the dialogue between cultures and contributes to the visibility of the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership through intellectual, cultural and civil society exchanges.
Cartoons crisis
When the crisis over the Danish cartoons of prophet Mohammed broke out, the EMPA Bureau was the first joint European and Arab body to speak on the subject with a single voice. EMPA this week strongly condemned "any offences against religious values" and urged governments "to ensure respect for religious beliefs…and to promote the values of tolerance, freedom and multiculturalism". At the same time, they stressed that freedom of expression is an essential part of any democratic, pluralistic tolerant and open society.
The Israeli-Palestinian peace process
The Israel-Palestine conflict is another key topic of the Euro Mediterranean cooperation. EMPA's final declaration urges the future Palestinian Authority to respect the 2002 Beirut Declaration of the Arab League which calls for peace with Israel. The Euromed parliamentarians called on both the Palestinians and the Israelis to keep the promises they have made so far and to go on with the peace process. The EMPA said it will strive to "continue and reinforce the Israeli-Palestinian dialogue" in its midst.
Having been EMPA President since March 2005 Josep Borrell now hands over the chair to Fouad Mebazaa, President of the Tunisian Chamber of Deputies. The next meeting will take place in Tunis. Mr Borrell said, "I hope, it will be an opportunity to continue to develop our ideas about the basic principles underlying the future of Euro-Mediterranean relations."
20060330STO06831 EMPA website: Euromed MPs issue strong call to Palestinians and Israelis to respect past commitments in the peace process: Euromed parliamentary committee condemns cartoons and resulting violence: Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly: a user's guide:
EN
1
PHOTO
20060330PHT06829.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/intcoop/empa/default.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060327IPR06793 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060321IPR06541 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060323BKG06654 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
