MEPs debate strategy for dealing with natural disasters
Environment
2006-03-21 - 19:30
Following the fires in Spain, floods in Germany and droughts in Portugal, MEPs from the Environment, Regional Development and Agriculture Committees met to discuss how Europe should respond to natural disasters. MEPs debated with experts from civil society the state of the European Solidarity Fund and prospects for a European strategy on natural disasters.
"2005 was a particularly bad year for natural catastrophes in Europe," said Joseph DAUL (EPP-ED, FR), the Chairman of the Agriculture C ommittee at the opening of the public hearing on Natural Disasters: How Should Europe Respond? He reminded all participants that no simplistic, uniform answers would be found to the problems caused by such natural events, and that it was essential to leave a "wide margin of manoeuvre" to Member States .
Josef Pröll, the Austrian Minister for Agriculture, Forestry, the Environment and Water Management, stressed the cost of natural disasters to the EU, mentioning that several billion euros of damage had been caused by the drought of 2005. He called for European solidarity in reacting to catastrophes, but said that "fixing the damage will not be enough" and that "sustainable protection will require prevention measures."
Questions about Solidarity Fund
Manuel Castro Brito, President of the Federation of Farmers' Associations of Baixo Alentejo (Portugal), urged the creation of an EU-funded insurance system, to be based on a system of reinsurance spread among all the Member States. He pointed out that emergency measures had had to be introduced in Portugal following sixteen months of drought in 2004 and 2005. "My country did not have enough resources to meet the demands of its citizens" , he said and spoke of the resulting depopulation in some regions of Portugal. "The Commission is unaware of the living conditions in some regions of the EU. We want a Europe where the money reaches everybody" , he added .
On this point Joseph Daul called for greater "budgetary flexibility" , saying "for exceptional measures we must be able to look at solutions with the Council and the Commission so that part of the agriculture budget unused by the end of the year can be used to meet the needs of our citizens who have been hit by disasters".
Several MEPs raised their desire for drought to be included in the scope of the Solidarity Fund. Eugénio Sequeira, Chairman of the Nature Protection League in Portugal, wanted to "get the Commission to release money soon so that droughts are regarded as disasters by the EU" . Rolf Berend (EPP-ED, DE) stressed the importance of preventing natural disasters occurring in the first place, saying this was "the only economically viable solution given the rising cost of dealing with disasters" . He also urged the Commission to draw up clear criteria for granting subsidies from the Solidarity Fund so as not to "arouse false hopes in the Member States" .
Some MEPs pointed out that many Member States already have measures in place to deal with natural disasters which needed improving rather then replacing. Dr Werner Schnappauf, Environment Minister of Bavaria, said: "By all means let's have common aims but let us not have directives of the sort we are too familiar with already…what is already there can be used to meet strategic aims" . He warned the EU against "getting bogged down in over-regulation and red tape" . Professor Jacqueline McGlade, Executive Director of the European Environment Agency, noted that a guarantee of early warning systems and a drought observation system can only be delivered if Europe pools its knowledge trans-nationally and modernises its "old and failing" infrastructure. Dr Thomas Maurer, Head of the Global Runoff Data Centre (GRDC) in the Federal Institute of Hydrology, said: "Unless you have proper data, you have no prospects…all should be jointly merged" . Professor McGlade warned: "Without this we will not be able to respond effectively…to the disasters which have no respect for national boundaries."
Common goals and shared resources
Environment Commissioner Stavros Dimas said the Member States were pooling and integrating resources better so "each Member State no longer needs to buy the equipment to deal with every scenario" . In this way the Union was remedying "the shortcomings the Member States cannot deal with alone" .
Edite Estrela (PES, PT), the Environment Committee's rapporteur on natural disasters, wanted to see simpler procedures to ensure a speedier response to disasters. She also mentioned that the idea of an international drought monitoring centre was being examined in Portugal and Spain.
2006-03-20 Co-chair Joseph DAUL EPP-ED FR Co-chair Gerardo GALEOTE QUECEDO EPP-ED ES Co-chair Karl-Heinz FLORENZ EPP-ED DE
Joint hearing of the Committee on Environment, Public Health and Food Safety, the Committee on Regional Development and the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development.
20060320IPR06484
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
