Euromed parliamentary committee condemns cartoons and resulting violence
Development and cooperation
2006-03-27 - 11:53
In an effort to heal the rifts which arose between European and Muslim countries after a Danish newspaper published cartoons of the prophet Mohammed, parliamentarians from the EU and ten Mediterranean partner countries adopted a resolution saying they strongly condemned any offence against religious sentiment and any incitement to xenophobia and hatred, as well as the violent demonstrations in which lives were regrettably lost and the attacks on European representations in Muslim countries.
MEPs and members of parliament from the 25 EU member states as well as the ten Euromed partner countries (Algeria, Egypt, Israel, Lebanon, Jordan, Morocco, Palestinian Authority, Syria, Tunisia and Turkey) added a call for the responsible use of freedom of expression, urging political leaders and media to avoid provocations regarding the religions and beliefs of others. At the same time, they stressed that the freedom of expression is an essential part of any democratic, pluralistic, tolerant and open society. Therefore, an open and transparent dialogue was seen as the only way to deal with the current situation and of preventing such things from happening again.
With regard to the Middle East conflict, the parliamentarians called upon the future Palestinian and Israeli governments to honour past commitments made in the peace process on the basis of the road map and to continue along this path. The international community was urged to respect the outcome of the Palestinian elections and to avoid any prejudice in relations with the Palestinian Authority. The partners involved in the peace process must continue to commit themselves to a peaceful, two-state solution and refrain from any unilateral actions violating the road map and international law, especially for electoral reasons. The Euromed parliamentarians were alarmed at the chaos that can result if the international community were to stop its support to the Palestinian people.
At the start of the EMPA political committee meeting a number of members protested the fact that a member of the Palestinian delegation had been blocked from attending the Euromed Paliamentary Assembly. The Palestinian representative Hassan Khreishi said that Mahmoud Alramahi had been refused a visa by the Belgian authorities.
The parliamentarians met in preparation of the plenary session of the Euromed Parliamentary Assembly to be held tomorrow ( see also background note ). On Sunday the EMPA political, economic and cultural committees held meetings throughout the day and voted texts which will be submitted to the plenary session for approval tomorrow.
2006-03-26
Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly
In the chair: Tokia Saïfi (EPP-ED, FR)
20060321IPR06541 Background note on the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060323BKG06654 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
