Irish MEP champions environmentally friendly fishing
Fisheries
Ireland
2006-04-04 - 16:51
MEPs promote environmentally friendly fishing across the EU
At Parliament's plenary session in March, Irish MEP Sean O'Neachtain (FF/UEN), representing the North-West constituency, presented a report on making fishing more environmentally friendly. Mr O'Neachtain's report, adopted without amendment, presented a series of recommendations aimed at enhancing protection of the marine environment and rebuilding of depleted fish stocks.
It also urges a more detailed study of coastal and offshore pollution, industrial and agricultural waste, deep-sea dredging and maritime transport, all of which have an impact on the marine environment and the condition of fishing resources.
Addressing Parliament on 14 March, Mr O'Neachtain said that marine resources must be harvested in the most environmentally favourable way in order to ensure sustainability of fish stocks. He added that the introduction of fishing practices which reduce adverse impacts on our ecosystems is a priority. In this regard, he highlighted the fact that 20 million tonnes of fish, the equivalent of about a quarter of total world catches, is being discarded worldwide every year.
"Taking that amount of fish out of the seas and then throwing it overboard is shockingly wasteful and has to be substantially reduced in the short term". said Mr O'Neachtain. He called for a review of all existing technical conservation measures in an attempt to reduce ecosystem and environmental damage.
Fisheries Commissioner Joe Borg responded positively to Mr O'Neachtain's speech and reiterated the efforts being made by the Commission to assure more environmentally-friendly fishing methods in the EU. Irish MEP for the South constituency, Kathy Sinnott (IND/DEM) responded by saying she was confident that the measures outlined, and others, could contribute significantly to sustainable fishing.
Another Irish MEP for the North West constituency, Jim Higgins (FG/EPP-ED) commended Sean O'Neachtain on producing a balanced report with sensible and practical recommendations, and said that. "If the recommendations are to be properly implemented, consultation with industry is vital. The issue of over-fishing is now being addressed", he continued "but the negative environmental element has been overlooked for far too long, and is equally important in order to begin the process of regeneration of depleted fish stocks".
20060403IPR06984 Information on Seán Ó NEACHTAIN MEP Text adopted on more environmentally friendly fishing methods
EN
1
PHOTO
20060404PHT07048.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/members/expert/alphaOrder/view.do?language=EN&id=22861
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2006-0091 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
