Trans-European energy networks: guidelines for the 2004 enlargement
Energy
2006-04-04 - 15:05
MEPs adopted a second reading report on Trans European Energy Networks. The amendments adopted are agreeable to Council and the procedure is completed at this second reading stage.
The aim of the directive is to adapt the guidelines (TEN energy) to the new shape of a European Union of 25 Member States, allow funding to be earmarked for projects of common interest, enable the internal market in gas and electricity to be completed and, to guarantee security of supply by means of interconnections between Member States and with neighbouring countries (south-east Europe, Mediterranean countries, Ukraine, Belarus). This approach to trans-European energy networks mirrors the approach followed for trans-European land transport networks.
The directive seeks to replace two older Decisions and to include the projects necessary to link the new Member States to be a part of the internal market of electricity and gas. It identifies projects of common interest and those which will be given priority in the coming years. It introduces new elements intended to facilitate the preparation of projects and the national procedures.
The compromise includes two important elements of the original Commission proposal supported by the EP but previously opposed by the Council: the declaration of projects of European interest and the European coordinator.
Background:
The European Union finances electricity and gas transmission infrastructure projects of European interest. A yearly budget of about €25m is spent mainly for supporting feasibility studies. Most of the projects cross national borders or have an influence on several EU Member States. The guidelines on Trans European Energy Networks specify which projects are eligible for funding. The financial rules specify the financial procedures involved. The present proposal seeks to replace the two existing directives with a new one.
The estimated amount of investment required in the period 2007-2013 for the construction of the priority projects for electricity and gas networks is around €28bn (20bn in the EU; 8bn in third countries). An additional amount will be required in order to complete the other projects of common interest. These investment amounts will be mainly provided by the energy networks operators and other private funds supplemented, where appropriate, by the European Community aid and loan mechanisms.
20060330IPR06839 Trans-European energy networks: guidelines for the 2004 enlargement (repeal. dec. 96/391/EC, 1229/2003/EC)
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=240812
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
