2004 budget discharge: Member States criticised for management of EU funds
Budgetary control
2006-03-24 - 11:28
MEPs are prepared to sign off the Commission's 2004 budget but they still want to keep up the pressure on EU governments. The Budgetary Control Committee is insisting on better management of Community funds where these are jointly managed by the Commission and the Member States but is nevertheless recommending that the Commission be granted the 2004 budget discharge.
Rapporteur Jan Mulder (ALDE, NL) has constantly stressed the principle of accountability. "It is not enough to say an action has been carried out; it must be shown how it has been implemented and who is accountable for this implementation" , he says. For this purpose the Budgetary Control Committee is suggesting the introduction of "national management declarations", to be signed by the relevant bodies of the Member States. The latter are responsible for joint management of the Community budget with the Commission and would therefore have to take their share of responsibility if errors occur.
The Council did not take up the central proposal of the 2003 discharge, i.e. a similar national declaration but at a higher level: MEPs wanted finance ministers to sign these declarations and thereby become accountable in cases where the EU budget is jointly managed. This idea got a cool reception from the Council in November 2005, with Member States claiming that existing control systems were adequate. In the 2004 discharge MEPs are now proposing a slightly modified approach: a series of sectoral declarations signed by bodies selected by the Member States themselves.
It should be pointed out that the Court of Auditors, for the eleventh consecutive year, has been unable to establish that "underlying transactions" (all the operations underlying the implementation of the Community budget) are free of irregularities. Under the EU Treaty, the Commission and the Member States are required to ensure "sound financial management" (Article 274), something which cannot be verified completely with the existing control systems.
Mr Mulder believes the Commission should not have to pick up the tab for a problem which originates primarily in the Member States. He stressed "I think the Council must be more responsible and more transparent. Refusing the discharge to the Commission is a nuclear weapon and would mean that the Commission would have to resign. It would not be fair to make the current Commission accountable for the policies of its predecessor. This Commission is cooperating well with the European Parliament to improve the EU's financial management, whereas the Council is resisting".
Review of Commission's internal control systems needed
The other main plank of the 2004 discharge relates to the accountability of the Commission under the same Article 274, which requires it to manage the Community budget properly. The current system, which is the fruit of the administrative reforms carried out by former Commissioner Neil Kinnock, requires the directors-general to report on their activities, by department and for the whole of the Commission. MEPs believe this system has shortcomings, as the quality of information contained in the reports is not checked and no one is accountable for it.
MEPs therefore urge other senior officials to accept accountability, namely the secretary-general of the Commission, the director-general for the budget and the internal auditor.
Discharge for the other institutions & the EU agencies
Turning to the other EU institutions, which are covered in the reports by Nils Lundgren (IND/DEM, SE), the committee decided by a large majority to propose that discharge be granted to the Committee of the Regions.
As to the EU agencies, apart from the "explicit" reservations expressed by the Court of Auditors regarding the European Reconstruction Agency for 2004, MEPs note that, following enlargement of the EU in 2004, the structures and operating methods of this agency have been affected. They want the Commission to analyse the actual or presumed problems and to propose adjustments to the rules.
In addition to calling on the agencies to make good and proper use of the resources available to them, MEPs urge them to avoid duplication as far as possible and to detail measures for improving the application of the transparency principle in communication with the public and in recruitment.
The reports on the 2004 discharge are on the agenda for the plenary session of 26 and 27 April in Brussels.
2006-03-20 Committee on Budgetary Control Chair Szabolcs FAZAKAS PSE HU 20060320IPR06483 The 2004 Discharge documents can be found here
EN
1
LINK
/comparl/cont/site/calendrier/documents/20march06/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
