European Parliament delves into demographic change
Social policy
2006-03-23 - 13:46
Demographic changes are one of EU biggest challenges
Europe is facing today unprecedented demographic change. People are living longer and fewer children are born. In this context, the European Parliament adopted today a report about the challenges for politics and society due to these changes. Key issues for the MEPs are employment promotion, more attention for family needs, the reconciliation of work and family life, a balanced immigration policy and the encouragement for older people to work longer.
In view of the Commission's Green Paper "Confronting demographic change: a new solidarity between the generations" MEPs adopted a report with 448 votes in favour, 70 against with 20 abstentions concerning the new challenges in the wake of an ageing European population. The report, drafted by Philip Bushill-Matthews (EPP-ED, UK) suggests an increase in employment and the prioritisation of family needs are the key issues for MEPs to consider.
Particularly with regard to the Lisbon Agenda and its aim to increase economic growth, the demographic change has to be taken seriously - the Commission notes that "never in history has there been economic growth without population growth" and considers there to be three basic trends concerning demographic change: a continuing increase in longevity; a continuing growth in the number of workers over 60; and continuing low birth rates. The report points out that although demographic change demands adequate political measures, it "should not just be treated as a problem, but also represents a positive challenge to societies to engage those in all age groups and to offer opportunities which previously did not exist".
MEPs emphasise that these three basic trends require certain political measures to be taken: a better promotion of families; further attention to be paid to the importance of a balanced immigration policy; and the encouragement of older people to participate in the labour market. Further measures should be taken in order to foster a reconcilability of work and family life: "The improvement of work-life balance for individuals should be a perpetual priority for governments." The report suggests that this could be achieved, for example, through more flexible working hours, higher equality in the work-place, family-friendly tax policies and better accessibility to childcare and dependent-care facilities. They call upon the Member States to take such measures into account, and adapt their policies accordingly.
MEPs believe that solidarity between the generations means not only a better integration of young people - e.g. regarding their access to the labour market - but also the promotion of access to lifelong education and training for people of all ages. In this context "the emphasis should be to encourage and enable people to work longer."
The House calls on the Commission to underline the importance of demographic change and its challenges by understanding it as a horizontal task, with a view to mainstreaming it as an issue in all the Union's activities. Furthermore, the Commission should decide on a more intensive exchange of views at the Spring Summit. Appropriate studies, analyses and a peer review relating to demographic change and its impact on society should be carried out within the context of the Community programme PROGRESS.
MEPs underline the fact that numerous issues relating to demographic change in society fall exclusively within the sphere of competence of the Member States and that therefore there is no general Community competence for establishing European rules in this area.
20060322IPR06614 Demographic challenges and solidarity between the generations
EN
1
PHOTO
20060323PHT06658.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5262022
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
