The Week Ahead 8 - 14 May 2006
Institutions
2006-05-05 - 10:23
Political group week - Brussels
Future of Europe. To mark Europe Day, the European Parliament and the Austrian Parliament are holding a forum to debate the future of Europe. Topics for discussion will be: the European Union on the world stage; globalisation and the European social model; the outlook for the area of freedom, security and justice; and the financing of the EU. The forum will be chaired by EP President Josep Borrell and the Speaker of the Austrian Nationalrat , Andreas Khol. European Commission President José Manuel Barroso and Council President-in-Office Wolfgang Schüssel will also take part (Monday and Tuesday) . CIA. A delegation of thirteen members of the temporary committee investigating alleged illegal activities by the CIA, led by its chair Carlos Coelho, goes to Washington DC from 8 to 12 May. MEPs will meet representatives of the US administration, members of Congress and various experts. The delegation will announce its findings at press conferences on 11 May in Washington and 16 May in Strasbourg. President Borrell. EP President Josep Borrell takes part in the EU-Latin America summit in Vienna (Friday) . Preparing for the plenary session. Parliament's political groups will devote the week mainly to preparations for the Strasbourg plenary session taking place on 15-18 May. Topics on the plenary agenda include the interinstitutional agreements on the financial perspective and budgetary discipline as well as the progress made by Bulgaria and Romania towards accession. Other items are nutritional and health claims made for food products, Parliament's annual report on human rights in the world and a debate on natural disasters. Greek President Karolos Papoulias, Bolivian President Evo Morales and the President of the Palestinian Authority Mahmoud Abbas and will address formal sittings of the House. Press briefing. Any changes to the plenary agenda decided by the Conference of Presidents will be announced at the press briefing at 11am on Friday 11 May in Brussels. Open Day in Brussels. The European Parliament opens its doors to the public on Saturday 6 May. The theme of this year's Open Day is worker mobility.
20060505IPR07953 For full details, see Agenda
EN
1
LINK
/news/expert/event_top_page/default/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
