MEPs seek answers on high energy prices
Energy
2006-04-21 - 11:17
The energy directives which aimed to liberalise electricity and gas markets in the EU were supposed to reduce prices to consumers through more competition. Since they came into force, however, prices have generally increased. The Industry, Research and Energy Committee held a hearing on Thursday to look at the reasons for this.
Results of a recent study on electricity markets show there is still a significant lack of EU market integration. While some local and regional markets clearly profited from the liberalisation, there is relatively little progress at EU level. Several markets of member states are still government dominated with little regulatory independence.
Higher prices, but not everywhere...
Representatives of industry and consumers as well as MEPs called for a functioning internal market and internationally competitive electricity and gas prices, saying exorbitant prices threaten both industrial and private consumers. Peter Class of the IFIEC, the International Federation of Industrial Energy Consumers, said the advantage of the opening of the markets not “in lower prices but in competitive prices” and in an assured security of supply. He added that consumers now pay double the price of a few years ago in Germany and the Netherlands, for example.
Esco Seppänen (GUE/NGL, FI) was concerned about consumers in those countries where energy prices have been low because of national conditions like cheap nuclear and hydro power: “We don't want to have German or Dutch prices in Finland and our consumers don't want to suffer because of the liberalisation of energy markets,” he said. However, the witnesses agreed that consumers in countries with low energy prices will indeed have to put up with possible price increases as a natural result of internal market operations.
Upheaval in the energy markets?
Dr. Felix Matthes of the Öko-Institut in Germany drew attention problems of market concentration and increasing dominance in the power production industry as monopolies limit the success of liberalisation. Patrizia Toia (ALDE, IT) was concerned about "the fate of European energy companies". She asked Paolo Scaroni, chairman of the board of the Italian company ENI, what he thought of the "risk" posed to his group by the arrival on its national markets of the major energy operators. Mr Scaroni replied that he would warmly welcome the emergence of "a major gas producer in Europe". In the view of Mr Matthes "competition is the best way of dealing with those who take advantage of the market".
Do we need an European Regulator?
Mr Class as well as Holger Krawinkel from the European consumers’ organisation BEUC promoted the idea of a public regulator or ‘energy watchdog’ at European level as a counterweight in favour of consumers. Herbert Reul (EPP-ED, DE) asked the experts "Are we talking about a single European regulator or a horizontal extension of national regulators in the Member States?" Gunnar Lundberg, of the Swedish company Vattenfall, wanted a definition of the role to be played by any future European regulator. In the view of Vincent de Rivaz, director of EDF Energy in the UK, "regulators play an important role at national level: what matters is their coordination".
MEPs call energy suppliers to account
Referring to the energy supply problems experienced by Europe before Christmas, Eluned Morgan (PES, UK) took private industry to task: "Why did you not take action then?", she asked, pointing out that these companies were at that very moment asking for extra funds "so as to vary the sources of supply". Deploring these "costly developments which could have been prevented earlier", she questioned the priorities of the companies, saying they were "divided" between the interests of "company profits and security of supply". On the same topic, Umberto Pirilli (UEN, IT) voiced concern about Europe's freedom of action if international agreements were not observed and referred to the implicit threat made that very morning by the gas giant Gazprom, the EU's biggest supplier, to redirect its exports to north America or Asia.
2006-04-20 Committee on Industry, Research and Energy In the chair Claude TURMES Greens/EFA LU
Hearing on European Energy Markets
20060411IPR07196 The contributions of the experts will be made available
EN
1
LINK
/hearings/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
