Improving transparency of the EU institutions
Institutions
2006-04-06 - 15:04
Openness and transparency of the EU institutions
The European Parliament takes action to ensure transparency and democratic scrutiny of the EU institutions. In two reports adopted Tuesday, MEPs call for the Council to meet in public when it is acting as a legislator, and requests the Commission to revise existing rules and to table new legislation by the end of this year on "the right of access" to European Parliament, Council and Commission documents.
How can the European Union talk about transparency and the need to close the gap with its citizens if it fails to apply the most basic rules on public access to the EU institutions' documents? The European Parliament came out in favour of revising existing legislation to ensure that debates in Council and all preparatory documents on legislative procedures are available to the public and easily accessible. Transparency and democratic scrutiny of the institutions are crucial to ensuring public trust in the Union itself. Responding to this concern, Parliament, in a non-binding report by Michael Cashman (PES, UK), adopted a package of recommendations calling on the Commission to revise the existing rules and to table new legislation by the end of this year on "the right of access" to European Parliament, Council and Commission documents. Firstly, the amended regulation should require access to be granted to all preparatory documents linked to a legislative procedure --including the opinions of legal services-- and also to the records of the Council debates where these institutions are "acting in their role as legislators" and to the identity of the author of each initiative. Secondly, the existing legislation should be modified as to define more clearly on what basis specific documents may be classified as confidential, "in order to protect the essential interests of the EU. MEPs want to prevent documents being classified as confidential "as a matter of routine, simply because they refer to an issue which is or might be relevant from a security point of view". Finally, the European Union should limit the right of Member States to restrict access to their contributions and amendments in co-decision and other legislative procedures, say MEPs. The existing EU legislation on public access to the institutions' texts was the fruit of lengthy negotiations between Parliament and Council before its adoption at second reading in 2001. MEPs feel today that the final formulation has proven too vague as far as access to EU documents and Council activities is concerned. Parliament pressures Council of Ministers to meet in public MEPs adopted another report from which calls for the Council to meet in public when it is acting as a legislator. The report, by David Hammerstein Mintz (Greens/EFA, ES), backs a call from the European Ombudsman for the Council to review its refusal to do so. MEPs consider it unacceptable that the EU’s most important law-making body still meets behind closed doors when acting as legislator. The say the Council should respond to calls for greater transparency coming from parliaments, civil society and the general public. Parliament says that it is indispensable that representatives of the public and the media are given access to the meetings. The House point out that the second paragraph of Article 1 of the EU Treaty obliges the institutions of the EU to take an approach of openness and closeness to the citizen during their decision-making processes and that any deviation from this principle would have to be based on very specific and strong reasons. Arguing that it is of the utmost importance for national parliaments to be able to hold their governments and ministers to account, and that meeting in public would make the Council’s work both more transparent and more relevant to European citizens, they call on the Council to take all measures needed to make the meetings in which it is acting in its legislative capacity open and accessible to the public. They request that the Council also broadcast, including on the internet, its public meetings and provide in good time dates and agendas of those meetings as well as issuing official transcripts in all EU official languages.
20060404STO07063 Special Report from the European Ombudsman following the draft recommendation to the Council of the European Union in complaint 2395/2003/GG concerning the openness of the meetings of the Council when acting in its legislative capacity Recommendation to the Commission on access to the institutions' documents Council of the European Union - public debates
EN
1
PHOTO
20060404PHT06994.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5296292
EN
3
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5197962
EN
4
LINK
http://ue.eu.int/cms3_fo/showPage.ASP?id=313&lang=en&mode=g
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
