Opening of the session and changes to the agenda
Institutions
2006-04-06 - 15:49
EP President Josep BORRELL opened the session by informing MEPs of the arrest of the former President of Liberia, Charles TAYLOR, who has now been transferred to the custody of the special court in Sierra Leone. He is accused of war crimes and crimes against humanity, including responsibility for murder, rape and the use of child soldiers.
Parliament, recalled President Borrell, had called for Mr Taylor to be transferred to the court: “ We should therefore applaud this victory against impunity for war criminals. The new Liberian President has been invited to address the House, and I hope this will happen soo n.”
Changes to the agenda
The Plenary approved a number of changes to the agenda:
The vote on the report by Csaba ŐRY (EPP-ED, HU) on free movement of workers will now take place on Wednesday, not Tuesday as previously announced. The vote on the package of reports concerning better lawmaking will take place at the Brussels session at the end of April.
The Council statement on Wednesday will have a new title: “ Road safety measures and security measures in the transport sector including their financing ”. The President noted that this debate was intended to include discussion of security measures in the fight against terrorism as well as road safety as such.
Thursday afternoon will now feature a Commission statement on the situation in South East Turkey followed by a debate. This was at the request of the GUE/NGL group whose leader Francis WURTZ (FR) spoke of “ a violent crackdown ” and “ serious violations of commitments entered into ” by Turkey. There will not be a resolution on this subject at this stage.
Finally, the human rights debate on Thursday concerning Iraq will be renamed to cover “ the Assyrian community in Iraq and the situation of prisons in Iraq ”, as requested by the EPP-ED group.
Highlights of the week
The state of Europe's economy will feature prominently this week. On Tuesday MEPs will debate economic guidelines for the EU and the Commission will unveil their revisions to the Services Directive. Wednesday sees Austrian Chancellor Wolfgang Schüssel debate the EU's Spring economic Summit, while EP President Borrell and leaders of the political groups will make statements on the results of negotiations on the EU's financial perspective. Elections in Ukraine and Belarus also feature.
MEPs gather for their April Strasbourg plenary session to deal with issues from the opening of labour markets to the new Member States, and to the future of the Middle East after the Israeli elections. The major debates of Monday evening focus on trans-European energy networks and on measures to increase the openness and transparency of the EU institutions in general and the Council of Ministers in particular. Michael CASHMAN 's (PES, UK) report on public access to EU documents will be part of this latter debate. MEPs will also debate progress on the WTO talks and the state of EU competition policy. The report by Alain LIPIETZ (Greens/EFA, FR) on competition policy (2004) will be the second point on the agenda. The third item on the agenda will be a debate and Commission statement with resolution on the situation regarding refugee camps in Malta. On Tuesday, the sitting will open with a debate on employment and the economy, as Parliament holds its annual debate on the EU’s guidelines for its Member States in these areas. There will also be a debate on the transitional arrangements restricting access for workers from eight of the countries who joined the EU in 2004 to the labour markets of many of the ‘ old ’ EU 15. Parliament will also debate two reports by Avril DOYLE (EPP-ED, IE) at the final, third reading stage of legislation on fluorinated greenhouse gases and emissions from air-conditioning systems in motor vehicles. The afternoon session will focus on the ‘ better lawmaking ’ agenda, including a report from Arlene McCARTHY (PES, UK) on internal market legislation. At 5pm, the Commission will make statements on its modified proposal on the directive on free movement of services and the posting of workers directive (96/71/EC). The report by Diana WALLIS (ALDE, UK) on the request to defend the parliamentary immunity of Witold Tomczak will be taken without debate and the vote will take place on Tuesday. On Wednesday ,President Borrell and the political group leaders will make brief statements on the results of the latest trialogue on the financial perspective . Depending on the outcome of the trialogue, which will take place on Tuesday 4 April, the Parliament may also adopt a resolution on this subject. The key debate of the week will take place on Wednesday morning as Chancellor SCHÜSSEL from Austria, current President-in-Office of the Council, presents the outcome of the Spring Economic Summit to MEPs . On Wednesday at midday, the President of Malta Edward Fenech-Adami will address MEPs in a formal sitting. He will then join President Borrell for a joint press conference. The afternoon session focuses on foreign policy matters, with successive debates on the Middle East after the Israeli elections, Belarus and Ukraine , plus a discussion on World Health Day . The EU's High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy, Javier Solana , will participate in the discussion on the Middle East. Two more reports from Michael CASHMAN (PES, UK), this time on identity checks at the external borders of the Schengen area, will be voted on Thursday. Thursday’s sitting beings with debates on development issues, as Parliament considers the work of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly and the issue of corruption in developing countries. MEPs will also vote on a report from Proinsias DE ROSSA (PES, IE) relating to the European Schools in Brussels. As usual., the session will end with three short debates on human rights issues around the world. The human right debates and resolutions will be on the following subjects: Darfur The Assyrian community in Iraq and the situation of prisons in Iraq Egypt: - the case of Ayman Nour.
20060330IPR06837
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
