An EU approach to economic immigration?
Immigration
2006-05-03 - 15:46
Immigrants contribute to the prosperity of Member States and have a beneficial effect on the EU labour market, according to MEPs who adopted a hotly contested report drawn up by Ewa KLAMT (EPP-ED, DE) aimed at defining for the first time an EU strategy on economic migration. The main points of disagreement were the type of rights which should be granted to legal immigrants and the possibility of creating a Green Card system.
Should the EU adopt a Green Card system to regulate the flow of immigrants from outside Europe? Would this help to solve the economic problems caused by Europe's ageing population? Answering these and other questions was the purpose of Ms Klamt's own-initiative report, which was drafted in response to a Commission green paper on economic migration. MEPs highlighted "the need to adopt a common immigration policy in order to end the exploitation of (illegal) workers" and said that "economic migration is a positive human phenomenon ". Yet MEPs emphasised that this was only "part of the solution" to Europe's demographic problems and economic difficulties. Problems within the EU labour market should be also solved by stimulating innovation and encouraging the employment of older workers in the EU.
Integration of migrants
MEPs called on Member States to promote the integration of economic migrants. They stressed that "the right to vote is a matter of Member State competence", while saying that to encourage the social and political integration of migrant workers Member States should recognise "the right of migrants who have been continuously resident in the Union for at least five years to vote in local and European Parliament elections."
MEPs rejected a controversial paragraph calling the European Commission to present a proposal on the creation of a Green Card system for economic migrants, although they did support the setting up of a single administrative procedure for issuing an employment and residence permit for economic migrants. In any case, the admission of a third country national for economic reasons should in principle be linked to the existence of a specific job, MEPs added.
Unable to reach a consensus, MEPs finally decided not to comment on the Commission's suggestion to give priority to citizens from all Member States before looking for non-EU nationals to fill any job vacancy (the principle of "Community preference"). Rapporteur Ewa Klamt had supported this idea in her original report.
Security issues
Any common policy to manage legal migration in Europe is inevitably linked with security issues and with the need to fight illegal immigration effectively. All members of the committee agreed that it must be up to each Member State to decide how many immigrants it can accept on its territory and under what conditions. However, the system chosen to manage legal and illegal migration in an EU country has a clear effect on other Member States. In that sense, MEPs pointed out that the mass regularisation of illegal immigrants carried out by countries like Spain "is no substitute for substantial policies for dealing with immigration or an effective means of recruiting economic migrants".
On the question of the return of illegal immigrants, MEPs finally urged the Commission "to define a return policy, based on the promotion of voluntary return, including possibly supportive measures in the country of origin".
The resulting text differed so much from the draft report initially proposed by rapporteur Ewa KLAMT that many members of her political group decided to abstain in the final vote on the text as a whole. The report was adopted by 259 votes in favour, 85 against and 176 abstentions.
20051027IPR01959
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
