The weather forecast of the century
Environment
2006-05-04 - 11:11
There is no need to ask whether climate change is really going to happen. It's already under way. Measures are urgently needed, not only to try and limit this inevitable process, but also to enable us to adapt to what is going to happen. This was the message given by Professor Guy Brasseur to MEPs on Wednesday.
Professor Brasseur was the guest of honour at the European Parliament's fourth STOA Annual Lecture. He began with the intention of talking only about the scientific aspects of climate change. But the forecasting models he presented, accompanied by often striking graphics, were bound to make his audience - and especially the MEPs present - wonder about what action should be taken. This is in any case the purpose of STOA (Scientific and Technological Options Assessment), a unit at the European Parliament which, as its name suggests, provides scientific and technological analysis for EU legislators. As Professor Brasseur himself said "good governance requires good science" . The STOA unit is currently chaired by Philippe BUSQUIN (PES, BE), an MEP and former European Commissioner responsible for research.
The weather forecasts we follow each evening on television, with animated satellite pictures, are as nothing compared to the models devised by the Hamburg-based Max Planck Institute for Meteorology, which Professor Brasseur heads. These models, of which MEPs could see the forecasts, constitute weather reports on a global scale and with a century-long perspective. Whether the hypotheses on which they are based are optimistic or pessimistic, they show that climate change is already happening and that it is on the whole a result of human activity.
Sharp regional variations
According to the models, the average temperature of the Earth will have increased from 2.1 to 4.1 o C in 2001compared with the average of the period 1961-1990. Half the ice in the arctic will have disappeared but in the summer, from 2080 onwards, European shipping will be able to reach Japan via the north pole without bumping into the tiniest ice cube. Sea-levels, as a result of the melting of the ice as well as global warming and hence an expansion in their volume, will rise by 20 to 30cm, or even 55cm according to the most pessimistic scenario.
On the European mainland the effects will vary and the result will not always be warm temperatures. There will be more droughts and even the beginnings of desertification in the Mediterranean basin (as there will be in Amazonia and China), but heavier rain and worse floods in central Europe, colder weather in the north because of the slowdown of the Gulf Stream and more frequent and more violent storms everywhere. The very long-term future is difficult to predict but, over a human lifetime, these changes are inevitable. Although the more optimistic scenarios are a little less disturbing, no model currently being used is stable and the temperature curves will continue to rise after 2001. "If we stopped all CO2 emissions today, the temperature would continue to rise for between 200 and 300 years" , said Professor Brasseur.
"Kyoto is not enough"
With a weather report like that, it won't be enough to get your umbrella or parasol ready for the next day. What can be done? Replying to Members' questions, Professor Brasseur of course expressed support for the efforts being made under the Kyoto Protocol to cut greenhouse gas emissions. "But Kyoto is not enough" , he added. "To have an impact on these models, we must reduce emissions not by 5 to 10%, but by 80 to 90%. Kyoto is only the beginning of a response." (This is a timely message a few days ahead of the UN conference on climate change, which opens on 28 November in Montreal and will be attended by Members of the Environment Committee).
In that case, he was asked, what recommendations would he make to world leaders? While not claiming to have any hope of convincing George Bush, Professor Brasseur said he would first try to make the leaders acknowledge that serious climate change is highly likely. Then he would tell them that "while mitigating measures are needed" - such as the Kyoto Protocol - "new energy policies must be implemented, in particular in the United States. And I would tell the Europeans not to be satisfied with the Kyoto Protocol but to develop new technologies". And also not to neglect research "as many processes are still little known" which could possibly alter the parameters of the problem. Which is an elegant way of saying that good science also requires good governance.
The EP is very active in the field of climate change. On 16 November it adopted in plenary a report drafted by Anders WIJKMAN (EPP-ED, SE) on climate change, which contains a list of recommended policy measures. On 22 November, the Environment Committee also adopted a report by Anne FERREIRA (PES, FR) on the environmental aspects of sustainable development, which will come before the plenary in January. Another report is being drafted by Edith ESTRELA (PES, PT) on the environmental aspects of recent natural disasters in Europe.
2005-11-23 Chairman of STOA Philippe Busquin PES, BE
20051121IPR02661
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
