For a transatlantic partnership agreement
External relations
2006-04-25 - 18:42
The Committee on Foreign Affairs adopted a report today calling for a Transatlantic Partnership Agreement to strengthen the EU-US relationship. While reiterating the common commitment to combat terrorism and the spread of weapons of mass destruction (WMD), the report also points out several irritants that have led to recent disagreements between the two sides.
The own initiative report by Elmar Brok (EPP-ED, DE) passed by a large majority (39,3,6) in committee today. It " underlines the importance of NATO's role…[as] a crucial guarantor of transatlantic stability and security ." It also calls for close cooperation on the Iran nuclear issue, China, India, Japan, Latin America and Russia, and " encourages the partners to reinforce their common efforts to promote peace, prosperity and progress in the Middle East ."
Nevertheless, the report does not shy away from criticisms of US policy. The committee " urges the US to extend the Visa Waiver Program to cover all EU citizens. " It also " strongly regrets […] the combination of mistrust due to suspected violation of human rights and international law involved in the so-called extraordinary renditions in Europe," and " reiterates its call for the immediate closure of the Guantánamo detention centre. "
On the institutional front, the committee proposes the adoption of a Transatlantic Partnership Agreement by 2007, " reiterates the need to strengthen the parliamentary dimension of the Transatlantic Partnership by transforming the Transatlantic Legislators' Dialogue (TLD) into a transatlantic assembly ," and suggests that the EP should establish a permanent post in Washington DC to maintain permanent contact between the two bodies.
Mr Brok's report joins a related one by Erika Mann (PES, DE) from the Committee on International Trade, which calls for a barrier-free transatlantic market to be established by 2015, and the creation of a bilateral trade dispute settlement system. The reports will be debated jointly during the May mini-plenary in Brussels.
2006-04-25
Committee on Foreign Affairs
In the Chair: Elmar Brok (EPP-ED, DE)
Procedure: Own initiative
Plenary vote: May II, Brussels
20060424IPR07537 EP calls for a barrier free transatlantic market:
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060411IPR07197 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
