Better language competence would increase mobility in the EU
Education
2006-04-27 - 16:55
MEPs push for multilingualism
Proficiency in at least two foreign languages should be a basic skill for every European citizen studying and working in the EU, stresses the European Parliament in a report approved on 27 April. MEPs strongly support the introduction of a common European indicator of language competence, which would enable comparisons between linguistic proficiency and Member State policies in this area.
To encourage mobility in the enlarged EU, it is important for European citizens to possess knowledge of several languages. In March 2002, the Barcelona European Council called for the introduction of a linguistic proficiency indicator to bridge the current information gap regarding the actual language and communication skills of European Union citizens. While MEPs consider that the EU Action Plan 'Promoting Language Learning and Linguistic Diversity 2004-2006 ' constitutes a positive step towards the achievement of the Barcelona objective (mother tongue + two languages), there is a clear need to step up EU efforts in this area. Consequently, they welcome the creation of an European Indicator of Language Competence proposed by the Commission in a communication from last year which is to measure overall foreign language competencies in four areas: reading, comprehension, speaking and writing in each Member State. The Indicator should record the proficiency of the sample at each of the six levels on the scales of the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages of the Council of Europe and this in at least two languages other than the mother tongue. This reference framework has gained wide acceptance and is already used in many Member States.
During an initial phase, linguistic proficiency will be tested in the five most widely taught languages in the European Union (English, French, German, Spanish and Italian), but the Parliament wants to make sure further languages would be added at a subsequent stage. According to a recent Eurobarometer survey " Europeans and their languages ", published on February 2006, 38% of Europeans speak English as a foreign language, while the rates for the other four languages are 14% for German, 14% for French, 6% for Spanish and 3% for Italian.
The Indicator will offer a valuable technical instrument that will help the European Commission obtain reliable information concerning the linguistic proficiency of European citizens, in particular young people. It will also enable comparisons to be made between Member State policies in this area, and will facilitate consultation regarding best practice, thereby giving fresh impetus to language teaching.
In the context of the European Year of Workers' Mobility, rapporteur Manolis MAVROMMATIS (EPP-ED, GR)said: " Learning two languages in addition to the mother tongue will give motivation and an opportunity to young people to exercise their right to free movement within EU. They will have opportunities to study and work in the EU25. That is one more reason why we should have a common language test that will indicate the true skills of the Europeans ."
MEPs believe that Member States should be fully involved in development and implementation of the Indicator. Member States are invited to participate actively in the implementation and development of the Indicator and give fresh impetus to language teaching, including through successful language immersion programmes.
Parliament calls on the Commission to actively encourage information concerning the advantages of language learning from an early age, and considers that initiatives to inform the public of the advantages of foreign language proficiency, such as European Day of Languages (26 September), a Council of Europe initiative, and the European Language Label, an EU initiative, should contribute more substantially to increasing multilingualism.
Finally, MEPs call on the Council to concur with the timescale adopted by the Commission regarding the establishment and implementation of the European Indicator of Language Competence so as to organise a first pilot exercise to test the proposed testing instruments in 2007.
20060421IPR07490
EN
1
PHOTO
20060426PHT07685.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
