EU budget 2007-2013: a deal is done - €4 billion more but some dissatisfaction
Budget
2006-04-06 - 11:18
MEPs reacted to the recent deal struck between the Parliament, Council and Commission on the financial perspective 2007-2013. Although, many MEPs stated their dissatisfaction with the figures, it was felt that reaching a deal was essential. MEPs had secured a further €4 billion on the deal the Council had struck in December under the UK Presidency.
President Josep BORRELL said " We now move to the agenda item concerning the state of play on the financial perspective. On this subject, I would like to tell the plenary briefly that our negotiating team, chaired by Mr Lewandowski, has reached an agreement with the representatives of the Commission and Council. As you are aware, Parliament had set a number of cumulative and quantitative objectives for the financial perspective, namely an increase in overall resources and an improved structure and improved modes of implementation for the budget.
With respect to the Council's position of December, the ceiling has been raised by EUR 4 bn of 'fresh money', to be added to the resources of certain programmes which would have suffered severe cuts. These include Erasmus, the lifelong learning programmes, innovation and aids to SMEs.
To these additional resources should be added an increase of EUR 2500 m in the EIB's reserves, to fund programmes in the fields of R&D, transport networks and aids to small businesses. For the flexibility instrument, the amount for the current period, i.e. EUR 200 m per annum, is maintained, but with the possibility of carrying over unutilised resources to the next two financial years."
Parliament's rapporteur Reimer BÖGE (EPP-ED, DE) said he was not satisfied with this result. The Financial Perspective for the enlarged Europe and what was needed in terms of added value had vanished, he said. However, he said, “ in current circumstances we have reached the very limits for an acceptable solution. We did our utmost. Parliament was not just obsessed with figures – we wanted reform of policy, new instruments, the cutting of red tape and guarantees for Parliament's role on foreign policy instruments – and a proper role in the 2008-9 review. We have managed to get these qualitative aspects on board in a satisfactory way. As far as the figures are concerned, all sides have reached the pain threshold .” There was, he said, more funding for Life Long Learning and competitiveness and an additional 40,000 students would be able to take part in European exchanges. He thanked all of Parliament's team for working together to “ deliver this commitment to European added value .”
For the Commission, José Manuel BARROSO expressed his satisfaction at the agreement reached by the negotiators. He congratulated all involved. “ This is clearly better than the European Council's December agreement. It is good news that we now have the funds to match our ambitions for the next seven years .” He also mentioned the extra funding for TENs, Life Long learning and research. He hoped the agreement would be endorsed by the full Parliament and Council without delay. “ This is not just about the figures, it is also about sound financial management principles, transparency, accountability and the quality of the way we work together .” He pointed to the increased role for Parliament in the planned review of EU spending. “ No-one is completely happy, but this is a good demonstration on the spirit of partnership, I hope we can move swiftly to build on this momentum to get all our programmes up and running in time for next year .”
Political group speakers
EPP-ED group leader Hans-Gert POETTERING (DE) said that a lot of progress had been made which would not have been possible without the European Parliament, and without looking beyond the national interest to the common European interest. “ We are not entirely happy, but we know that more could not be achieved .” He too praised the EP negotiating team. He called for national authorities to shoulder their responsibility for proper handling of EU funds, not just blaming the EU for any deficiencies.
For the Socialist group, Martin SCHULZ (DE) said that while the agreement was “ less that what we wanted, it was more than many expected. It was a victory for common sense. ” He said the review clause was especially valuable. He noted the Commission had undertaken to present proposal for the review. He looked forward to improved financial management, saying the EU must spend money properly – and that there was a general agreement to make progress. Thanking all involved, he said, “ Today is a good day .”
ALDE group leader Graham WATSON (UK) also thanked the negotiating team and the Austrian Presidency. “ I hope this agreement will commend itself for approval... even though we are not satisfied. There is not enough for research, for Gallileo, TENs and Life Long Learning. I know if is fashionable in some national capitals to pour cold water on our common endeavour... if the central force for developing our Union is no longer visionary leadership from within, then perhaps developments beyond our borders will persuade us to provide the Union with the resources we need .”
On behalf of the Greens, Monica FRASSONI (IT) declared that they were "not terribly pleased" with the agreement and not particularly convinced that the Parliament could not have got more. She noted how the "basic problem is the same: the unwillingness by MEPs to pay for what's necessary in the EU" . She thanked the negotiating team, whilst noting that it was entirely composed of men. Ms. Frassoni spoke of her concerns that the revision clause was not included in the agreement, she asked what the fate of this clause will be and what the EU decision making process will be in terms of its external progress. She lamented the 20 Billion Euro cut for rural development and also asserted that the topics of EU taxes and EU-own resources have to be kept on the agenda. She closed by describing the agreement as an "unsatisfactory" one.
Francis WURTZ (GUE/NGL, FR) said that the EU budget is "not the only instrument to foster plans for development and growth", suggesting the Central Bank as an example of another instrument. He described the budget as "an expression of political will" and in correlation, mentioned the lack of Members' States willingness to pay for the political decisions they take, suggesting enlargement, the structural funds and the cohesion funds as examples of this. Mr. Wurtz noted the "dreadful effects on research and cooperation" that the rejection of the December compromise - "a negative compromise " - had. He considered the Parliaments' budgetary demands to be "very modest indeed" and accordingly advised: "we have to reject this farce, we have to be responsible" .
Wojciech ROSZKOWSKI (UEN, PL) spoke of his mixed feelings. He talked firstly of his relief that a decision has been made after 15 months, and that the pressure on EU finances is behind us. However he also spoke of his disappointment in the compromise, saying that there was a "limited distribution of EU funds" and the fact that the "Council was too tough in the face of modest demands" was "not very pleasant" . Consequently he said that he could almost understand the Euro-scepticism and Europhobia, mentioning the stinginess of Member States. He declared that his group "will support this proposal", warning however that "if we are below the threshold in the annual budgets, the future of the Union is black" .
Nigel FARAGE (UK) for the Independence and Democracy group, opened by saying that the EU was "indulging in its favourite sport and past-time, that of navel-gazing". He wondered when Members would start "addressing the real issues of the EU budget", declaring it to be "totally flawed" and asking "do we need a budget at all?". He criticised the British Prime Minister Tony Blair for being "outwitted, outclassed, and outplayed by President Chirac" and getting a bad deal for British taxpayers. He asked why the UK should be paying for the underground systems of other countries, accusing the UK of pursuing "economics of a madhouse " by "subsidising its economic competitors ". He closed by saying that the UK would not be doing so for much longer: "no British cheque will be coming to you in a few years, but we have enjoyed ourselves while being here".
Jean-Claude MARTINEZ (NI, FR) said that with the financial perspectives envisaged, the European Union would find it impossible to catch up with the US market. He spoke of a need of funds for hospitals, laboratories and high-speed trains, and accordingly lamented the lack of enthusiasm in European economic policy-making.
President Borrell's conclusion to the debate
In concluding the debate, President Borrell said: " The political groups have expressed different degrees of dissatisfaction. They have also made a call to continue to work in order to create a system of own resources that will permit the EU to set aside national egoisms in future budgetary negotiations , t o which several presidents of group have referred.
Chancellor Schüssel, we want to encourage you to follow th e path that you have bravely outlined. We are sure that the future of the Union depends on it , with better budgets to reach the Union 's objectives . The political groups will debate the deal and the Parliament will vote on the agreement in next plenary session. "
20060330IPR06876
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
