EU Noise directive means better protection at the workplace
Environment
United Kingdom
2006-04-05 - 16:02
Noise Directive enters into force on 6 April
Do you have to raise your voice to be heard by someone just two metres away? Do you use noisy powered tools or machinery for more than 30 minutes a day? Do you work in a noisy industry such as construction, road repair, engineering or manufacturing?
If you answer yes to these or any of the other questions asked by the UK's Health and Safety Executive in its current information campaign, you should know about the Control of Noise at Work Regulations, which come into effect in the UK on 6 April 2006.
The European Parliament and the Council of Ministers set the basic decibel exposure limits and laid down what protective measures employers must take when they adopted the EU Noise Directive in February 2003, the second in a series of health & safety directives designed also to protect workers from vibrations, optical radiation and electro-magnetic fields.
According to the UK's Health and Safety Executive, 170,000 people in Britain suffer deafness, tinnitus or other ear conditions resulting from harmful noise at the workplace. The new regulations introduce lower acceptable noise levels at work and define what steps have to be taken by employers to protect workers.
Maximum exposure levels
The EU directive set maximum exposure values for an 8-hour period, with a weekly averaging of exposure only in justified circumstances. If the decibel threshold is exceeded, workers have to wear individual hearing protectors, employers are responsible for checking personal protection measures and must take measures to eliminate or reduce risk on the basis of a risk assessment.
All workers in noisy industries are clearly covered by this directive. However, the 85 decibel threshold could conceivably be reached also from machinery as diverse as power drills, detonators, motorcycles or electric lawnmowers.
Examples of professions who are unlikely to be affected are: teachers (however noisy a class full of school children might be, it is unlikely that an 85 decibel average would be maintained over an 8-hour period); football referees (even a packed Premiership stadium is unlikely to reach the 140 decibel 'peak sound pressure' level when the home team scores - 140 decibels is equivalent to a jet plane taking off 25 metres away).
During the European Parliament's debates, much was made of the music industry, both in the need to protect those at risk of damage to their health from noise, and in the difficulties for the music industry to adapt. The Parliament rapporteur at the time, Helle Thorning-Schmidt from Denmark, said: "We have heard much about the British pop industry and about bagpipe players, all of which livened up the debate. It is not that I wish to provoke anyone with whom we have been debating this matter, but…irrespective of whether it sounds pleasant or unpleasant, noise can cause very serious damage to hearing."
In the end, the Directive allows an extension for the music and entertainment industry beyond the 2006 deadline for other industries. The UK Health & Safety Executive plans to produce guidance for the music and entertainment industries and will carry out a wider public consultation at the end of 2006 before bringing in new rules in April 2008.
Comments on the directive
Four British MEPs involved in preparing the legislation give their views on the outcome of the Noise directive.
Philip Bushill-Matthews (West Midlands, Conservative) said: "When the European Parliament voted on this Directive, the UK Health and Safety Executive at the time said that some of the amendments from UK Labour MEPs to this Directive would do nothing for health and safety, but simply add to the burdens on business. The amendments passed nonetheless. This is exactly the sort of Directive that needs to be revisited and simplified by the current Commission if they are to fulfil their pledge to start securing better regulation and reducing red tape."
Stephen Hughes (North East, Labour) said : " T his is a sensible and proportionate improvement to the legislation . M y own father finds it difficult at times to converse with my infant son because of industrially induced hearing loss - that is the part of the hearing spectrum most affected . These improvements will hopefully make sad situations like that - all too common in areas with a history of heavy industry - a thing of the past . "
Liz Lynne MEP (West Midlands, Liberal Democrat) said: "If the socialist rapporteur had got her way, many industries across the EU would have gone to the wall. Fortunately common sense prevailed and after months of lobbying by myself and a group of industry representatives, significant concessions were made and a practical text agreed. The European Parliament voted for a directive to use weekly instead of daily averaging of noise exposure limits whenever 'duly justified', to take the use of hearing protectors into account and to look at the entertainment and leisure industries separately."
Jean Lambert (London, Greens) said: "A good working environment is vital to our physical and mental health. We have to do our utmost to protect workers from conditions such as noise at work that may affect their future quality of life. Hearing loss is a serious problem which can be irreversible. It does not just affect those using pneumatic drills but also those working in noisy music venues so we need to take sensible precautions."
Hugh Robertson, Health & Safety Officer at the TUC, said: "The TUC believes the Noise Regulations are welcome and very long-overdue. However, they will only be effective if there is rigorous enforcement".
Also commenting on the Directive was Rob Oliver, Chief Executive of the Construction Equipment Association. He said: "The CEA, as the trade body for manufacturers in the UK, have been involved at all stages of the EU Directive and the Control of Noise at Work Regulations. Our members have been involved in a tremendous amount of work over the years to produce quieter equipment - both in terms of the sound power of machines emitted during their working modes and the sound pressure levels experienced by operators in the cab. There is continuous research development to find ways to further reduce the noise of equipment used outdoors. This is regulated by another EU Directive (2000/14/EC). There is certainly no shortage of legislation in this area but our members have always risen to the challenge. We take our environmental and health and safety responsibilities very seriously".
The Health & Safety Executive is running an information campaign during March and April aimed in particular at advising employers, with a basic guide for small businesses, a more detailed guidance booklet, advice on cost-effective solutions in the workplace and an information helpline for workers or employers: (from the UK only) 0845 345 0055.
20060403IPR06983 European Parliament debate, 4 December 2002 Directive 2003/10/EC of 6 February 2003 on the minimum health and safety requirements regarding the exposure of workers to the risks arising from physical agents (noise) UK Health & Safety Executive Noise campaign March-April 2006 For more info on the Construction Equipment Association
EN
1
PHOTO
20060404PHT07031.jpg
EN
3
LINK
http://europa.eu.int/eur-lex/pri/en/oj/dat/2003/l_042/l_04220030215en00380044.pdf
EN
4
LINK
http://www.opsi.gov.uk/si/si2005/20051643.htm
EN
5
LINK
http://www.coneq.org.uk
-//EP//TEXT CRE 20021204 ITEM-009 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
