Groundwater: our most important natural resource
Environment
2006-04-25 - 15:46
"Groundwater is our most important natural resource. Over half of the EU's groundwater sources are polluted. Once polluted they can no longer be cleaned up. Hence the importance of protecting them". This, in the words of Parliament's rapporteur Christa Klass (EPP-ED, DE), is the key issue being tackled by a new European directive.
Ms Klass' second-reading recommendation on the protection of groundwater against pollution was adopted by the Environment Committee on 25 April by 50 votes to 0 with 1 abstention. MEPs were not happy with the Council's common position, which they said did not pay sufficient attention to prevention. A number of first-reading amendments were reintroduced.
Differing views between MEPs emerged, particularly over the necessary degree of harmonisation of standards. Johannes Blokland (IND/DEM, NL) did not think "that common standards are needed Europe-wide when situations can vary greatly" . Marie-Noëlle Lienemann (PES, FR), however, believed it was necessary at least to have "a system of gradually converging standards, as one of the goals of the framework directive on water is to make groundwater drinkable" .
The text adopted by the committee does not impose single standards for all countries, except for nitrates and pesticides but it does seek to harmonise methods for measuring potential pollutants. MEPs wish to beef up the directive on a number of points, by improving sampling methodologies, tightening up the wording of the legislation and closing any loopholes to prevent the directive being undermined.
Where the rules on nitrates and pesticides would require changes to farming practices, MEPs suggest providing special aid through the common agricultural policy. For around ten other substances, the directive leaves it up to Member States to lay down limit values. These include arsenic, cadmium, lead, mercury and sulphates. The resultant range of national standards should, however, be the subject of an impact study on the environment and the single market.
The standards adopted should be reviewed five years after the entry into force of the directive (i.e. 2011 if the legislative procedure is completed in 2006) and every six years thereafter. In addition, MEPs want the directive to be the subject of an overall efficiency assessment by 2015.
Among other improvements introduced by the committee are the establishment of a common methodology for the protection of spa and medicinal waters and tougher rules, e.g. to ensure that catchment areas for drinking water are indeed protected by the new directive, since in most Member States drinking water is usually taken from groundwater.
2006-04-25 Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety Chair Karl-Heinz Florenz EPP-ED DE
Procedure: Codecision, second reading
Plenary vote: June, Strasbourg
20060424IPR07539
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
