Irish MEP leads new research project on autism
Social policy
Ireland
2006-04-20 - 18:16
Kathy Sinnott MEP
Earlier this year, Irish MEP and disability rights campaigner, Kathy SINNOTT (Independent/IND-DEM), officially launched the European Autism Information System (EAIS), a pan-European research initiative which aims to establish an information system to record data on autism and determine the incidence of the disorder in Europe. A specific database is also being developed by the National Centre on Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities in the USA.
Autism Spectrum Disorder, or autism, is a biological disorder which affects the brain, and can lead to social interaction problems, communication problems and behavioural problems. It varies widely in its severity and symptoms and can often go unrecognised. There is no cure but early detection, educational and behavioural therapies and medical intervention, can all help to improve the day-to-day lives of adults and children with autism.
Kathy Sinnott is a member of the European Parliament Committee for Environment, Public Health and Food Safety, and Vice-President of the Parliamentary Intergroup on Disability. Since her election to the Parliament in 2004, she has lobbied for an early warning system to track the increasing incidence of autism. The successful launch of the EAIS project means this will now be realised. In 1996, Kathy Sinnott founded the Hope Project in Ireland, which was designed to reach, inform, assist and motivate parents to ensure that their disabled children get the appropriate help as early as possible ( www.hopeproject.ie ). Due to the relatively high incidence of autism in Ireland, the Hope Project team now deals predominantly with families affected by autism. In January 2005, Ms Sinnott voiced her concerns about the Commission’s lack of urgency in relation to the high and still increasing incidence of autism in the EU. She called on it to follow the American example whereby each US state is obliged to report autism incidence rates at least once a year . She stressed that in the EU, there was no reliable data available to determine the incidence of the disorder, which she called an epidemic, and that this was a major public health concern. According to Ms Sinnott, there is a severe shortage of therapists working with people with autism in Ireland and there is currently no specialised medical treatment publicly available.
At the launch of the project in January, Ms Sinnott described the 'European Autism Information System' as a 'giant step forward' in the search to find out just how prevalent autism is in Ireland and the rest of the EU. The European Commission has committed €480,000 to the project, although it is expected the costs will far exceed this figure. The project will bring together key experts in order to create a network as a forum to advance the communication and co-ordination of professional expertise in the EU. There are six associated partners and twenty-two collaborating partners who will work together on the project, and a leading expert in autism has been appointed as project leader in each of the participating European centres. In Ireland, the project is being led by Professor Ivan J. Perry, head of the Department of Epidemiology & Public Health in University College Cork. The initial results are expected to be known by mid-2008.
20060403IPR06985 The Hope Project Ireland Kathy Sinnott MEP
EN
1
PHOTO
20060420PHT07480.jpg
EN
2
A
http://www.hopeproject.ie
EN
3
LINK
http://www.hopeproject.ie/
EN
4
LINK
/members/expert/alphaOrder/view.do?language=EN&id=28119
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
