Helping women immigrants to integrate in EU societies
Women's rights/Equal opportunities
2006-04-26 - 14:15
How can the EU advance the integration of women immigrants into the labour market and society in general? Language learning, zero-tolerance for human rights violations, and awareness-raising about fundamental rights and obligations were among the answers put forward at a hearing organised by the Women's Rights Committee on Tuesday.
Migration is no longer a predominantly male phenomenon. Women account for almost half of the approximate 185 million migrants worldwide. Europe is home for approximately 8 million immigrant women with diverse backgrounds and motives for migration. Edite Estrela (PES, PT) said immigrant women face two-fold discrimination, as immigrants and as women, and on two levels, in the host community and within their own community. All forms of discrimination women face need to be addressed, she said.
Gross violations of women immigrants' fundamental rights, such as forced marriages and female genital mutilation, is an area of particular concern. " Make forced marriages a crime ", said German lawyer Seyran Ates. This would make it much easier to get the message across that this is a violation of human rights, and would also help the courts deal with this issue. Sihem Habachi of the French association 'Ni putes, Ni soumises' rejected cultural relativism, which she said created segregation and separation - Europe, she said, needs to wake up when democratic values are infringed.
Language as a key to participation in society and on the labour market was raised in many contributions. Immigrant women face particular problems entering the labour market. " Over the last decade third-country nationals' unemployment has remained higher than EU-nationals', more than twice as high in a majority of Member States ", said Zita Gurmai (PES, HU). Other speakers stressed the importance of seeing migrants as " an opportunity rather than as a cost and a threat " and that an obstacle to fighting discrimination on the labour market is that immigrant women are not aware of their rights.
" The problems raised during the hearing are common to all immigrants not just the women. However for women these problems become further emphasised ", said rapporteur Rodi Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou (EPP-ED, EL). She was one of several speakers highlighting the need to use and value immigrants' human potential to contribute to society's socio-economic development. Ms Gurmai added the diversity of immigration policies in the Member States made it important " to further strengthen efforts to exchange best practices at EU level ".
2006-04-25 In the chair Edite Estrela PES PT Committee on Women's Rights and Gender Equality In the chair Zita Gurmai PES HU
Hearing on Women's immigration: the role and place of immigrant women in the EU
20060424IPR07542
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
