State aid for innovation should be an exception, but has its place
Economic and monetary affairs
2006-04-27 - 14:29
The use of state aid to promote innovation should remain the exception rather than the rule according to MEPs, who adopted an own-initiative report on the subject. It says state aid should be an instrument to correct imbalances that cannot be addressed by regular policy instruments, highlighting some areas where this might be the case.
Drawn up by Sophia In’t Veld (ALDE, NL), the report was adopted on Thursday by a clear majority. MEPs, who are responding to a specific Commission consultation paper following on from the reform proposals for the whole range of state aid policy, say state aid for innovation should be complementary to the relevant EU policies and should have a clear measurable added value for the immediate beneficiaries as well as a secondary impact on the broader local, regional and national economy. Lessons need to be learned from past failures and successes in using aid to foster innovation. The new EU framework should avoid very restrictive definitions and arrangements, while providing for an interim review once the system is up and running.
The report welcomes the idea of transparent, non-discriminatory, practicable ex ante rules which would provide for legal certainty. It says subsidies should be conditional on the characteristics of the economic sector, the market structure and the market power of the company concerned, among other factors.
Parliament also insists that state aid for innovation should be temporary, granted according to rational criteria, proportionate, strictly and effectively controlled and subject to periodic impact assessments. It notes that innovative processes as such do not merit state aid, which should only be granted for innovations which cannot be financed by normal commercial means.
MEPs also stress that SMEs should be allocated a larger share of the aid available. They call for financial support to be given by means of risk capital for seed and start-up phases, and for such support also to be available in the post-seed phase, though this is not an optimal option and should be for the short term only.
Parliament says regional aid and state aid for innovation are complementary and should focus on less-developed regions in order to promote economic and social cohesion.
Calling for greater clarity on how state aid rules apply to universities and research establishments engaged in economic activities, Parliament also calls for them to take part in regional public-private partnerships as ‘innovation intermediaries.’
20060425IPR07603 Sectoral aspects of the State Aid Action Plan: aid for innovation
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5313292
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
