Equitable Life: complaints mount up but CEO highlights company's efforts
Petitions
2006-04-26 - 12:17
The Committee of Inquiry into the Collapse of the Equitable Life Assurance Society heard stinging accusations from policyholders' representatives on Tuesday about the conduct of the company and of the UK authorities. Equitable Life's chief executive, who also gave evidence, told MEPs of the steps the Society had taken to try to deal with the situation since he took the reins in 2001.
Michael Josephs of the Investors' Association said he believed investors had been victims of a cover-up and that there had been "a consistent pattern of misdirection and concealment of information about the Society's activities on the part of Equitable itself, the insurance industry and the responsible government departments …..for at least 20 years".
The UK had a "deliberately weak" prudential environment but "Equitable was unique in the extent to which it exploited these weaknesses" by manipulating terminal bonuses to improve its ranking in performance tables. "The regulator should have recognised this intention but apparently did nothing to counter it". In fact, according to Mr Josephs, "it appears more than probable that the whole insurance establishment has colluded with the Society to suppress the key facts of how the Society was weakened in the 1980s". He concluded that "the Committee of Inquiry is invited to examine whether … a consistent pattern of concealment and misdirection is or should be compatible with the regulatory regime implicit in the EC Life Directives".
Two policyholders from Ireland, Pat and Beatrice Knowd, complained of receiving "misleading and fraudulent" information from the Society - and that the UK Financial Services Authority should have known the Society was non-compliant with EU regulations. In addition, they said the society has obstructed their efforts to seek redress via the UK Ombudsman. Diana Wallis (ALDE, UK), the committee's rapporteur, and Sean O'Neachtain (UEN, IE) later expressed concern at the apparent discrimination between victims in different countries.
Another petitioner, Nicholas Bellord, maintained that Equitable Life had enjoyed "a cosy relationship with the regulators" , leading in the end to a "cover-up". The regulators "knew that Equitable was potentially insolvent but at all costs this fact must not become public". He also spoke of "delays, obfuscations and general obstructiveness of the FOS [Financial Ombudsman Service] ".
Paul Weir, the chairman of the Late Contributors Group (ELCAG), told the committee: " It is hard to escape the impression that the Treasury, the FSA, the FOS and the board of Equitable Life are all working together to keep Equitable Life afloat at any price – anything to protect the UK Government from having to pay a single penny in compensation to a million EU citizens who have between them lost more than 4 billion pounds."
The final speaker was Charles Thomson, who has been chief executive of Equitable Life since 1 March 2001, the old board of the Society having now been replaced completely. He stressed the efforts made since 2001 to deal with the problems. Litigation against the former directors had been unsuccessful. Mr Thomson described the board's efforts to provide compensation to policyholders but stressed that this should only happen where mis-selling had occurred, as "when the Society pays redress it can only come from current policyholders". Equitable Life had produced a scheme offering compensation and "the great majority accepted these offers". Around a thousand policyholders rejected the offer and, following referral to the Financial Ombudsman, the Society has been settling these cases separately. If the UK Parliamentary Ombudsman's second report established that policyholders had suffered injustice due to maladministration by the regulators, this could provide a basis for compensation claims against the UK authorities.
As regards the application of EU rules, Mr Thomson stated "my view is that the relevant regulators in the UK both before and after the changes made as a consequence of the consolidated life directive had sufficient powers to regulate effectively". Therefore the question is "whether the regulatory system should have caused the Society to manage its financial position and its risks differently". However, he stressed that, while "mistakes were made in the how the Society was managed before 2001", nevertheless " the Society was never insolvent". Lastly, in reponse to questions from MEPs including Wolf Klinz (ALDE, DE), Proinsias De Rossa (PES, IE) and Rainer Wieland (EPP-ED, DE), Mr Thomson rejected claims that there had been "collusion" between Equitable Life and the regulators.
2006-04-25 Committee of Inquiry into the collapse of the Equitable Life Assurance Society Chair Mairead McGuinness EPP-ED IE 20060426IPR07644 This was the second hearing organised by the committee - follow this link for details of the first one
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060321IPR06582 EN NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
