Roaming charges: MEPs reluctant to intervene yet
Information society
2006-05-05 - 12:16
At a public hearing held by Parliament's Industry and Internal Market committees on Thursday, the fees charged for roaming - whereby mobile phone users are billed for making calls when abroad - were discussed by MEPs with private sector and NGO representatives. Regulation of roaming charges at EU level seems problematic. MEPs are disinclined to legislate at this stage but they do want operators to make their charging policies more transparent.
Financially, this is a nice little number - and one you would want to protect: the phone operators who explained their position on roaming charges did not try to claim otherwise. The practice of levying high charges on calls made or received on a mobile phone via a domestic operator when the user is abroad has been sharply criticised by consumer bodies. The European Commission looked into the matter in March 2005 and proposed that certain "good practices" should be followed, such as no charging when international calls are received or the Home Pricing Principle (HPP), whereby the customer who is abroad pays for a call at a price which has been negotiated with his domestic operator.
These ideas were backed by Paul Chamsaur, director of the Group of European Regulators (GRE), who stressed that a call may cost the operator 5 euro cents but the client could be charged between 40 and 60 cents. Nevertheless, he believed such measures would be "lengthy and complex" to implement and preferred a "ceiling on the price of calls received" .
Erika Jakab, of the European Consumers' Organisation (BEUC), argued that consumers' rights were not being respected in this area. She said "The customer does not have any information about the charging of calls so he cannot ask for a refund and certainly not choose an operator who might suit him" .
Operators in favour of the status quo
This view was not shared by Gunnar Forsgren, vice-president of TeliaSonera. He believed in letting the market decide, saying "customers are prepared to pay extra for this additional service" . In his view, "the cost of roaming must not fall on the operators alone" . Wolfgang Kopf, vice-president of T-Mobil, said "roaming prices have steadily fallen thanks to the market and will continue to do so" . Richard Feasy, public policy director of Vodafone UK, went further: he was worried about regulation which might cause operators to propose "rates with or without roaming" , to the detriment of a service which customers value highly.
MEPs decide to wait and see
For their part, MEPs were keen to keep things calm. Daniel Caspary (EPP-ED, DE), who wondered about the willingness of companies to "propose transparent charges" , nevertheless urged them to "lead the way, before [the EU institutions] are forced to legislate" . Malcolm Harbour (EPP-ED, UK) also wanted to give operators this "chance" and stressed that "surveys have revealed no significant failures of competition but above all a lack of transparency" . Fiona Hall (ALDE, UK) questioned whether the market in international calls actually "functions like a classic market" , but she hoped that changes in international call rates would "not have an impact on domestic rates" .
Catherine Trautmann (PES, FR) warned operators against "the temptation of self-regulation of prices, which could seem to consumers like collusion by the industry" . She also raised the old idea of a single telephone code throughout the EU. Charlotte Cederschiöld (EPP-ED, SE), deputy chair of the Internal Market Committee, emphasised that "the implementation of the services directive could in itself bring about de facto transparency" .
The Commission's representative said his institution was expecting to see developments on this matter by July, when the Commission is due to unveil draft legislation on roaming charges.
2006-05-04 Committee on Industry, Research and Energy Chair Giles Chichester EPP-ED UK Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection Vice-chair Charlotte Cederschiöld EPP-ED SE
Mini Hearing on "International Roaming - its economic implications"
20060502IPR07757
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
