A new approach to migration and development
Development and cooperation
2006-04-26 - 14:28
There are around 175 million migrants in the world, equivalent to 3 per cent of the earth's population, a phenomenon which poses a challenge to the European Union and its development policy. MEPs and outside experts discussed the link between international migration and development, as well as new ways of tackling the issues, at a hearing held on Tuesday by the Development Committee to help prepare a forthcoming own-initiative report on development and migration.
"The EU must devise new instruments to tackle migration and development issues" , argued Marie-Arlette Carlotti (PES, FR), author of the draft report. It must begin by "respecting our commitments, especially the promise made in 2005 to double public development aid" , take more account of migration in the Millennium Goals and place the whole issue at the heart of the ACP, she stressed. In addition, an ACP-EU "facility" for migration should be set up at the end of 2006 with a budget of €25 million. Migrants' remittances - which are equivalent to three times public development aid - should be made "safer and cheaper" to send and be "guided towards investment in the development of these countries".
Mrs Carlotti added that circular migration - whereby migrants travel back and forth between their country of origin and their host country - would help stem the brain drain, a problem which particularly affects the healthcare sector. "Decent jobs" are needed in these countries if their economies are not to be too dependent on the informal sector. Mrs Carlotti also proposed that the 1951 Convention on Refugees be expanded to cover displaced persons, who are not covered by any legal instrument, and that the EU should cooperate more closely with the UN High Commissioner for Refugees.
Guest speakers - Aîcha Belarbi, member of the Global Commission on International Migration (GCIM), Meera Sethi, Regional Adviser for Sub-Saharan Africa of the International Organisation for Migration (IOM), and Souhail Chichah, Representative of the National Development Cooperation Centre (Belgium) - welcomed the shift in Parliament's approach, as it no longer considers migration purely as a "justice and home affairs" issue but now tries to include a development dimension.
Migration is a global phenomenon, pointed out Nirj Deva (EPP-ED, UK), who said that " while Africa is concerned, so is Asia which is very present in the countries of the Persian Gulf, with two million people who make important transfers to their countries of origin" . Fernando Fernández Martin (EPP-ED, ES) spoke of the situation of migrants from Latin American countries such as Ecuador.
"Women are often forced to become migrants" , added Feleknas Uca (GUE-NGL, DE), who is drafting the opinion of the Women's Rights Committee.
2006-04-25 Committee on Development Chair Luisa Morgantini GUE/NGL IT
Procedure : Own-initiative
Vote by Development Committee : 31/05/2006
Plenary vote: July
20060424IPR07538
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
