2004 budget discharge: MEPs delay Parliament's discharge - Strasbourg rent cause for concern
Budgetary control
2006-05-02 - 10:23
MEPs voted to postpone discharge for the European Parliament's budget in 2004. The House wants further information into alleged irregularities concerning the cost of renting two of its buildings in Strasbourg. The decision to grant discharge to the European Parliament was rejected by the house with 3 votes in favour, 591 against and 13 abstentions. MEPs must now draft a new report and have a further six months to decide on its 2004 discharge.
Rapporteur on the European Parliament discharge, Markus FERBER (EPP-ED, DE) said in the debate: " We have to find out if the city of Strasbourg receives a sum of money from Parliament that differs from the sum it passes on to the pension fund. I would like to point out the following: We are not discussing the principal question of the Parliament's seat in Strasbourg, which is clearly laid down in the Treaties ."
MEPs signed off the Commission's 2004 budget but they still want to keep up the pressure on EU governments. Parliament insists on better management of Community funds where these are jointly managed by the Commission and the Member States but is nevertheless recommending that the Commission be granted the 2004 budget discharge.
Rapporteur Jan MULDER (ALDE, NL) has constantly stressed the principle of accountability. "It is not enough to say an action has been carried out; it must be shown how it has been implemented and who is accountable for this implementation", he says. For this purpose, Parliament is suggesting the introduction of "national management declarations", to be signed by the relevant bodies of the Member States. The latter are responsible for joint management of the Community budget with the Commission and would, therefore, have to take their share of responsibility if errors occur.
The Council did not take up the central proposal of the 2003 discharge, i.e. a similar national declaration but at a higher level: MEPs wanted finance ministers to sign these declarations and thereby become accountable in cases where the EU budget is jointly managed. This idea got a cool reception from the Council in November 2005, with Member States claiming that existing control systems were adequate. In the 2004 discharge, MEPs are now proposing a slightly modified approach: a series of sectoral declarations signed by bodies selected by the Member States themselves.
It should be pointed out that the Court of Auditors, for the eleventh consecutive year, has been unable to establish that "underlying transactions" (all the operations underlying the implementation of the Community budget) are free of irregularities. Under the EU Treaty, the Commission and the Member States are required to ensure "sound financial management" (Article 274), something which cannot be verified completely with the existing control systems.
Mr Mulder believes the Commission should not have to pick up the tab for a problem which originates primarily in the Member States. He stressed "I think the Council must be more responsible and more transparent. Refusing the discharge to the Commission is a nuclear weapon and would mean that the Commission would have to resign. It would not be fair to make the current Commission accountable for the policies of its predecessor. This Commission is cooperating well with the European Parliament to improve the EU's financial management, whereas the Council is resisting".
Parliament welcomes the initiatives taken by the Council to reinforce the responsibility of the Member States for improving the control of actions under shared management, with the aim of achieving a positive statement of assurance, and especially the commitment by the Council to producing an annual summary at the appropriate national level of the available audits and declarations.
MEPs note with satisfaction that the Council and the Commission agree on the importance of strengthening internal control (...) in order to get to a positive statement of assurance by the Court of Auditors. (...). The House also notes that as part of their enhanced responsibilities for structural funds and in accordance with national constitutional requirements, the relevant audit authorities in the Member States will produce an assessment concerning the compliance of management and control systems with the regulations of the Community. MEPs welcome the fact that Member States have therefore undertaken to produce an annual summary at the appropriate national level of the available audits and declarations.
Parliament expects that the results of the review on unknown bank accounts related to Commission activities launched by Commission in October 2005 will be made known completely to Parliament and be followed-up. MEPs also expect that the accounts thereby established will be audited and the funds credited to the accounts will be entered into the general budget.
Review of Commission's internal control systems needed
The other main plank of the 2004 discharge relates to the accountability of the Commission under the same Article 274, which requires it to manage the Community budget properly. The current system, which is the fruit of the administrative reforms carried out by former Commissioner Neil Kinnock, requires the directors-general to report on their activities, by department and for the whole of the Commission. MEPs believe this system has shortcomings, as the quality of information contained in the reports is not checked and no one is accountable for it.
MEPs therefore urge other senior officials to accept accountability, namely the secretary-general of the Commission, the director-general for the budget and the internal auditor.
Discharge for the other institutions and the EU agencies
Turning to the other EU institutions, MEPs granted discharge by a large majority for the Committee of the Regions.
As to the EU agencies, apart from the "explicit" reservations expressed by the Court of Auditors regarding the European Reconstruction Agency for 2004, MEPs note that, following enlargement of the EU in 2004, the structures and operating methods of this agency have been affected. They want the Commission to analyse the actual or presumed problems and to propose adjustments to the rules.
In addition to calling on the agencies to make good and proper use of the resources available to them, MEPs urge them to avoid duplication as far as possible and to detail measures for improving the application of the transparency principle in communication with the public and in recruitment.
20060421IPR07488 Procedure for granting discharge
-//EP//TEXT RULES-EP 20060213 ANN-05 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
