UK MEPs turn attention to better lawmaking and better regulation
Institutions
United Kingdom
2006-05-12 - 18:09
Cutting red tape - priority for UK MEPs
On 16 May the European Parliament will vote on the own initiative report: Implementation , Consequences and Impact of the Internal Market legislation in force (rapporteur Arlene McCarthy, Labour North West). It might not seem immediately obvious from the title but the issues this report poses go right the heart of the work of the EU as a whole and to its relations with its citizens.
The report makes clear that the " confidence and trust of citizens, consumers and business in the EU is linked to their experience or perception of EU laws and their impact on their daily lives. Internal market legislation must open up opportunities to trade and business, to give consumers and citizens increased choice, while protecting environmental, social and consumer rights" .
The McCarthy report poses serious questions: can simplification of legislation become deregulation? In areas such as the environment where protection is increasingly important, there are concerns from many groups as to the right balance between regulation and deregulation. What is the proper balance? What about ensuring consumer and other interests as well as business are properly consulted? What should the role of Parliament be when alternatives to legislation are proposed? What about transposition, and implementation of existing legislation in a uniform and even manner across all Member States? How can this be ensured? What about the clarity of drafting of legislation and the ironing out of confusing ambiguity and the need for precise definitions and provisions to provide legal certainty? What about improving the monitoring of implementation of compliance with EU law?
The report puts forward a range of proposals in response to these questions.
Union based on law
The European Union is a union based on law. What we in the UK have been helping to create over the past 33 years of our EU membership is an area of peace and security and prosperity based on law. We have gradually moved towards a genuine Single Market and an area of equal rights where all citizens can work, travel, live in any one of the other Member States, where goods and services move freely, where discrimination which favours national over foreign is gone. And we have been creating this not through aggression or war but through co-operation, negotiation and law.
What may seem dry as dust legislation is the very essence of what cements our society, brings about, reflects and reinforces change, allows men and women to push the boundaries and achieve things which in the past might not have been possible.
The role of the European Parliament in democratic scrutiny is vital in this process. Political decision-making and the careful consideration and balancing of interests on behalf of society as a whole is central to the legitimate development of the EU.
But in recent years we have heard growing protests about the quality and quantity of law and regulation and how much this administrative burden costs business in particular in a competitive global environment. Uncontrollable "Red tape" is one of the most frequently cited criticisms of the EU. The goal is not only to achieve less and better regulation but a genuine policy shift towards more considered and intelligent regulation.
Arlene McCarthy (North West, Labour) said: "Let us be clear. It is the consumer, the citizen and businesses that pay the price when laws are not effective. Bad drafting leads to legal uncertainty, poor or confused transposition and at the end of the line is a confused businessman or consumer who loses confidence in the internal market. The ECJ, after years of deliberation, becomes the arbiter of better legislation. That is not the right way forward."...."the reality is that good laws that are well drafted, easy to implement, easy to enforce and police, are the key to restoring confidence in the internal market. I hope that today’s debate is the beginning of a process of close cooperation, sharing best practice between the institutions in a close partnership of equals, to build and restore that confidence."
Diana Wallis (Yorkshire and the Humber, Liberal Democrat) said: "we have to take care. Impact assessment cannot displace political decision making. Of course, we need full and independent information from all sides on all aspects, not just the effects on business. Then we as co-legislators can decide, but it must be our decision, not that of experts, nor of technocrats, stakeholders or lobbyists. Give us all the information in a balanced manner, then, in full transparency, we can make a political decision for which we are accountable. No number of impact assessments or re-impact assessments should replace democracy."
Malcolm Harbour (West Midlands, Conservative) said: "better regulation is a process.....The problem is that the process is difficult, complex and very few people understand it. We have to try to explain and simplify it, but we need to explain it to our own constituencies as well as to people outside. How many people in this Parliament can really say that they understand the procedures that have now been set up within the Commission to improve the quality of legislation?... The better legislation process is vital for the future of the whole way we do business here."
Alyn Smith (Scotland, SNP) said: "a lack of Council transparency remains the elephant in the room; it remains the root cause of so much discontent with EU lawmaking in general. Surely the Council can take more steps towards meaningfully meeting in public." Scotland is currently part of a Member State not known for its enthusiastic EU engagement and yet our parliament in Edinburgh would represent an enthusiastic partner in better EU lawmaking. Our parliament has total responsibility for health, the environment, justice, education, fishing, agriculture and many more areas, yet the EU view of subsidiarity too often stops at the Member State when, in fact, the more relevant partner may well be much more local.
Red tape - is it all necessary?
What to do about red tape and how to control it effectively is a difficult question. It is now at the top of the political agenda at both national and European levels. There are a range of different and complementary initiatives underway.
Round up of current initiatives
Six Member States agreed a joint strategy to make Better Regulation a key goal during their EU Presidencies 2004 - 2006 (Ireland, Netherlands, Luxembourg, UK, Austria, Finland). An effective regulatory framework for Europe is seen as an important element in the Lisbon strategy for greater growth and jobs.. This is a view shared by the European Commission. The new Commission came into office in November 2004 determined to press ahead with the “better regulation” agenda. It is now moving ahead in several significant areas: the use of regulatory impact assessments for all major legislative proposals and policy-defining documents in the Commission's annual work plan, new guidelines for impact assessments which strengthen the analysis of impact on competitiveness, the screening of all legislation adopted before 1 January 2004 pending before the Council and Parliament to assess whether it reflects good practice. Where it does not, legislation may be withdrawn. The Commission has already proposed the withdrawal of 68 obsolete proposals.
Better and earlier consultation
There is a realisation that the most effective legislation is produced in close consultation with key practitioners and stakeholders. There is a strong sense for existing consultation channels to be boosted by more systematic consultation at an earlier stage in the policy-making process, preferably at the outset of discussions on how to deal with a particular policy programme. The Commission is therefore adopting a new approach which will consider the overall regulatory burden in specific areas beginning with the automotive, waste and construction sectors.
Alternatives to regulation
A radically new approach is looking at alternatives to regulation. Why is the immediate urge always to legislate first - are there no other ways of reaching the same ends? The "do nothing" option can be valid as can self-regulation, the development of social partners' agreements, the provision of information and advice.
UK initiatives
In the UK, the Better Regulation Task Force (since Jan 1 2006 the Better Regulation Commission www.brc.gov.uk has been designed to provide independent advice to government, from business and other external stakeholders, about new regulatory proposals and about the Government's overall regulatory performance. It has called for each government department " to pursue a rolling programme of simplification to deliver a net saving in administrative costs and a tangible decrease in the regulatory irritants that matter most to stakeholders." Simplification includes deregulation, consolidation and rationalisation.
The battle for better regulation is far-reaching and is being fought on various fronts simultaneously:
Gold plating
Work is progressing on the dangers of gold plating in relation to what happens to EU legislation at the stage of its implementation into UK law. The Davidson Review is currently underway and will report with recommendations to Government by the end of 2006.
Improving parliamentary scrutiny
There is a growing consensus that the UK Parliament is not sufficiently scrutinising European proposals, and that the necessary systems are not in place to encourage this. In 2004 The House of Commons Modernisation Committee produced a report on the complex and opaque nature of the scrutiny process. Suggested improvements included the establishment of a Joint European Grand Committee, in which Ministers and possibly Commissioners could conduct statements, questions and debates, and which MEPs could also attend. Reform of the Commons Standing Committees was also proposed and more frequent visits by UK Committees to their EP counterparts.
A revised system would smooth both the formulation and implementation of EU legislation. Not only would this serve to identify and generate solutions to problems at an early stage, but vitally it would contribute to the necessary process of explaining to the British public how the European Union really operates.
Business viewpoint
Many UK business organisations have made a significant contribution to the Better Regulation debate. One of the foremost is the City of London Corporation. Michael Snyder, Chairman of the Corporation’s Policy and Resources Committee says: “Regulatory reform is vital if the EU economy is going to compete successfully with the US and Asia in the future. If we are to achieve sustained economic growth and the job creation necessary to achieve the Lisbon goals, we need to ensure that legislation in place is proportionate and avoids imposing unnecessary burdens on business while fostering more open, transparent and competitive markets and more user choice.
“In addition to our ongoing dialogue with the UK Government and EU institutions, we have commissioned a series of independent research reports which have assessed best practice in other countries and produced a working model for cost-effective implementation. The latest report analyses how best to audit and review regulatory impact assessments. The study looks at the options for creating an EU review system, examines best practice amongst national audit offices and considers the scope for developing their role and that of the European Court of Auditors.
“We are very pleased to see that the Internal Market Committee has produced such a constructive report on the future of the better regulation agenda. We support much of what Arlene McCarthy MEP is calling for and are particularly keen for the Commission and Member States to focus on the consistent implementation and enforcement of existing legislation by moving resources to facilitate this strand of work. We also support the use of detailed and timely cost benefit analysis before making policy decisions in favour of regulatory as against non-regulatory interventions in the market place. There is also a strong case for auditing the thoroughness of regulatory impact assessments of draft legislation. Above all, the principles of better regulation should be embedded into the working practices of all EU institutions including the formal obligation to review, after several years, whether the practical outcomes of regulatory measures have proved to be consistent with the stated objectives of legislators.”
A balanced approach
There are a range of other aspects which need to be considered in the Better Regulation debate: Health and Safety, social, environment and consumer considerations. The attempt to achieve a balanced approach is reflected in the European Parliament's recent report on the Implementation, Consequences and Impact of the Internal Market legislation in force .
After the vote the report and its recommendations will be sent to the Council and the Commission.
20060425IPR07587 Details of the full report The Davidson Review on Implementation of EU Legislation
EN
1
PHOTO
20060512PHT08158.jpg
EN
2
A
http://www.brc.gov.uk/
EN
3
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5211242
EN
4
LINK
http://www.cabinetoffice.gov.uk/regulation/reviewing_regulation/davidson_review/index.asp
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
