MEPs call for a Constitution by 2009
Constitutional affairs
2006-05-10 - 10:24
The Constitutional Affairs Committee called on Thursday morning for the EU to have a constitution in place by 2009 to ensure the Union can function effectively and democratically. MEPs also argued that no further enlargement, after the accession of Romania and Bulgaria, can be allowed without a new constitutional settlement.
After four months of impassioned debate following the French and Dutch no votes, the committee decided to launch a Europe-wide debate to find a solution to the deadlock. Responding to the decision by the European Council in June 2005 to set in train a period of dialogue or reflection, MEPs stressed the need to involve all European citizens in the process of building Europe's future. Members also criticised the Council and Commission for failing to ensure that the reflection period has a clear focus. The Constitutional Affairs Committee's proposal is designed to see that the new debate delivers tangible results.
Comprehensive institutional reform is seen as necessary to ensure that an enlarged EU functions properly, since the Nice Treaty is inappropriate for the continuation of the integration process. MEPs criticised the suggestion that a core group of Member States could start implementing reforms, leaving the other countries behind.
Format for the new public debate
Members agreed that, to increase public participation, the proposed European debate should be guided by common topics and have clear political goals. The committee wants Parliament to play a leading role in the debate. As part of the process, MEPs are calling for a number of conferences and meetings to be held as a way of advancing the debate on the future of the EU. These would be known as Parliamentary Forums and Citizens' Forums.
Under the committee's proposed schedule, the Parliamentary Forums, a series of conferences between national parliaments and the EP, would be held in spring next year. These events would also provide an opportunity to hear reports from the French and Dutch parliaments about their suggestions for a way forward.
At the same time, to ensure public participation, the Constitutional Affairs Committee wants Member States to hold a large number of Citizens Forums, i.e. public meetings and media debates at national and local level. The two co-rapporteurs stressed that all these debates should be structured around specific topics to deliver clear results. They should involve political parties, employers' and employees' representatives, civil society, the academic community and the media.
According to the committee, the public is concerned more about the context, i.e. the EU's political role and policies, than the constitutional text itself. MEPs believe the main issues on which the debate should focus are: the integration process, the EU's global role, the European social and economic model, and security and justice. Different outcomes of the debate are envisaged in the report, from abandoning the constitutional project to continuing with ratification, from seeking to clarify the present text to complete re-drafting. Nevertheless, Members agreed that it is important not to pre-empt the outcome of such a debate.
Lastly, after taking into account the results of the debate, a clear decision on the way forward should be taken by second half of 2007. If it is decided to revise the text extensively, MEPs say the current Constitution could still serve as basis. The committee will monitor the whole process and summarise the proposals put forward during the debates in a series of 'European Papers'.
The committee's report, drafted by Andrew DUFF (ALDE, UK) and Johannes VOGGENHUBER (Greens/EFA, DE), was approved by a large majority: 22 votes in favour, 2 against and 1 abstention.
2005-12-12 chair Jo Leinen PES DE
Procedure: Own-initiative
Plenary vote: January 2006
20051215IPR03793
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
