Morales discusses nationalisation, coca and Cuba with Foreign Affairs Committee
External relations
2006-05-16 - 13:32
Shortly after his formal address to the plenary session on Monday evening, Bolivian President Evo Morales took part in a debate with the Foreign Affairs Committee. MEPs praised his personal commitment and showed understanding for his social reform plans, though there were questions about the legality of the nationalisations being pushed through by the former indigenous activist and leader of coca-leaf growing farmers - and about his close relations with Fidel Castro.
Véronique de Keyser (PES, BE) said his speech in plenary was " Politics with a capital P ", while Francis Wurtz (GUE/NGL, FR) found Morales' speech " extremely touching, authentic and dignified ". Philippe Morillon (ALDE, FR) wished Morales every success but asked him to explain how he intended to proceed with negotiations with European countries and industries on the nationalisation of natural resources. Poul Rasmussen (PES, DK) insisted that the Bolivian president, like anyone else, " had the fundamental right to renegotiate contracts ". Both he and Monica Frassoni (Greens/EFA, IT) advised Mr Morales, however, not to stake everything on " two friends ". " The aid that Castro is giving may not be positive for you ", Ms Frassoni warned. Mr Rasmussen told the Bolivian leader that he had many, many friends.
Elmar Brok (EPP-ED, DE) warned the Mr Morales about Parliament's continuing concern over Cuba's human rights record, and insisted that social justice could not be achieved by with legal uncertainty. José Salafranca (EPP-ED, ES) said that foreign investment in Bolivia would only be forthcoming if there was legal certainty and political stability in the country. He also said the " overnight nationalisations " were " not a friendly sign and were incompatible in both form and substance " with the cooperation agreements between the EU and Bolivia. Several Members asked for Mr Morales' cooperation in fighting drug trafficking and his support for fostering greater Latin American unity.
Mr Morales argued that legal justice cannot exist without social justice, and that his reforms were " righting the wrongs of 500 years of pillaging " during colonialism. He insisted that he was not an enemy of private companies, and that his nationalisation scheme would not result in expulsions or expropriations. He highlighted investment in health and education as his country's priorities and defended small-scale cultivation of coca leaves for the local market, but not for the production of cocaine. Morales also said he supported organic agriculture: " Organic produce is much appreciated in Europe and we don't wish to compete with countries in the GMO sector ."
2006-05-15 Committee on Foreign Affairs In the chair: Elmar BROK EPP-ED DE 20060515IPR08193 Summary of the Bolivian President's formal address to MEPs
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060512IPR08045 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
