Open Day draws the crowds
European citizenship
2006-05-12 - 18:09
Open Day glamour. A Romanian visitor points the way.
Over 60,000 people took advantage of European Parliament open days in Strasbourg, Luxembourg and Brussels on consecutive weekends in late April and early May. The Brussels open day took place on 6 May, with the Parliament and the other EU institutions attracting over 100,000 visitors to the European quarter of the city, according to Belgian Police estimates.
Strasbourg was the first to open its doors at the end of the April with two days of exhibitions, music, art and debates with MEPs attracting more than 31,000 visitors from France, Germany and other countries.
The event in Brussels was also unashamedly open and informal - a jazz band, quizzes and singers entertained people as they wandered around the Parliament's premises. Stands, exhibitions and demonstrations were put on by the political groups and the services of the Parliament to explain their roles. The interpreters service allowed people to try interpreting into one of the EU's 20 official languages for themselves.
The official theme of the open days was the year of "workers' mobility" and the issues this raises with regard to employment opportunities in different countries. Debate and lively exchange were not far away with the Plenary Chamber hosting debates on the draft EU Constitution and the consequences of the 2004 enlargement.
A wide variety of material was available from the stands - information leaflets, brochure, CDs, posters and various other gadgets. However, a fact remarked upon by many this year was the increased demand for information material about the Parliament, the workings of the EU more generally and the Parliament's political groups.
Representatives of the EP Groups all agreed on the fact that this year there was considerably more interest in this kind of informative material (as opposed to souvenirs) than in previous years. They found that yearbooks on their activities and material related to people's daily lives were very popular. One of them speculated that the ongoing debate over the EU Constitution and the future direction of Europe played a part in this.
Among the visitors, Belgian student Hassan Aanounou, from Eupen, said he had come "just to see the Parliament". He said he was "very surprised and impressed by the building and by the number of people who were visiting."
Another student, Ting Gong, of Belgium's Leuven University said the open day was "a great idea and that it was important that we can approach the institutions".
Adjacent to the Parliament in Leopold Park, a children's play area, singers from EU-aspirant Romania and a food village kept young and old occupied during the day.
The event is traditionally held the weekend before Europe Day - 9 May. This commemorates the "Schuman Declaration" of 1950 which proposed pooling the coal and steel reserves of the six founding countries to avert further conflict between them.
With the programme and the number of visitors growing each year - the organisers have little time to rest before planning Open Day 2007 - hope to see you there!
20060512STO08034 Parliament press article on free movement of workers Practical Information on working across the EU
EN
1
PHOTO
20060511PHT08026.jpg
EN
3
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/comm/employment_social/index_en.html
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060502BKG07807 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
