The European social model as a positive answer to globalisation
Future of Europe/European integration
2006-05-09 - 16:23
The need to find a positive answer to globalisation and a common approach to problems like high unemployment, low economic growth, a lack of trust in the European project and the existence and shape of the European social model were at the heart of the debate in the joint parliamentary meeting working group on globalisation and the European economic and social model.
A number of speakers said globalisation is Europe's major challenge at the moment, but noted that it also raises fear for many citizens. Mr Othmar Karas (EPP-ED, AT), who will present a report on the discussion, said it is essential to paint a positive picture of globalisation. " Nobody wants to create fear via globalisation. One has to accept that globalisation is taking place and we need to frame globalisation by internal and external measures ." Helga Machne (Member of the Austrian Parliament) said " globalisation is a good thing for Europe and should be used to solve the problem of unemployment and stagnation of economic growth ". Mr Karas said globalisation should not imply social dumping and a loss of quality. Along with many speakers, he stressed that protectionism and nationalism are not the answer. Instead Europe needs to intensify collaboration and coordination and to enhance mutual understanding as well as the respect of differences.
Pierre Jonckheer (Greens/EFA, BE) referred to a recent Eurobarometer study showing that citizens want more decisions taken at European level. The need to enhance the trust of citizens was emphasised by Outi Ojala (Member of the Finnish parliament) , and echoed by many others. Edite Estrela (PSE, PT) noted that " the world has changed but Europe has not adapted. "
The future of the European Economic and Social model
Another key issue in the debate was how to preserve the European Social model in the context of globalisation, and whether there is one European Social model or several different models.
Soraya Rodriguez (Member of the Spanish Congress) said national policies can no longer guarantee social rights and that we need a European answer. The desire by citizens for Europe to address social issues was emphasised in several speeches. Burning problems such as social systems and population trends need to be addressed otherwise Europe will be " an old continent and not a continent of growth ", warned Mr Karas. Pervenche Berès (PSE, FR) said, " the European economic and social model is a key aspect of the European competitiveness " and called for further reflection on this point.
Views diverged on the number of European social models, but speakers agreed that the perception is different from inside and outside Europe. Proinsias De Rossa (PSE, IE) said, " we do have a common social model driven by common values...but different systems ".
Caspar Einem (Member of the Austrian Parliament, vice president of the subcommittee of European affairs) called for a " common European economic policy" and not 25, in order to ensure growth and to face challenges of globalisation.
The Lisbon strategy
Opinions varied on the Lisbon strategy and the open method of coordination. Many agreed that the Lisbon process is not working properly, but, as Neven Mimica (Croatian parliament, president for the committee on European integration) said, it is part of the solution if implemented properly. Mr Karas said it is necessary to find a solution to the existing clash between the good Lisbon goals and the lack of implementation on national level.
Summing up, Ms Berès welcomed the debate and underlined that it is important " to listen to those we represent ". Members agreed that this kind of exchange is very fruitful, in particular as the issues at stake are of concern on a national as well as on a European level.
2006-05-08
Joint Parliamentary meeting on the Future of Europe
Working group on "globalisation and the European social and economic model"
20060503IPR07840
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
