The Week Ahead - 15 - 21 May 2006
Institutions
2006-05-12 - 13:11
Plenary session – Strasbourg
Presidential visits. Three national leaders will address Parliament in formal sittings: Karolos Papoulias, President of Greece (Wednesday) , Evo Morales, President of Bolivia (Monday) , and the President of the Palestinian Authority, Mahmoud Abbas. (Tuesday) Mr Morales will also take part in a meeting of the Foreign Affairs Committee, while Mr Abbas will join a meeting of the Conference of Presidents. Bulgaria and Romania. The Commission will announce its assessment of whether Bulgaria and Romania should be able to join the EU as planned in January 2007. (Tuesday) Financial perspective. MEPs will debate and vote on whether to give formal approval to the 7 year budget deal reached between Council, Commission and Parliament last month. (Wednesday) Food health claims. Parliament will vote at second reading on new rules for foods which claim to give nutritional and health benefits. (debate Monday, vote Tuesday) Natural disasters. A series of reports on how to improve EU action in preventing and reacting to natural disasters will be discussed in plenary. (Thursday) Human rights in the world. MEPs will hold their annual debate on global human rights issues. (debate Wednesday, vote Thursday) ECB Board Member. MEPs will decide whether to approve the appointment of Jürgen Stark to the ECB Executive Board. (debate Tuesday, vote Wednesday) Bureau and Committees. Fabienne Keller, Mayor of Strasbourg, will attend meetings of the Bureau and the Budgetary Control Committee to answer questions on the rent for EP buildings in the city. Other committees meetings include the Temporary Committee on claims of illegal CIA activity in Europe, where delegation which visited Washington DC will report back, and the Industry and Research Committee, which begins a marathon vote on the 7th Framework Programme for EU Research funding. (Monday) Against Homophobia. Parliament will mark International Day Against Homophobia with a seminar on the issue. (Wednesday)
20060512IPR08032 For full details, see Agenda
EN
1
LINK
/news/expert/event_top_page/default/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
