Strasbourg plenary session highlights: three Presidents, two EU candidates and the EU budget
Institutions
2006-05-12 - 18:09
MEPs face a packed May agenda in Strasbourg
MEPs face a packed May Strasbourg agenda. A debate (Tuesday) on whether Romania and Bulgaria will join the EU on 1 January 2007 is likely to draw much attention. Parliament will also hear from three Presidents - Bolivia, Palestinian Authority and Greece. The House will deal with a series of reports dealing with the consequences of natural disasters. Parliament will also set out its final position on the agreed EU budget for 2007-2013.
Monday 15 May After the official opening of the session on Monday afternoon, President Evo MORALES of Bolivia will address the House at 5.15pm in a formal sitting. The session starts with a debate on the screening of legislative proposals pending before the legislature with MEPs setting out what criteria should be applied before a proposal is withdrawn. The House then turns its attention to nutrition and health claims such as " low fat ." A deal with Council has been reached which means that Parliament's vote is the last stage in the process. Tuesday 16 May The first item on Tuesday, starting at 9am, will be a statement by Commissioner Margot WALLSTRÖM on the Commission's ideas for the future of Europe. MEPs will then debate the financing of environmentally friendly freight transport. Ten years after the outbreak of mad cow disease, the House also debates a new regulation on transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (TSE) to consolidate and update existing legislation. At midday on Tuesday, President Mahmoud ABBAS of the Palestinian National Authority will formally address the House. President Abbas was due to address Parliament in March but had return urgently to the Middle East. MEPs debate three separate reports from the Economics Committee: the appointment of Jürgen STARK to the Executive Board of the European Central Bank; public finances in the EMU and on VAT rules. James ELLES (EPP-ED, UK) will lead the debate on the Commission's Annual Policy Strategy for 2007. At 3pm on Tuesday, the Commission will announce its latest position on progress made by Romania and Bulgaria towards accession . MEPs will debate whether the two countries are ready to join the EU on 1 January 2007 or which further monitoring clauses may be needed. Wednesday 17 May On Wednesday morning, the House debates the EU budget 2007-2013 . The debate and vote will mark the approval by the EP of the political agreement reached on 4 April on the next Financial Perspective. At midday on Wednesday, President Karolos PAPOULIAS of Greece will formally address the House. Wednesday afternoon starts with a debate on the situation of prisoners in Iraq and Afghanistan. MEPs then turn to foreign policy with debates on assistance to countries outside the EU. This includes a report by Gay MITCHELL (EPP-ED, IE) on the financing of development and economic co-operation. On Wednesday evening, Richard HOWITT (PES, UK) will lead the debate on his report on Human Rights in the World 2005 and the EU's policy on the matter. Wednesday 17 May is also the International Day against Homophobia and Michael Cashman (PES, UK) will host an event to mark the day. Thursday 18 May On Thursday, the House will focus on dealing with natural disasters with a series of reports being debated and voted. Parliament will debate and vote on the new EU Solidarity Fund which has a budget €1 billion per year to deal with the consequences of natural disasters. The session ends with debates and votes on human rights issues in Nepal and Sri Lanka .
20060512STO08038
EN
1
PHOTO
20060511PHT08030.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
