Toxic waste to Africa - MEPs want investigation into deaths
Environment
2006-10-26 - 14:52
In adopting a joint resolution on the export of toxic waste to Africa, MEPs call on the Commission, the Netherlands and Côte d’Ivoire to investigate the case where eight people have died so far and some 85 000 have been taken to hospital for treatment for nosebleeds, diarrhoea, nausea, eye irritation and breathing difficulties. The consequences of this dumping of toxic waste may be far-reaching, including soil contamination and surface and groundwater pollution.
Toxic waste was dumped by a Greek-owned, Panamanian-flagged tanker leased by Trafigura Beheer B.V., a Netherlands-based company. Such sharing of responsibilities creates a systematic and unacceptable problem with regard to the enforcement of EC legislation. The Amsterdam port authorities found out about the hazardous nature of the waste upon unloading, and asked for a higher fee to complete the unloading, following which the tanker chose instead to pump the waste back on board. The Netherlands authorities allowed the ship to leave their territory despite knowing about the hazardous nature of the waste and about the captain’s unwillingness to pay for environmentally sound disposal in the Netherlands . The company had the opportunity to dispose of the waste in a legal and safe manner in Europe, but chose a cheaper alternative in Côte d’Ivoire,
MEPs call on the EU and its Member States to take all necessary measures to provide full assistance to the population affected and in particular to children, by using all available means of support, cooperation and civil protection.
The House considers that both EU legislation and international conventions were clearly violated in the case of the exporting of hazardous waste to Abidjan, and therefore calls on the Commission and the Member States to take all necessary measures to ensure full enforcement of the existing waste shipment legislation. MEPs ask the Commission and the Member States concerned to make public all the bilateral agreements they have concluded up to date with non-OECD countries for the shipping of waste. Parliament also calls on the Commission to make legislative proposals to close the loopholes in the current regime on hazardous waste so as to end shipments to non-OECD countries of waste electrical and electronic equipment and obsolete ships and vessels.
Parliament mandates the Commission to collect information on the illicit trafficking in, and dumping of, such hazardous wastes and products in African and other developing countries, to come forward with proposals for measures to control, reduce and eradicate this illicit trafficking, transfer and dumping of such products in African and other developing countries, and to produce annually a list of countries and transnational corporations engaged in the illicit dumping of toxic wastes and products in African and other developing countries.
20061020IPR11907 Joint motion for a resolution on the export of toxic waste to Africa
-//EP//TEXT MOTION P6-RC-2006-0545 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
