Address by Hungarian President to the European Parliament, 50 years after Hungary uprising
Institutions
2006-10-26 - 14:24
The President of Hungary, László Sólyom, addressed the House at a formal sitting to commemorate the 50th anniversary of the Hungarian uprising. His opening words were "Hungary and the world celebrate together the 50th anniversary of the 1956 Hungarian revolution and freedom fight. It is encouraging and elevating to feel that there is one event of commemoration with which everyone can identify."
He added: "But the real reason for this commemoration and joy is that this joint celebration is taking place in a Hungary that is independent, sovereign and democratic, where there is rule of law, and where the country could become a member of international organizations such as the European Union of its own free will."
The president then made some pointed comments about certain Western positions at the time of the events of fifty years ago. He reminded his audience that "1956 questioned communist ideology and presented a dilemma to the left-wing, pro-Soviet section of the intelligentsia in Western Europe, by making them face facts."
However, he added, "politically, the Soviet Union had learnt that it could assert itself in the region" as was shown by the fact that "neither the American nor the French or British governments intended to intervene" and " they made this clear to the Soviet leadership".
Moreover, "they left the Hungarian government isolated and uninformed and the freedom fighters and population under a misapprehension, for the propaganda of the state-sponsored Western radio stations urged them to trust in the arrival of liberating assistance".
Turning to the positive side, the president said "the Hungarian Revolution and struggle for independence provided the first and weightiest evidence of the instability of the Communist regimes in the Central European states", which ultimately "led to the democratic transitions in Central Europe in 1989-90".
The president paid tribute to "the greatness of Imre Nagy", who assumed the leadership of his country for a short while before being removed from power and hanged in secret by the communists. He went on to praise and thank Austria and Germany for the way they had welcomed tens of thousands of Hungarian refugees, giving both practical and moral support.
Lastly, President Sólyom described the joy on people's faces which "radiated from every photo and reel of film" that had survived of the demonstrations of 23 October 1956. "Everyone who recalls these events speaks of these joyful faces". He concluded by quoting from the writer Géza Ottlik: "No feat of the poetic imagination, no heart throbbing with revolutionary fervour, not even the insight of genius can suffice to enable anyone who was not there from beginning to end to grasp what it was really like". "What shines in their eyes is joyful relief". "Nothing is more precious to them than the human dignity they have regained".
20061020IPR11904 The Office of the President of the Republic of Hungary - website
EN
1
LINK
http://www.keh.hu/keh_en
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
