MEPs adopt first reading position on EU budget for 2007 at €127.3 billion
Budget
2006-10-26 - 17:50
The EP adopted a 2007 draft budget substantially higher than that adopted by Council in its July first reading. Commitments are set at €127.3bn, payments are €122bn, equalling 1.04 % of GNI. Council had adopted a draft budget of 125bn in commitments and 114bn in payments, or 0.98% of GNI. With this vote, Parliament has stayed well within the margins of the Financial Perspective.
The strategy of the rapporteur for the Commission's budget, Mr James Elles (EPP-ED, UK), called "Value for Money", focused on the adequate funding of programmes considered as priorities of the EP.
The funding of Commission's posts for which Council had proposed a major cut was reinstated by the EP subject to a number of conditions.
James Elles said: "This budget is a prudent, coherent and forward-looking one and as the first under the new Financial Perspective takes a strategic approach. Most importantly, Parliament in this budget has ensured that the speed of globalisation and its wide-ranging implications for Europe's citizens are taken into account in our budgetary priorities. At the same time, through the innovative concept of Value for Money, we have made clear that we have to stop throwing good money after bad in programmes which are known to have weaknesses in implementation. This concept must become an integral part of the budgetary process."
Heading 1a & 1b "Sustainable growth"
Parliament has adopted a series of amendments for the old structural funds lines now in heading 1a & 1b. The EP has decided to increase payment appropriations for budget lines linked to cohesion in line with its policy priorities, also due to the fact that the level of funding agreed in the 2007-2013 multi-annual framework is much lower than anticipated in this domain.
For instance, ESF Convergence and regional competitiveness are increased to €1442m and €661m respectively from €1092m and €461m.
Importantly, another amendment sees 817.4m in commitments and 653.9m in payments go the reserve for TENs-Transport, until a political agreement is found with Council and the Commission on the control of funds. Another remark calls for the cross-border rail projects to be given new momentum.
Heading 2 "Natural resources"
The EP calls therefore for the re-establishment of the figures in the PDB for CAP spending, reduced after Council's drastic across-the-board cut in market expenditure of EUR 525 million, based on accounting criteria and without taking account of Parliament's priorities. Parliament is also concerned with the fall in real terms of spending on rural development, despite the need to restructure the rural economy.
Heading 3 "Justice and Home Affairs"
Given the urgency of immigration matters, the Parliament proposes an increase for the agency managing EU external borders (Frontex plus €12.8 million in commitments and payments to a total of €34 million) as well as the funds for external borders (plus €7.6 million in commitment and €10 in payment for a total of €170 million for commitments and €87.5 million for payments.
Credits aiming to finance Schengen Information System II and visas are placed in the reserve, notably to wait for the clarification on the legal basis and their interoperability and for a series of databases. Parliament is waiting to be duly informed on the VIS system.
Another budget amendment foresees the creation of a pilot project on a Globe theatre which aims to promote an open space for European debate, culture and study.
An amount of €1 500 000 was included for the financing of the 50 anniversary of the Treaty of Rome, as part of the contribution for the financing of the "Europalia" Europa 2007.
Heading 4 "the EU as a global partner"
Parliament has stayed within the ceiling of heading 4, "The EU as a global partner". This means that, contrary to previous years, Parliament does not ask for the "flexibility instrument" (which can free up to 200m for non-recurring, unforeseen needs) to be used.
On the Common Foreign Security Policy (CFSP, or PESC in FR), Parliament reaffirms its willingness to be closely involved through a "dialogue" with Council, on the basis of the agreement of November 2002, whereby Council pledged to inform Parliament on CFSP actions.
50% of CFSP appropriations are cut and spread on a number of other lines of the heading. Funding for CFSP is now proposed at 72.6m in commitments and 54.6m in payments.
As far as the so-called "EU special representatives" are concerned, the EP proposed to transfer their 14m administrative budget to Heading 5. Doing so, the EP looks to have more control on their appointment. Among the regional lines, 100m in commitments and 90m in payments will go to funding of the reconstruction of Afghanistan. Funding the countries "east of Jordan" (including Iraq) has been left untouched at 108.6m in commitments and 80m in payments.
Heading 5 "administration"
On the question of the posts at the Commission, for which Council had proposed a major cut, Parliament has reinstated the initial funding put forward by the Commission in its pre-draft budget. 50m go in the reserve, though, which will be released if a number of conditions are fulfilled. One of these conditions features a "screening" of administrative needs to be done by the Commission as well as a redeployment plan. Another condition calls for Parliament's priorities to be reflected in the Commission's annual strategic policy.
This amendment deals with the line of "personnel in activity" at the Commission, funded to the tune of 1.526.030.000 excluding the 50m reserve (in both payments and commitments).
Pilot projects and preparatory actions
Concerning the pilot projects and preparatory actions (instruments aiming to finance temporary actions which are not covered by other community programmes), MEPs adopted, at this stage, a list of projects including: "Euroglobe" (a pilot project on a Globe theatre aiming to promote an open European space for debate, culture and study), and preparatory actions with China and India on management exchange programmes to operate in the university and research sectors.
Other institutions
The so-called "other institutions", for which Mr Louis Grech (PES, MT) is the rapporteur, deal among others with Parliament's budget for next year. Mr Grech's approach to rebuke the cuts applied across the board.
The EP's draft budget set a level of 1.397 millions in commitments and payments.
The looming enlargement of Bulgaria and Romania is reflected onto Parliament's budget with 48m earmarked to cover new staff needs and collateral expenses.
Two new budget lines for the Visitors' Centre and the Web-TV are created, with the amount to be released at a later stage from a special information reserve. The 6.7m earmarked for Parliament's webTV will be released when, among others, the prototype and level of participation of political groups are presented to the EP's budgets committee.
Next steps
The next key step now sees Parliament and Council engaged in the 2nd conciliation on November 21, aiming to strike an agreement before the 2nd reading. The 2007 Budget should be approved and signed on December 14 in Strasbourg.
20061020IPR11896 Draft general budget for 2007 (sections I, II, IV, V, VI, VII, VIII) Drafr general budget for 2007 (Section III) Figures and tables on EP first reading on EU budget 2007 will be available here
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5305832
EN
2
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5306082
EN
3
LINK
/comparl/budg/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
