Nairobi Conference on climate change
Environment
2006-10-26 - 14:24
In adopting a joint resolution on the EU strategy for the Nairobi Conference on Climate Change, MEPs urge the European Union to maintain its leading role in the negotiations at the COP 12-COP/MOP 2 Conference in Nairobi, and to maintain a high level of ambition in future discussions with its international partners.
Parliament recalls its request that there should be no gap between the first and the second commitment period under the Kyoto Protocol and that the time limit for reaching agreement on future climate commitments should be the end of 2008.
The House also recalls its support for the continuing use of flexible mechanisms, and for the long-term goal of a global carbon market based on cap and trade. Parliament Calls on the parties to COP 12-COP/MOP 2 to address the climate change impacts of international aviation and calls for a discussion on a global tax on flights at the upcoming negotiations at the COP 12-COP/MOP 2 Conference in Nairobi.
The resolution stresses that economic development is a right for all developing countries. Parliament emphasises, however, that developing countries do not have to repeat the polluting practices of the industrialised countries, and calls therefore for increased attention to be paid to technology cooperation and capacity building in the field of sustainable energy.
MEPs call on the Commission and the Council to make access to efficient and low-carbon energy technologies a priority within EU development cooperation. Parliament also emphasises the key importance of engaging the rapidly industrialising developing countries in a future international climate change regime, while fully respecting their vital concerns about promoting their economic development and fighting poverty. The House stresses that the impact of climate change upon society must be better understood. MEPs call on the Commission therefore to examine how to best organise workshops - in Europe and elsewhere with relevant stakeholders such as citizen groups, industry, farming communities, security experts and economists - to better understand the consequences of climate change in more detail.
Parliament insists that individual EU countries, and the European Union as a whole, live up to their existing commitments under the Kyoto Protocol and the burden sharing agreement, since the EU’s leading position in international talks will be undermined if this cannot be achieved. The House believes that the EU delegation plays an important role in these negotiations on climate change, and therefore finds it unacceptable that the members of the European Parliament part of that delegation were unable to attend the EU coordination meetings at the previous Conference of the Parties.
20061021IPR11909 Motion for a Resolution - Nairobi Conference on Climate Change
-//EP//TEXT MOTION B6-2006-0543 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
