Opening of the October Strasbourg session
Institutions
2006-10-24 - 09:34
The session was opened by Parliament's President Josep BORRELL, who began by welcoming to Strasbourg a visiting delegation from the Japanese Parliament.
The President announced that tomorrow he would be signing a number of co-decision legislative acts with the Council - for the first time in the presence of the media including a co-decision agreement text on the European capitals of culture . The ceremony will take place on Tuesday 24 October between 2.30 and 3.00 pm on the left side of the hemicycle (LOW, level 1, side canal). The next capitals of culture are: Luxembourg and Sibiu (Romania) in 2007, Liverpool in 2008 , Linz, Stavanger and Vilnius (2009), Essen, Istanbul and Pecs (Hungary) in 2010.
Agenda changes
The votes on SIS II (Schengen system) will take place on Wednesday instead of Tuesday.
Wednesday afternoon's debates will continue until 6pm and therefore Question Time to the Council will start at 6pm and end at 7.30pm.
Highlights for the week ahead
In a heavily modified agenda, MEPs return to Strasbourg to face a packed schedule. Highlights include debates and votes on the 1956 Hungarian uprising, the "Spanish peace process", a debate and vote on breast cancer, the first reading of the EU 2007 budget, the results of the Lahti summit, a vote on a resolution on press freedom in Russia, the annual debate with Jean Claude TRICHET on the European Central Bank and the announcement of the 2006 Sakharov Prize Winner for human rights and freedom of expression.
Monday 23 October
MEPs debate the Schengen Information System. The Civil Liberties Committee is signalling that it wants a first reading agreement with the Council on legislation to allow the enlargement of the Schengen Information System to the ten new Member States. It is proposing a package of three reports on proposals and amended Commission plans for SIS II.
The House will also debate financing of the protection of the environment.
Arlene McCARTHY (PES, UK) will present her legislative report on the European Order for payment procedure, a procedure designed to speed up the settlement of cross-border payment claims.
Tuesday 24 October
Tuesday starts with statements from the President and political groups on the commemoration of the 1956 Hungarian uprising. The debate marks the 50th anniversary of the uprising against the communist regime and the Soviet occupation of 1956. The House will also vote on a resolution on the subject.
MEPs then turn their attention to breast cancer as part of breast cancer awareness month. Parliamentarians will compare best practice among Member States. Every two minutes a woman is diagnosed with breast cancer and every six minutes someone dies of it somewhere in the EU. Every year it claims 88,000 women and 1,000 men. The House will also vote on a resolution on this topic.
The House then turns to a series of culture and media reports with votes on several legislative programmes including the Erasmus grant for students and support for European cinema.
In the afternoon, Parliament will focus on the EU budget for 2007. The budget for 2007 is some €127 billion in commitment appropriations and €121.7 in payment appropriations. The House will vote its first reading position on Thursday.
President BORRELL and a Minister representing the Finnish Presidency will formally sign the conciliation agreement text on the European capitals of culture. The ceremony will take place on Tuesday 24 October between 2.30 and 3.00 pm on the left side of the hemicycle (LOW, level 1, side canal). The next capitals of culture are: Luxembourg in 2007, Liverpool in 2008, Linz and Vilnius (2009), Essen and Pecs (Hungary) in 2010
Wednesday 25 October
Wednesday starts with MEPs debating the "peace process in Spain". The House will also vote on a resolution on the topic.
The House will also debate the results of the informal summit of Heads of State of government held on 20 October in Lahti, Finland. Finnish Prime Minister Matti VANHANEN and Commission President José Manuel BARROSO will take part in the debate.
At midday, President László SÓLYOM of Hungary will formally address the House.
In the wake of the murder of Anna POLITKOVSKAYA , the House will vote on a resolution on freedom of the press in Russia.
Wednesday afternoon from 3pm, Parliament will debate the situation in Moldova (Transnistria) and Georgia (South Ossetia). The House will also vote two separate resolutions on these subjects.
MEPs then turn their focus to Syria with a debate on the EU-Syria association agreement. The Foreign Affairs Committee is convinced that the association agreement could give a decisive impetus to the political, economic and social reforms needed to improve the country’s situation. The committee reiterates, however, that respect for democratic values, human rights and civil liberties are prerequisites, and that, to this end, an effective control mechanism should be included in the agreement’s human rights clause.
In the evening, the House holds a joint debate on toxic waste and the protection of the environment, including Commission and Council statements on the exporting of toxic waste to Africa.
Parliament will also debate the posting of workers directive as the last point of the agenda on Wednesday evening. Members of the Employment Committee are concerned that the Posting of Workers directive is not being implemented properly in some Member States and is, therefore, failing to achieve its aims. In the context of the dispute over employment in the ferries industry in Ireland, the committee calls on the Commission to submit a proposal for a directive on the conditions required for the crews of vessels providing regular passenger and freight ferry services between Member States.
Thursday 26 October
The Conference of Presidents will declare the winner of the 2006 Sakharov Prize for freedom of thought and human rights. The winner will receive the award from President Borrell during the December plenary in Strasbourg.
Jean-Claude TRICHET, the President of the ECB will be present in Strasbourg to participate in the annual debate on the European Central Bank. MEPs will be considering a report from the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee which praises the ECB’s handling of interest rate policy, while warning of the need for caution when raising rates to avoid endangering growth.
The House will also debate and vote on funding for rural development and CAP payments.
The session ends as usual with three debates and votes on resolutions relating to human rights. On this occasion the topics are: Tibet, the trial of Rios Montt (former dictator of Guatemala) and Uzbekistan.
20061020IPR11833 Briefing - 23-26 October 2006 Final draft agenda - 23-26 October 2006
EN
2
LINK
/omk/sipade3?PROG=AGENDA&L=EN&QUERY=ALL-SIT&NAV=S&REF=2006-10
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061005BRI11415 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
