EP supports peace initiative in Basque Country and expresses solidarity with victims
Institutions
2006-10-25 - 20:18
The European Parliament adopted a resolution with 321 votes in favour, 311 against and 24 abstentions on "the peace process in Spain", which expresses solidarity with the victims of terrorism and supports the fight against terrorism and the peace initiative in the Basque Country undertaken by the Spanish democratic institutions within the framework of their exclusive competences.
Adopted with a very narrow majority, the resolution condemns violence as it is morally unacceptable and absolutely incompatible with democracy. The House expresses its solidarity with the victims of terrorism. The resolution was put forward by the PES, ALDE, Greens/EFA and EUL/NGL groups. An alternative resolution by the EPP-ED and UEN groups was not adopted (302 votes in favour, 322 against, 31 abstentions).
MEPs support the statement by the President of the European Parliament, Josep Borrell, of 22 March 2006, to the effect that ‘this is good news for Spanish society and the whole of Europe, showing that terrorism can be fought by the force of democracy, that this is a time to show calmness and caution; a time to remember the many victims of terrorism; and a time for hope, for the unity of all the political forces of democracy.’
Full text of the adopted resolution
The European Parliament
1. Endorses the statement by the European Council of 23 and 24 March 2006 under the Austrian Presidency that ‘the European Council welcomed the reports of the President of the Spanish Government on the announcement of a permanent ceasefire made by the terrorist group ETA’;
2. Supports the statement by the President of the European Parliament, Josep Borrell, of 22 March 2006, to the effect that ‘this is good news for Spanish society and the whole of Europe, showing that terrorism can be fought by the force of democracy, that this is a time to show calmness and caution; a time to remember the many victims of terrorism; and a time for hope, for the unity of all the political forces of democracy’;
3. Calls on the Council and Commission to take appropriate action;
4. Condemns violence as it is morally unacceptable and absolutely incompatible with democracy;
5. Expresses its solidarity with the victims of terrorism;
6. Supports the fight against terrorism and the peace initiative in the Basque Country undertaken by the Spanish democratic institutions within the framework of their exclusive competences.
Debate preceding the vote - 25 October
In a highly charged atmosphere, MEPs debated the peace process in Spain. MEPs will also vote on resolutions on the subject. Opening the debate, Paula Lehtomäki for the Council Presidency said that the European Community was born out of the quest for peace and security and it is very important that these issues be discussed.
Finnish Minister for Foreign Trade and Development Minister Lehtomäki said: "In its meeting on the 23 and 24 March 2006, the European Council expressed its satisfaction with the reports given by the Spanish Prime Minister concerning the announcement of a permanent ceasefire made by the terrorist organisation ETA. The Presidency of the European Union is satisfied with all the actions implemented to ensure that ETA will give up terrorist methods and that a peaceful solution will be achieved in the framework of the democratic governmental bodies of Spain. The Council expresses once more its support to the measures taken by the Member States to combat terrorism in accordance with the principles of the rule of law."
European Commissioner
Commissioner Franco FRATTINI began by saying "terrorism is one of the worst imaginable threats to democratic society" as it is "an assault on our fundamental values: human rights, democracy and the rule of law". The Commission, he said, was committed, to bringing terrorists to justice and he pointed to measures brought in at EU level such as the European counter-terrorism strategy. He commended the attitude of Spanish society as exemplary. Its respect for democracy and the rule of law over the years in the fight against terrorism "had paid off with the weakening of ETA". He concluded by saying "we shall not be divided today, since this is a debate against a common enemy of Spain and Europe: terrorism".
Political group speakers
For the EPP-ED group, Hans-Gert POETTERING (DE) said "one of the noblest tasks in politics is the fight for peace". However, he highlighted the differences of opinion between the political groups - in particular the fact that two rival resolutions had been tabled on the subject under debate. The EPP-ED's position was that it "asked how we can trust ETA and Batasuna when they speak of peace" but "give no apology for their killings". He called on ETA to express "remorse and a wish for atonement" and noted that it was still on the terrorist list of the EU, had not laid down its arms and was "still a threat".
Martin SCHULZ (DE) , for Socialist group, stressed that the "terrorism is an attack on values" and is never justified. But, he went on, "we all face a challenge to find a way out". He "admired the courage of the victims" but he also admired "the courage of the Spanish government in trying to find a path to peace. He quoted the words of former Spanish prime minister Aznar who had said in 1998 that to achieve peace "we must open our hearts to hope and forgiveness". This, he said, was "the spirit we must build on". His group did not always agree with Mr Aznar, but this time "he was right". What the Spanish government was now doing was trying to build on the work of its predecessors. In conclusion, "we must work on a cross-party basis and seize this opportunity".
For the Liberals, Graham WATSON (UK) said "the EU has been described as the greatest example of conflict resolution in history". We must therefore "not turn a blind eye to the best prospect of peace in a generation". As with the Northern Ireland conflict, it was "occasionally necessary for politicians to take a risk for peace". "Building the house of peace will not be easy", he acknowledged, but his group wished to make an appeal to all sides to "set aside party politics" on this issue.
Monica FRASSONI (IT), speaking for the Greens/EFA group, said that her group had always supported the peace process to defeat ETA terrorism. My group, she said, rejects violence and offered support to all victims of terrorism. Mrs Frassoni said that the Spanish peace process did not exclude any option, and it was the responsibility of the Basque people to solve the problems. Discussing the issues in the European Parliament, she said, did not mean the Parliament was condoning violence, but rather the opposite, encouraging the peace process. Terrorism and violence, she said, affected all Europeans. The key to success was dialogue.
Francis WURTZ (FR), for the EUL/NGL group, said that his group had always been against all forms of terrorist attacks. Attacks on citizens could never be justified. It was important to remember the victims. His group, he said, looked forward to a definitive end to the violence in the region. It was necessary to take a responsible and open approach especially with regard to dialogue. His group, he said, would be supporting the joint motion for a resolution put forward by the PES, ALDE, Greens/EFA and his own group. "We all want a peace based on the rule of law".
Brian CROWLEY (IE), for the UEN group said: "We must look to the future and ensure that in the future there will be no more victims, because political solutions will be found for the differences which there are between the differing peoples within Spain, within France, and within the European Union as a whole. The opportunities which are now presented to us by this process should be grasped, should be seized, but it should not be predetermined that everybody will get what they want and I think the most important issue that we now face is not to point the finger of blame at somebody else from the Popular Socialist Party in Spain, but to encourage the main forces of democracy in Spain to unite together to find a solution for all of the people of Spain, not to be driven down the road of division and dissension. Opportunity comes to pass but not to pause. Let us grab that opportunity and give support."
Speaking for the IND/DEM group Jens-Peter BONDE (DK) said that within the Spanish peace process all democratic principles should be respected. He said that there were only 12 states in the world which matched their ethnic make-ups. The EU, he said, should not intervene in the internal matters of Spain and it was for the Member States to solve their own internal conflicts. Mr Bonde said that he came from an area of conflict on the Danish / German border and often conflict was resolved by referenda. The key to peace he said was giving more than you wanted based on compromise.
Jim ALLISTER (UK), a non-attached MEP said: "Coming from Northern Ireland, which has experienced what at times was euphemistically called a peace process, I see uncanny parallels and lessons to be learned. ETA Batasuna and IRA Sinn Féin are both revolutionary Marxist-based organisations intent on foisting their will and ideology on a civilian population through vicious violence as and when required. It is not surprising that deep terrorist links have existed between them. Learn from our mistakes. Therefore, do not be taken in by mere proclamations of commitments to peace by those whose stock and trade is duplicity and mayhem! Test them long and test them hard or you too will have your goodwill exploited."
20061020IPR11900
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
