MEPs give their views on outcome of Lahti Summit - innovation, energy and relations with Russia
Institutions
2006-10-25 - 20:28
MEPs debated the informal Lahti Summit of Heads of State and government held on 20 October. The House gave its views on the meeting with President Putin, with many MEPs focussing on the murder of Anna Politkovskaya and the freedom of the press in Russia. Members also debated the future of the European Institute of Technology following the go-ahead given by European leaders in Lahti.
Finnish Prime Minister Matti VANHANEN , on behalf of the Council Presidency, opened the debate on the Lahti meeting of EU heads of state or government which took place on 20 October. He reviewed the main issues covered at the summit and also at the working dinner with Russian President Vladimir Putin.
At the summit itself, the first issue was energy. Key points were the development of energy relations between the EU and Russia - where "openness, market-based solutions and reciprocity" were agreed to be crucial - the forging of closer ties with strategically important third countries and "the curbing of climate change through energy policy". For the latter, a renewed emphasis on sustainable energy and energy efficiency were needed. Next spring the European Council would adopt a "prioritised Action Plan on Energy Policy for Europe".
The next issue was innovation policy, where the main topics had been "intellectual property rights, particularly patents, cooperation between the private and public sectors, the European Institute of Technology and standards". The patent system must be made "more cost-effective and predictable" and some states must show more flexibility and "agree to simplify the language regime", he said. Regarding standardisation, he pointed to the success of the Europe-wide GSM standard for phones, which had enabled Europe to become a world leader in this field.
Turning to immigration, the summit had emphasised the need for both a rapid response to the "acute crisis we are experiencing" as well as a longer-term "coherent and comprehensive policy", which must include economic development of the countries of origin.
The leaders had also spoken of the need to develop the EU's decision-making system to enable the EU to respond more promptly to acute problems. In particular, he fully supported the call made at the summit by EP President Borrell for "more effective decision-making in justice and home affairs".
The summit had also discussed Darfur and agreed to "maintain pressure on the Sudanese government to end the fighting".
Lastly, turning to the working dinner with President Putin, Mr Vanhanen said the leaders had discussed "how to achieve the goal of energy cooperation" through a new agreement and he hoped the EU-Russia summit in November in Helsinki would agree to start negotiations on a new and comprehensive EU-Russia accord.
He himself had brought up the killing of journalist Anna Politkovskaya and made it clear on behalf of the Union "how deeply shocked were at the murder". Chechnya and Georgia were also discussed.
Above all, he stressed, "we are building a strategic partnership with Russia in a 'common space' in concrete ways and on an extremely wide range of issues". The EU needs to be able to speak to its partners with one voice and "at Lahti we succeeded in showing President Putin that the Union is united and determined". "This does not mean that Russia agrees with everything we say. We had a long discussion, where President Putin answered our questions in detail and also sought weaknesses in the EU’s action. We are used to this with Russia, it is part of normal dialogue".
The crucial question now, he concluded, was "how we translate our words into action".
European Commission President
President José Manuel BARROSO said that the Lahti summit must be seen as part of a process. Europe had an ambitious agenda and the Lahti summit was about putting this agenda into action. On innovation, the Commission President said that Europe was slipping behind. The Commission, he said, would be coming forward with fresh proposals on patents before the end of the year. President Barroso also welcomed the green light given by the Heads of State and Government on the European Institute for Technology (EIT). The EIT, he said, would represent a flagship for European excellence in innovation.
With regard to Russia, President Barroso said that European leaders had spoken with one voice demonstrating solidarity and coherence. On immigration, President Barroso said it was impossible to continue with the unanimity rule, it was a collective problem requiring collective solutions. On Darfur, the President said it was paramount to avoid further tragedy.
Lahti overall was a signpost on the road to equip Europeans for globalisation.
Political group speakers
Ville ITÄLÄ (FI) for the EPP-ED group said that despite negative warning in the Financial Times on President Putin's invitation to Lahti, EU leaders spoke with one voice. It was a small but an important step and the reaction to the murder of Anna Politkovskaya was bold and correct. The dinner at the summit, he said, would have been the perfect opportunity to raise the question of the Baltic Sea. Overall, he said, the summit was a success for Finnish Prime Minister Vanhanen.
Martin SCHULZ (DE), for the PES group said that Prime Minister Vanhanen had held a very successful summit. It was good that Mr Putin was invited and the reaction of European leaders was strong. Russia needed to be condemned if human rights were being abused in Chechnya. In a functioning democracy, one is able to criticise anything, this was not the case in Russia. As to innovation, he said, that if the speeches of Prime Minister Vanhanen and President Barroso were to be believed, then we would all think we were "living in an Eldora do."
For the ALDE group, Graham WATSON (UK) listed the key points discussed at Lahti - the European Institute for Technology, energy security, immigration and relations with Russia - saying these were strategic issues which "highlight the need for coherent policy-making". He went on: "What is the use of a European technology university producing innovative ideas if we are not able to agree on a quick and easy patent system? What's the hope for a collective climate change strategy if we're not prepared together radically to change our patterns of energy consumption and generation? What are the prospects for a common immigration policy if we fail to devise development and trade policies that bring relief from grinding poverty and misery?" He added "Europe is failing. We need more not less Europe". Lastly, referring to the murder of Anna Politkovskaya , Mr Watson said "the EU should sign no partnership and cooperation agreement with Russia until freedom, transparency and the rule of law are established and the legal certainty for investors which follows from them."
Monica FRASSONI (IT), co-president of the Greens/EFA group, said the Lahti Council had shown how closely internal and international policy were linked. Support for a democratic Russia and those like Anna Politkovskaya was completely in line with attempts to secure energy supplies, respect the Kyoto protocol and improve energy efficiency. Silence on Chechnya, corruption and assassinations in Russia was not a convincing policy, she said. “Appeasement does not increase Putin's reliability, just his determination to strengthen his grip on Russia's zone of power. We oppose any attempt to remove conditionality. We must keep the human rights clause in the agreement.” On energy, she opposed nuclear power, saying the Iranian and North Korean situation showed there was a link between nuclear energy programmes and weapons proliferation. Reductions in consumption and increasing efficiency were the best approaches. On immigration, she called for more support for developing countries, so that their best workers were not obliged to head for Europe.
Speaking for the GUE/NGL group, Esko SEPPÄNEN (FI) said human rights and media freedom could not be overlooked, but it was not possible to negotiate a deal on these things with Russia, just as another superpower across the Atlantic, he said, refused to negotiate on ending torture, wars or bringing American war criminals to justice in The Hague. “Russia is prepared to be part on an energy dialogue, but it is not clear if this is just a one way process. The summit did not resolve these problems... it was no more than foreplay for the next summit,” he said.
Brian CROWLEY (IE), for the UEN group, highlighted the plans for a European Institute of Technology. He said that while the majority of Parliament was in favour, it was time to ask what actual modality would make it happen. He also called for a patent system which provided proper protection for innovation, “otherwise, the best graduates will move to the US or Japan where there is bigger investment and better protection for their ideas.” Finally, he praise EU leaders for showing it was possible to speak with one voice to Russia.
Godfrey BLOOM (UK) of the Independence and Democracy group said energy was the life blood of nation state: “It is very difficult for people in the UK to accept that energy policy should be decided by foreigners.” He said the Battle of the Atlantic was still in living memory, when Britihs freedom had been on a knife edge, because “continental countries found it impossible to live together.” An agreement with Putin was ludicrous, he said, calling the Russian president “a gangster.” “Signing a agreement with him is as ludicrous as signing a piece of paper with Hitler,” he added. He said it was time to be honest, and state clearly that renewable energy technology simply did not yet work well enough to play a major role. “But honesty,” he concluded, “ is something we try to avoid in this chamber.”
Rysazard CZARNECKI (NA, PL) thanked President Borrell for his “important words to Putin. We cannot sacrifice human rights for energy (...) We cannot have double standards on human rights – we have system of values which we must bear in mind all the time and not just when it is convenient. Don't forget Lenin said capitalists will sell you rope to hang them with.”
British speaker
Timothy KIRKHOPE (EPP-ED, UK) said hearing Mr Bloom had been surprising, as “I thought dinosaurs had died out thousands of years ago.” He said the EU would need Russia's energy resources in the years to come and Russia would need access to European energy markets, so the stakes were too high for diplomatic grandstanding. “Russia,” he said, “must make a commitment to pluralism and the democratic process. It needs to have the same standards on democracy and human rights as we do.” Some said the progress made in Russia on these issues had stalled of late, said Mr Kirkhope, expressing the hope that more movement would now occur in the right direction. He was disappointed that the British Prime Minister had apparently failed to raise these issues.
Prime Minister Vanhanen's response to the debate
Replying to the debate for the Council, Prime Minister Vanhanen said he was glad to see that the presidency and the EP were on the same wavelength. The EU needed to devise common policies on all the key areas mentioned.
He referred to the decision taken at the summit to create a common European energy policy and said that was just as important as presenting a united front to Russia. However, it was important "not to caricature Russia as a monstrous dictatorship". After all, "they want to work with us too". President Putin himself had emphasised that "the Russians are dependent on us as much as we are on them". Europe must respond to Russia's appeal for investment but for this purpose there must be "common ground rules - for Russian companies as much as for European companies".
Lastly, touching briefly on immigration, Mr Vanhanen said he would come back in December with a document for discussion on this matter.
20061020IPR11901 President Borrell's speech on 20 October to the Lahti Summit
EN
1
LINK
/president/speeches/en/files/sp0119.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
