EP Committee urges further investigation of illegal CIA activities in Romania
Fundamental rights
2006-10-19 - 14:40
Following three days of meetings in Bucharest with Romanian officials, journalists and NGO representatives, members of the European Parliament’s Temporary Committee on allegations of illegal CIA activity in Europe said on Thursday that more investigation of the CIA's possible actions in Romania was needed. The issue of oversight of the activities of national intelligence services was also raised.
Noting that the Romanian Senate is the only national parliament other than the German Bundestag to have set up a committee of inquiry into CIA activities in Europe, Committee chair Carlos Coelho (EPP-ED, PT) said he was grateful for the way in which the MEPs were received by the Romanian authorities, appreciating “the willingness to cooperate they all showed towards our delegation”.
Summarising the delegation’s exchanges with Romanian authorities – talks which covered, among other things, the case of a December 2004 flight allegedly operated by the CIA, which involved an accident at Baneasa airport in Bucharest – Mr Coelho did note, however, that “there are questions which have still not been answered”. Investigations into alleged CIA activities in Romania, he added, “should continue and go deeper than was the case up to now”.
Welcoming the statements made by Senator Norica Nicolai, chair of the Romanian Senate’s inquiry committee – who did not rule out that CIA flights carrying detainees could have landed in Romania on stopovers – Mr Coelho noted that he understood that the June 2006 conclusions reached by that committee (which do not acknowledge such a possibility) were “only provisional” .
Though otherwise grateful for the cooperation of the Romanian authorities, rapporteur Claudio Fava (PES, IT) noted that “there seems to have been a lack of willingness on their part to try to clarify what happened”. It was necessary to remedy what he called “the lack of necessary oversight of the activities of foreign intelligence services in this country – just as in a number of other countries investigated by our Committee”. It is precisely because of insufficient oversight, he added, that “one still cannot exclude” that US secret services operated in Romania on a clandestine basis. As he and other MEPs observed, Romania and other EU Member States should cooperate in developing such oversight, particularly at the parliamentary level.
On the question of alleged CIA detention centres in Romania, Mr Fava remarked: “We have found no further proof, either to confirm or to deny, the original allegations”.
The EP delegation, in addition to Mr Coelho and Mr Fava, included Committee Vice-Chair Sarah Ludford ( ALDE, UK), Frieda Brepoels (EPP-ED, BE), Ana Gomes (PES, PT), Willy Meyer (GUE/NGL, ES), Ryszard Czarnecki (NA, PL), plus two Romanian observers: Marian-Jean Marinescu (EPP-ED) and Karoly Ferenc Szabo (EPP-ED).
2006-10-17 Temporary Committee on the alleged use of European countries by the CIA for the transport and illegal detention of prisoners Chair Carlos Coelho EPP-ED PT
Delegation to Bucharest, Romania: 17-19 October 2006
20061016IPR11692
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
