Member States’ fiscal policies under attack
Economic and monetary affairs
2006-05-17 - 18:02
Parliament has adopted a report which strongly criticises national governments for failing to get a grip on public spending and refusing to improve coordination of economic policy.
In the report, originally drawn up by Dariusz Rosati (PES, PL), MEPs express their concern about the persistently slow growth in Europe since 2002, substantially below long-term potential, constrained by structural rigidities, weak internal demand, and a lack of proper balance in the macroeconomic policy mix. They warn of the risks of rapid adjustments to global imbalances which might lead to a drop in US demand, with lower exports and weakening growth in the EU.
Parliament says stable, outward-looking and competitive macro-economic policy setting is a necessary precondition for sustainable public finances. It supports the reorientation of public policies and expenditure towards innovation and education.
MEPs say that the incorrect application of the Stability and Growth Pact means that there has been no significant improvement in the Member States’ fiscal positions since last year. They stress that it is vital to correct public deficits, saying that they are impeding economic recovery and making the cycle more acute. Parliament is calling for a much more ambitious reduction in public deficits in 2006 that a mere economic adjustment made in anticipation of higher growth.
The report warns that the lack of political will to contain spending, overoptimistic revenue projections, creative accounting and fiscal consolidation based mainly on one-off measures have largely contributed to budgetary slippage. Calling for improved statistical governance, MEPs also want greater transparency about implicit liabilities such as public sector pension commitments.
Parliament deplores the lack of policy coordination in the euro zone, notably the divergence of fiscal policies, and is concerned at the possible antagonistic effects of the lack of coordination. It calls on the Eurogroup chairman to propose a detailed plan for the duration of his term in office, with regular reports on the level of implementation achieved. Finally, MEPs call on the Member States to meet their obligations under Article 99 of the Treaty to regard their economic policies as a matter of common concern and to coordinate these policies.
20060512IPR08055 Public finances in the Economic and Monetary Union (EMU)
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5270972
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
