The Week Ahead 29 May - 4 June 2006
Institutions
2006-05-29 - 16:28
Plenary Session and Committee Meetings - Brussels
Plenary session. Parliament meets in Brussels, with an agenda including a debate with Belgian Prime Minister Guy Verhofstadt on the future of Europe, a vote on the second reading of legislation to increase the availability of medicines for children and discussions on Guantanamo, on the enlargement of the euro area and on the situation of Roma women in the EU. (Wednesday-Thursday) Foreign Affairs and Defence. MEPs and national parliamentarians from across the EU discuss the EU’s foreign and security policy with High Representative Javier Solana and the Austrian ministers for foreign affairs and defence, Ursula Plassnik and Günther Platter, for the EU Council Presidency. (Tuesday) EP in Finland. Ahead of the Finnish EU Presidency, the Conference of Presidents of Parliament's political groups meets in Helsinki. EP President Josep Borrell will meet Finland's President, Speaker of Parliament and Prime Minister. (Thursday-Friday) Borrell in Estonia. Mr Borrell continues his official visit to Estonia, including meetings with the country’s President and the Speaker of Parliament. (Monday-Tuesday) Air passenger data. The Civil Liberties and Legal Affairs Committees will discuss the outcome of Parliament's legal challenge to the EU-US agreement on transfer of data on air passengers, on which the Court of Justice is due to rule on Tuesday. (Tuesday and Thursday) Audiovisual services. Six parliamentary committees hold a joint two-day hearing to assess the draft directive on audiovisual media services, looking at both economic and non-economic implications. (Thursday-Friday) Dalai Lama. The Dalai Lama comes to Parliament to meet President Borrell and the Foreign Affairs Committee. (Wednesday) Juncker on ECB. Eurogroup chair and Luxembourg Prime Minister Jean-Claude Juncker discusses the European Central Bank’s activities with the Economics Committee. (Tuesday)
20060524IPR08457 For full details, see Agenda
EN
1
LINK
/news/expert/event_top_page/default/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
