Greek President calls for citizens to drive the future of Europe
Institutions
2006-05-18 - 11:50
Karolos Papoulias, President of the Hellenic Republic
Speaking to MEPs in a formal sitting, Karolos Papoulias, President of the Hellenic Republic, said the democratic participation of Europe’s citizens in decisions about its future was essential - and that the European Parliament had a key role in bringing this about.
President Borrell welcomed the President of the Hellenic Republic, Karolos Papoulias, to the chamber, praising him as a man of peace and a man committed to building Europe. President Papoulias had, he said, constantly worked for peace including fighting the military dictatorship in his country and mediating in the Middle East at a crucial time. President Borrell described President Papoulias as a man who delivers what he promises and should therefore be an inspiration to everyone present. The Future of Europe
President Papoulias said the European Union was founded out of the ruins of the Second World War for prosperity and progress, and was based on three principles: freedom, equality and humanitarianism. Freedom, he said, was linked to security and European Union citizens wanted to feel safe but not by compromising human rights and personal freedoms. Equality, he continued, was extremely difficult to achieve as there are many different ways of assessing it, whether one talks about the immigrants who want equal treatment with people of the host country, unemployed people who want equal opportunities or the poorer people who demand equal education and health care. He said that the European Parliament is the most important institution in the European Union, as it is democratically elected to reflect citizens’ concerns. He stressed that European citizens were the most important factors in the future of Europe as they will shape the future. Their participation was essential to building a European Union “superpower of humanitarianism” and it was the Parliament's role to ensure that their voices are heard loud and clear. Enlargement
President Papoulias said that the enlargement in 2004 had caused a real shock in day-to-day Europe but the advantages outweighed the disadvantages. It had a great moral value as it symbolised the overcoming of the Cold War divisions and giving Europe roots in Eastern Europe as well as being neighbours with the Middle East. He said that he also welcomed enlargement into South Eastern Europe. He said his country was in favour of Turkish accession talks being successfully concluded, but this presupposes a full implementation of the EU’s processes and rules, which cannot be twisted in favour of geopolitical expediency. He added that while the Cold War division had been overcome the island of Cyprus is still divided along the Green Line, which was a major European problem waiting to be solved. External Relations
President Papoulias said that the European Union needed to act in union and show a united force in all critical aspects of the world. He mentioned the Iraq war, where Europe had failed to unite. He said that it was clear that there had not been one voice, there had been open and sterile opposition among the countries with clear dividing lines. Europe, he said, needed more than a common currency or a common flag to unite the citizens. He stressed the need for common values and a common political culture. President Papoulias also mentioned the tension over Iran’s nuclear programme, saying diplomatic means were inexhaustible until an agreement is reached.
20060517STO08350
EN
1
PHOTO
20060517PHT08356.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
