Parliamentary meeting on the Future of Europe : MEPs and MPs debate - 8-9 May
Future of Europe/European integration
United Kingdom
2006-05-30 - 16:30
MEPs and MPs debate the future of Europe
Members of the European Parliament will meet in Brussels with members of national parliaments on Monday and Tuesday, 8-9 May to discuss the "Future of Europe". This event, jointly organised by the Austrian Parliament and the European Parliament, will give citizens' national and European representatives an opportunity to discuss the key issues which are of concern to them.
Josep BORRELL , President of the European Parliament said: 'Europe means the building of a supranational democracy... a new experience, an exercise fraught with perils.... Developing synergy and cooperation between the European Parliament and the national parliaments will help European democracy to move forward. This dialogue will bring together ideas and visions for the European Union of the future.'
Andreas KHOL , President of the Austrian Nationalrat, said: 'The future of the European Union rests in the hands of the citizens of Europe. Members of parliaments are their political representatives. Together, viewing matters from the point of view both of the Member States and of Brussels, we wish to debate the basic principles of the direction in which Europe should progress.'
The issues to be addressed during the meeting, in working parties and in plenary will include: Europe in the world and the EU's borders; globalisation and the European economic and social model; freedom, security and justice; and the European Union's future financial resources.
This event, jointly organised by the European Parliament and the Austrian Parliament, will provide a contribution to the discussions of the European Council meeting, due to be held on 15 and 16 June, which will draw the initial conclusions of the reflection period.
UK MEPs participating in the meeting summed up their expectations ahead of the meeting :
Charles TANNOCK (Conservative, London) said: " The interests of the people of Europe are best served by a new vision which concentrates on areas where the EU can bring real value added such as enforcing the single market and competition rules, reducing over-regulation and bureaucracy, enforcing environmental and consumer protection, fighting organised crime and international terrorism and co-operating on foreign policy and security issues. There is a real euro-fatigue which has set-in with our electorates who believe the EU to be too distant from their concerns and top-down in its approach. The no votes to the EU Constitution was a wake-up call which Europe's leaders ignore at their peril ."
James ELLES (Conservative, South East) said: " We need to look not only at what we can do to ensure greater accountability of the European institutions and more democratic involvement of our citizens in the work of the European Union. Just as importantly, we must better understand the very rapid changes in the world around us which directly affect Europe. There is a real need to instil a sense of urgency in developing effective policy responses to address these challenges ahead ".
James ALLISTER (Democratic Unionist, Northern Ireland) said: " I will be pleasantly surprised if this event proves other than another unrealistic endeavour to resuscitate and promote the rejected Constitution. The blinkered Europhile tendency of most participants is likely to show an arrogant disconnection with an increasingly sceptical citizenship ."
Richard CORBETT (Labour, Yorkshire and the Humber) said " It is important that parliaments begin to think together about the future of Europe and not just in our separate corners. This is about much more than treaties and institutions - though we will in due course have to come back to the question of the Constitutional treaty, now ratified by a majority of Member States but rejected by two - and decide on how best to reconcile this divergence ."
Andrew DUFF (Liberal Democrat, Eastern) said: " With the Council paralysed about what to do with the Constitution, and the Commission indecisive, it falls to the European Parliament to take the initiative. MEPs should push for an extension of the period of reflection until mid-2007, followed by a clear decision about how to rescue the Constitution -- if necessary by way of a judicious renegotiation. The Forum will ask itself whether the Constitution is still adequate to meet required policy objectives ."
Graham WATSON (Liberal Democrat, South West) said: " The European Union has a new purpose, as compelling as conflict-avoidance was in the twentieth century. Globalisation brings with it supranational challenges like population growth and migration , climate change and internationally organised crime which can only be managed effectively by countries working together. We must succeed in convincing citizens that the European Union, and the Constitution in particular, can respond effectively to these challenges by delivering more prosperity, opportunity and security than individual nations acting alone ."
Meeting details
The meeting takes place in the wider context of the period of reflection on the Treaty Establishing a Constitution for Europe. Parliaments want to play an active role in this period of reflection. This will be one of the first events at the European institutional level whose goal is to debate the future of Europe. The dates of the meeting were chosen to take account that 9 May is Europe Day.
The essential goal of the meeting is to enable an exchange and a debate between, on the one hand, national parliamentarians of the Member States of the Union and candidate countries, and on the other, MEPs on the main themes which concern public opinion in our countries as to the future of Europe.
The following themes have been chosen:
The European Union in the world and the borders of the EU;
Globalisation and the economic and social model;
Freedom, Security and Justice: what is the future?
The future resources of the Union.
Following normal practice for these types of meetings, it is co-organised by the Austrian Parliament (due to the fact that Austria holds the Presidency) and the European Parliament. The Meeting is co-Chaired by the President of the European Parliament and the Presidents of the Austrian Nationalrat and Bundesrat. The working groups on the themes outlined will also be co-Chaired by an MEP and a Member of a national parliament. The distribution of rapporteurs for the working groups also follows this approach.
UK MEPs participating:
EPP-ED
UK
James ELLES
EPP-ED
UK
Daniel HANNAN
EPP-ED
UK
Timothy KIRKHOPE
EPP-ED
UK
Charles TANNOCK
PES
UK
Richard CORBETT
ALDE
UK
Andrew DUFF
ALDE
UK
Graham WATSON
NON-ATTACHED
UK
James Hugh ALLISTER
Delegation from the House of Commons
Mr. Jimmy Hood Chairman of European Scrutiny Committee
Mr. John Denham Chairman of Home Affairs Committee
Mr. Jim Dobbin Member of European Scrutiny Committee
Mr. David Heathcoat-Amory Member of Foreign Affairs and European Scrutiny Committees
Delegation from the House of Lords
Member LORD GRENFELL CHAIR TO THE EUROPEAN UNION COMMITTEE Member LORD MARLESFORD MEMBER OF THE EUROPEAN UNION COMMITTEE Member LORD MACLENNAN OF ROGART MEMBER OF THE EUROPEAN UNION COMMITTEE Member LORD HANNAY OF CHISWICK MEMBER OF THE EUROPEAN UNION COMMITTEE
20060502IPR07790 Website on the inter-parliamentary meeting on the future of Europe Programme for inter-parliamentary meeting on the future of Europe - 8-9 May 2006
EN
1
PHOTO
20061206PHT00976.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.futureofeurope.europarl.europa.eu/
EN
3
LINK
http://www.futureofeurope.europarl.europa.eu/future/webdav/site/myjahiasite/shared/import/Home/Programmes/Programme-27.04.06_EN.PDF.pdf
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
