Women in armed conflicts
Women's rights/Equal opportunities
2006-06-01 - 14:51
Measures to improve the situation of women in armed conflicts, and recommendations to allow women to take action in peace processes are put forward in an own-initiative report adopted today by the European Parliament by 315 votes in favour to 23 against and 67 abstentions.
MEPs highlight the positive role that women play in conflict resolution and post-conflict reconstruction. They also draw attention to the vulnerability and special needs of women and girls in conflict situations and women as perpetrator of violence.
The report, drafted by Véronique DE KEYSER (PES, BE), states that women civilians in times of conflict, like children and old people, are victims of all sorts of ill treatment. In many cases the violence is not only physical and/or sexual abuse but also a violation of their economic, social and cultural rights. Victims of rape and sexual abuses are often stigmatised, rejected and mistreated and sometimes in honour of the community even murdered. MEPs emphasise states responsibility to put an end to impunity and to prosecute those responsible for genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes including those relating to sexual violence against women and girls. MEPs call for zero-tolerance of the sexual exploitation of children, girls and women in armed conflicts and refugee camps, and demands severe administrative and criminal penalties for such exploitation. The report also recalls the importance to reproductive health services in conflict situations and refugee camps.
Women should take a more active role in peace-making
Despite all the resolutions, appeals and recommendations adopted and made by various international and European institutions; women are still not fully involved in conflict-prevention and conflict resolution, peace-keeping operations and peace-building, notes the Parliament. Consequently, MEPs do not call for fresh recommendations but the implementation of existing ones, for example UN resolution 1325 of 2000 on Women and peace and security. The Parliament stresses the need to increase the role of women in political decision making in national reconstruction processes, and also their political presence at the negotiating table. The EU is encouraged to support measures to significantly increase the number of women at all levels in all European Security and Defence Policy missions.
The report also takes into account that women are not always peace-makers; they are also some times war-makers. Particularly the problem of female suicide bombers, and stresses that rape used as a weapon of war affects all women, irrespective of ethnic, religious and ideological differences.
Finally, the Parliament supports the due implementation of human rights clauses in agreements with third countries and of the principles of international humanitarian law and related international agreements with specific reference to women's rights and needs.
20060531IPR08615 Situation of women in armed conflicts and their role in reconstruction and the democratic process in post-conflict countries
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5288682
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
