European Parliament calls on the US Administration to close Guantánamo Bay detention facility
External relations
2006-06-13 - 15:15
In adopting a joint resolution by a large majority on the situation of prisoners at Guantánamo, MEPs reiterated their call on the US Administration to close the Guantánamo Bay detention facility and insists that every prisoner should be treated in accordance with international humanitarian law and, if charged, tried without delay in a fair and public hearing by a competent, independent and impartial court of law or international tribunal.
MEPs condemn all forms of torture and ill-treatment and reiterates the need to comply with international law. MEPs also point out that the suicides on 10 June 2006 of three detainees at Guantanamo Bay have raised further international concern about the detention facilities.
Parliament calls on the US authorities to implement the UNCAT recommendations and to ensure the non-use of 'special interrogation techniques', including methods involving sexual humiliation, 'water boarding', 'short shackling' and using dogs to induce fear, that constitute torture or cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment.
The House calls on the US Government to grant unimpeded access to the detainees at Guantánamo Bay for the respective UN bodies and international human rights organisations. MEPs note that the Red Cross has been the only international organisation to have official access to the detainees.
MEPs call on the US authorities to ensure that all allegations of torture and other ill-treatment involving US personnel are subject to prompt, thorough and credible investigation and trial. They will also call on the US Government to clarify if minors have been or are still held in Guantánamo in contravention of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child.
The House calls on the US authorities to ensure that released detainees are not returned to any state where they could face a risk of being tortured or subjected to cruel, inhuman and degrading treatment.
MEPs call on the EU to have a common approach for the EU-US Summit and to institute a joint action calling on the US Government to close the Guantánamo Bay detention centre and act in accordance with international law regarding the treatment of detainees.
The House also suggests, following the advice of the European Parliament Members' delegation which recently visited Guantánamo, that an ad hoc delegation be sent to Guantánamo when the EP considers it necessary and appropriate.
20060608IPR08814 Joint draft motion for a resolution on the situation of prisoners at Guantanamo
-//EP//TEXT MOTION P6-RC-2006-0295 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
