Montenegro: new challenges ahead
External relations
2006-05-31 - 15:55
Voting to go it alone (Photo: OSCE/Urdur Gunnarsdottir)
The upcoming football World Cup looks set to be the international farewell for the State of Serbia-Montenegro after Montenegrins voted to end the Union with Serbia on 21 May. The vote was witnessed by a Parliamentary observer delegation there to ensure it was free and fair. After the poll, Jelko Kacin, a Slovene Liberal MEP who chaired the mission declared himself "positively impressed" by the way the vote was carried out.
The ballot gave the pro-independence camp 55.5% of the popular vote - just over the 55% required for victory under the compromise deal brokered by the EU in 2002. Despite the divisions caused by the referendum campaign, the split from Serbia looks set to be peaceful as Belgrade has pledged to respect the result. A "spirit of cooperation" between the two countries was urged by EP President Josep Borrell in a congratulatory letter to Montenegro's Prime Minister Milo Djukanovic. Mr Borrell said that the prospect of "joining the European Union and the fulfilment of all the accession criteria must be considered as principal objectives".
This was echoed by German Christian Democrat Doris Pack, Chair of Parliament's Delegation for relations with South-East Europe. She said it was "'now up to both countries to shape their future, which is, without doubt, the accession perspective of both countries to the European Union." She added that both must work to achieve accession capability - including in Serbia's case the detention of Ratko Mladic, wanted by an international tribunal for the 1995 Srebrenica massacre in Bosnia-Herzegovina.
The referendum itself drew widespread praise for its fairness. Jan Marinus Wiersma and Hannes Swoboda, vice-presidents of the Socialist group, welcomed the vote as "free and fair" and said that "Montenegro will need stability as it faces up to the challenges ahead". Milan Horáček, a Green MEP, in Montenegro for the election said, "The European Union must support both states in redefining Montenegro's accession negotiations and escort the country on its way to independence."
As well as any aspirations it may have about joining the EU, Montenegro will have to negotiate membership of the United Nations and other international organisations. An issue to be settled with Serbia is access to the sea as Belgrade will lose direct access to the Adriatic. Serbia retains its legal claim to the UN-administered province of Kosovo - whose final status is currently being negotiated under UN auspices.
20060530STO08530 Parliamentary delegations to South-East Europe
EN
1
PHOTO
20060529PHT08511.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/delegations/presentation.do?delegation=1262&language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
