UK MEPs and Royal Society: Scheme to bridge politics and science launched in European Parliament
Research and innovation
United Kingdom
2006-06-07 - 14:53
Chairman of the Industry Committee Giles Chichester MEP
An innovative new scheme to foster increased understanding between European politicians and the science community was launched by the Royal Society (1) – the UK national academy of science – at a reception in the European Parliament on 31 May 2006.
The Royal Society MEP-Scientist pairing scheme brings together seven MEPs with seven scientists (2) who spent the week (30 May – 2 June) ‘shadowing’ them to gain first hand experience of how MEPs contribute to European legislation. The scientists gained an understanding of the different roles of the European Commission, Council and Parliament by meeting officials and will attend training sessions on the EU institutions and science and research policy in the EU.
In addition, the scientists spent time with their ‘paired’ MEPs in their constituencies and the MEPs visited the scientists’ laboratories to discover how scientific research is carried out and hear about new research.
The scheme is designed to make scientists more aware of how policy is made in Europe. It also aims to help MEPs understand the scientific process, introduce them to a network of young research scientists and bring high-quality scientific advice into EU policy discussions.
Lord Selborne, chairman of the Royal Society’s Science in Society Committee which oversees the pairing scheme, said: “We can see from the current debate over whether European science funding should be used for research on human embryonic stem cells that science and politics are worlds that do converge, despite being very different in nature. This scheme is an opportunity for both communities to better understand the constraints that the other works within.”
Eluned Morgan , the Labour MEP for Wales, who is taking part in the scheme said: “As individuals we are asked to decide on an extremely wide range of issues, often of a scientific or technical nature. While formal advice structures do exist, what the Royal Society scheme does, which is so valuable, is to give access on a personal level to a network of world-leading scientists in their fields”.
Fiona Hall , Liberal Democrat MEP for North East, said: “I welcome this scheme because scientists and policymakers don’t necessarily always understand the constraints under which both communities are working. At a time when the budget for FP7 is being discussed it’s very instructive and highly inspiring to get a closer look at some of the amazing work being carried out in the universities within my region.”
Giles Chichester , Conservative MEP for South West, said: “I am delighted to support the Royal Society’s new MEP-Scientist Pairing Scheme. The fantastic pace of scientific and technological change, and the potential impact of some of these developments on society at large, mean that it is more important than ever to bring the scientific community and policy-makers closer together. Whether it’s a public health, environmental or energy issue, the scientific basis for policy decisions has to be right.”
Dr Helen Coxall who researches climate change at the University of Cardiff and who is shadowing Eluned Morgan said: “Climate change issues, of course, have rocketed up the political and media agendas recently. There are a lot of scientific data out there and a lot of policy changes to be made but synthesizing all this is challenging and I am very interested to find out exactly how closely politicians and policy influencers work with new scientific data. This scheme is a great opportunity to better understand this process and how research is assimilated into policy making. Gaining an appreciation of the questions politicians are asking in this context may also help my own research questions.”
Lord Selborne said: “We are piloting the scheme this year as a natural extension of a very successful MP-Scientist scheme that the Royal Society has been running in the UK for the past 6 years. Our ambition is to work with other European organisations to expand this new scheme so that it brings together scientists and politicians from across the European Union.”
NOTES FOR EDITORS
1. The Royal Society is an independent academy promoting the natural and applied sciences. Founded in 1660, the Society has three roles, as the UK academy of science, as a learned Society, and as a funding agency. It responds to individual demand with selection by merit, not by field. The Society’s objectives are to:
strengthen UK science by providing support to excellent individuals
fund excellent research to push back the frontiers of knowledge
attract and retain the best scientists
ensure the UK engages with the best science around the world
support science communication and education; and communicate and encourage dialogue with the public
provide the best independent advice nationally and internationally
promote scholarship and encourage research into the history of science
2. Linda McAvan, Labour MEP for Yorkshire and Humber is paired with Dr Simon Lewis, from the University of Leeds
Giles Chichester, Conservative MEP for South West has been paired with Dr Hazel Mottram of the University of Bristol
John Bowis, Conservative MEP for London has been paired with Dr Mark Enright of Imperial College London
Fiona Hall, Liberal Democrat MEP for North East is paired with Dr Melissa Bateson, University of Newcastle
Malcolm Harbour, Conservative MEP for West Midlands is paired with Dr Graham Smith of the University of Birmingham
Chris Davies, Liberal Democrat MEP for North West is paired with Dr Martin Attfield of the University of Manchester
Eluned Morgan, Labour MEP for Wales is paired with Dr Helen Coxall from Cardiff University
20060606IPR08723 The Royal Society
EN
1
PHOTO
20060607PHT08777.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.royalsoc.ac.uk/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
