Improving EU legislation to prevent sex offences against children
Justice and home affairs
2006-06-01 - 14:10
The European Parliament adopted a report endorsing a proposal to improve existing legislation protecting children from sex offenders in Europe. The aim is to ensure that any court prohibition on working with children, arising from sex offences against minors or from child pornography, will be enforceable not only by the Member State which issues it, but also by any other EU country to which the person concerned moves.
Combating the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography became a priority for the EU in 2003 when legislation was adopted establishing a minimum common approach to these criminal offences, covering the type of penalty and the prohibitions imposed. One of the provisions was to impose a temporary or permanent ban on child sex offenders taking a job involving supervision of children. As a result of an initiative from Belgium, the Council is now considering an EU decision to ensure that a prohibition on working with children imposed by the national judicial authorities of one Member State will be enforced by any Member State where the individual might reside. This rule should help to avoid cases such as that of a paedophile convicted in France who later committed a similar crime in Belgium.
An important aspect of the new EU law will be to oblige national authorities to include information on penalties for sex offences against children in criminal records which can be consulted by any other Member State on request. In its report, drawn up by Bogusław SONIK (EPP-ED, PL), the House generally supports the proposal, although it recommends amendments to improve the wording and tighten up some definitions in the legislative text. One of the key changes approved by MEPs would oblige Member States to include also in their criminal records any related prohibition imposed by non-EU countries.
20060531IPR08611 Combating the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography: recognition and enforcement of prohibitions arising from convictions for sexual offences. Framework decision. Initiative Belgium
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5219892
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
