Opening of plenary session in Strasbourg
Institutions
2006-06-12 - 19:53
President Josep Borrell opened the session by informing MEPs that there would be an extraordinary plenary session at 11am on Tuesday 20 June in Brussels, to allow the President-in-Office of the Council, Austrian Chancellor Wolfgang Schüssel, to report back to Parliament on the work of the Austrian Presidency and the outcome of this week's summit in Brussels.
Change to the agenda
Only one change was made to the previously published agenda - the vote on the Esko SEPPÄNEN (GUE/NGL, FI) report on shipments of radioactive waste will be postponed to the July session. A proposal from the EPP-ED group to drop the planned vote on resolutions concerning the accession to the EU of Bulgaria and Romania was defeated by 90 votes to 95, with 8 abstentions.
Highlights of the Strasbourg Week
MEPs will debate the European Council which will take place in Brussels on 15-16 June 2006 with one of the key topics being the Constitutional Treaty after the French and Dutch "no" votes. Parliament will tackle the future of European research and development with two reports on the 7th Framework Programme for research. MEPs will also be questioning the Commission on its efforts to combat and prevent preventing trafficking in human beings and forced prostitution during the World Cup in Germany . Monday 12th June Michael CASHMAN 's report (PES, UK) on the work of the Petitions Committee highlights the need to ensure that "response times … become shorter, investigations even more effective and its service … equally available to all citizens of the EU". The Committee on Women's Rights and Gender Equality will be asking the Commission what special measures has the Commission taken or does it intend to take for combating and preventing trafficking in human beings and forced prostitution during 2006 football World Cup , if the Commission has considered practical options for launching a European Day against trafficking in human beings, as well as Germany's measures in place and the effective working with NGOs. Tuesday 13th June MEPs are likely to broadly throw their weight behind the Commission's proposals on the future of European research and development for the period 2007-2013. However, there is likely to be heated debate on the funding of embryonic stem cell research. Parliament will also vote on a report by Stephen HUGHES (PES, UK) on p rotecting workers against the risk of infection from contaminated needles. Every year around a million workers in Europe, mainly in the medical world, suffer injuries from used surgical needles. The consequences can be serious, including infections from HIV or hepatitis B or C. The EP Social Affairs Committee wants to improve existing EU legislation so as to give workers better protection. Parliament will vote on this topic following the postponement from the last plenary in Brussels. The House will also debate series of reports dealing with protection of personal data as well as non-discrimination and equal opportunities. Parliament will also debate the human rights situation in Tunisia and will adopt a resolution on the subject. MEPs will also adopt a resolution and debate EU-Russia relations following the EU-Russia Summit of 26 May. Wednesday 14th June The key debate of the plenary agenda focuses on preparations for the European Council to be held on 15-16 June 2006 in Brussels . The Austrian Presidency 's agenda consists of three headings: Europe Listens, discussing the future after France and the Netherlands' rejection of the Constitution, Europe at Work, citizens' security and life in the European Union, and A Work Plan for the Future, including subjects that will concern the EU in the near future. The resolution will focus on Romania's and Bulgaria's progress towards accession. On Wednesday afternoon, the House will also debate the increase in racist and homophobic violence in Europe. Seán Ó NEACHTAIN 's (UEN, IE) report on inshore fishing and the problems encountered by inshore fishermen and underlines the sector's "vital contribution" not only to local economies but also to maintaining the social fabric of coastal communities and preserving cultural traditions and practices. Thursday 15th June MEPs are set to back Slovenia's ambitions to join the euro zone following the report from the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee which approves the Commission’s proposal. MEPs will also debate a report on protection of the financial interests of the Communities and the fight against fraud , criticising individual Member States' efforts and the Commission's lack of efforts to improve the situation. Parliament will also vote on the 7th Framework programme for research, debated on Tuesday morning. The session ends with debates and votes on human rights issues in East Timor, Syria and North Korea.
20060608IPR08803 Briefing - 12 -15 June - Strasbourg Final Draft agenda 12- 15 June - Strasbourg
EN
2
LINK
/omk/sipade3?PROG=AGENDA&L=EN&QUERY=ALL-SIT&NAV=S&REF=2006-06
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060522BRI08406 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
