Call to expand Petitions Committee to meet public demand
Petitions
2006-06-13 - 14:19
With 1,609 complaints received in 18 months, Parliament is calling for an increase in the number of Members of the Petitions Committee to enable it to meet the demands made on it by the public. It also believes that, to be more effective, its procedures must be streamlined and its work better coordinated with the other EU institutions. It also wants a tougher line to be taken with Member States which do not comply with Community law.
A report by Michael CASHMAN (PES, UK) on the work of the Petitions Committee over the last year was adopted unanimously by a large majority. The report highlights the need to ensure that "response times … become shorter, investigations even more effective and its service … equally available to all citizens of the EU". For this reason, and to enable Parliament "to better respond to the expectations of petitioners", MEPs propose that the committee's numbers be increased to 50 full Members.
MEPs believe the committee plays a "vital role" in reconnecting with the citizens of the EU and contributes to a strengthening of democratic control over Community legislation and its implementation. To find appropriate solutions "to the concerns and problems with which citizens are confronted during their everyday lives", they believe the committee's procedures must be rationalised and coordinated. They also call for better cooperation between Parliament and the other actors involved, in particular the Commission but also the Council.
Between July 2004 and December 2005 the Petitions Committee received 1609 complaints, an average of 90 per month or three per day. However, around one third were declared inadmissible as they had nothing to do with the activities of the EU. The report therefore underlines the importance of nationally led information campaigns to promote better understanding among the public "of the substance of EC legislation, policies and objectives". It also calls for measures to be taken at both EU and national levels to increase the awareness of EU citizens of their right to petition the European Parliament.
MEPs express concern at the "unreasonable and excessive" amount of time which the Commission takes to pursue and conclude infringement proceedings. They also voice dissatisfaction at the frequent examples of non-compliance by Member States with decisions of the Court of Justice. They believe this situation "undermines the credibility of the formulation and coherent application of EC law, and that it brings discredit on the objectives of the EU". They therefore support a firmer policy towards the Member States aimed at bringing them before the Court of Justice so that "lump sums and penalty payments" can be imposed on them. In addition, MEPs stress Parliament's right to turn to the Court of Justice where serious infringements of Community law are revealed in the course of the examination of a petition.
Lastly, the report encourages the sending of fact-finding missions to the Member States to investigate issues raised by petitioners where these would "offer a clearer view of the often complex problems on the ground". Such missions, say MEPs, can help raise awareness among the competent authorities and thereby "increase the pressure to find effective and pragmatic solutions in the interest of the citizens".
20060608IPR08817 Deliberations of the Committee on Petitions during the parliamentary year March 2004 - December 2005
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5259842
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
