MEPs analyse Court decision to annul passenger data agreement with USA
Justice and home affairs
2006-05-31 - 18:06
MEPs in the Civil Liberties and Legal Affairs Committees met on Tuesday to give their first reaction to the European Court of Justice’s decision to annul the EU’s current agreement with the United States on the transfer of personal data by airlines flying to America. Parliament took the case to court in June 2004, on the basis that the transfer of passenger name records violated EU data protection laws.
According to the Court, " neither the Commission decision finding that the data are adequately protected by the United States nor the Council decision signing the agreement on the transfer [of personal data] are founded on the appropriate legal basis " and should therefore be annulled before 30 September 2006.
Jean-Marie Cavada (ALDE, FR), Chair of the Civil Liberties Committee, said “By annulling these two decisions, the Court has decided in favour of Parliament, and I welcome that. It is regrettable though that the Court did not rule on the other cause raised by our institution – the violation of fundamental rights.” (Having accepted Parliament’s case that the legal procedure used by the Commission and Council was erroneous, the Court decided it was not necessary to examine other reasons for rejecting the agreement, namely Parliament’s claim that it violated the fundamental rights of privacy and data protection.) Mr Cavada continued: “We need to remain vigilant regarding the legal basis proposed for the new agreement, with which Parliament should clearly be involved. On this issue, it would be disastrous if it was decided to reach bilateral agreements instead... Better cooperation among the three European institutions is deeply necessary, especially on any question regarding data protection and data retention. We need to find a solution before the end of September.”
Since 5 February 2003, the United States has required in-bound airlines to provide US border authorities with electronic access to Passenger Name Records - PNRs. The US says the information is necessary for the fight against terrorism. PNRs include a list of data on passengers and crew, such as departure and return flights, credit card information, addresses and the passenger's meal choice. Airlines face the prospect of fines of €6 000 per passenger as well as the potential loss of landing rights in the US if they fail to provide US agencies with this data 15 minutes before the flight's departure.
The issue will be discussed again during the next meeting of the Civil Liberties Committee at 3 pm on Thursday 1 June.
2006-06-01 Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs In the chair Jean-Marie Cavada ALDE FR Committee on Legal Affairs In the chair Rainer Wieland EPP-ED DE 20060529IPR08507
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
