Opening of the mini-session in Brussels: tribute to the victims of Indonesian earthquake
Institutions
2006-05-31 - 20:00
EP President Josep Borrell opened the session with a reminder of the many victims of the recent earthquake in Indonesia. He said he had conveyed Parliament's solidarity to the Indonesian government. He added that he was pleased to see international aid, including European aid, beginning to reach those affected.
Highlights of the session
Wednesday 31 May 2006 The mini-session in Brussels starts with a debate on the future of Europe . Belgian Prime Minister Guy Verhofstadt will participate in the debate . This is the first in a series of debate with leaders of EU countries (not representing the European Council) The debate will commence at 3pm on Wednesday and last two and a half hours. Parliament will then debate the situation of prisoners in Guantanamo with Commission and Council statements. MEPs are expected to make a further call for Guantanamo to be shut down in a resolution to be adopted on Thursday. MEPs then turn to transatlantic relations with two reports on the subject. The House is likely to approve second-reading agreement with Council on paediatric medicines . As a result, children should soon be able to take medicines designed for their metabolism rather than small doses of drugs intended for adults. The House will also tackle a report on improving EU legislation to prevent sex offences against children. Parliament will debate the enlargement of the euro zone . The report warns that premature accession to the euro zone might lead to unexpected developments in the economic convergence process, such as undervalued or overvalued exchange rates, difficulties in achieving balanced payment accounts and therefore render economic adjustment more difficult. (Slovenia will join the euro zone on 1 January 2007 becoming the 13th member) MEPs will also give their first reactions to the Commission's Green Paper on energy, and in particular, energy efficiency . Thursday 1 June 2006 The House will debate three reports from the Women's Rights Committee including a reports on the situation of Roma women in the EU and a separate report on women in armed conflicts. Parliament will vote on Stephen HUGHES' (PES, UK) report on blood borne infections due to needle stick injuries . Every year around a million workers in Europe, mainly in the medical world, suffer injuries from used surgical needles. The consequences can be serious, including infections from HIV or hepatitis B or C. MEPs want to improve existing EU legislation so as to give workers better protection. The House will vote on a resolution on the humanitarian crisis in the Palestinian territory .
20060530IPR08571
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
