CIA "directly responsible" for abduction, detention and extraordinary rendition in Europe, say MEPs
Fundamental rights
2006-06-13 - 13:22
The CIA was "directly responsible" for extraordinary rendition, "illegal seizure, removal, abduction and detention of terrorist suspects on the territory of Member States, accession and candidate countries", all of which were violations of international law, said the committee investigating allegations of such behaviour in its interim report on Monday. MEPs also criticised Member States for their inactivity or complicity regarding CIA activity.
The report, drawn up by Claudio FAVA (PES, IT), was adopted by 25 votes in favour to 14 against with 7 abstentions. It says the CIA used aircraft hired by front companies for the illegal transfer of terrorism suspects to countries which frequently use torture during interrogations. MEPs in the committee call for such "extraordinary renditions" to be "clearly prohibited" in international law. They warn that Member States "may be held liable" for their failure to comply with the European Convention on Human Rights - case law indicates that EU countries have a positive obligation to prevent human rights violations on their territory.
Next steps
Having " shown the need to carry out further checks " the temporary committee aims to continue its work for the remainder of its twelve-month term . MEPs now propose to invite the Secretary-General of NATO to a hearing to clarify the possible involvement of SFOR and KFOR troops in the illegal detention of six Bosnians who remain in the Guantanamo Bay detention centre. The report calls for the closure of Guantanamo, asking Member States to " take a proactive role " in finding a solution for the detainees .
Although the interim report - unlike that of the Council of Europe - makes no explicit mention of alleged detention centres in Poland and Romania, committee chair Carlos Coelho (EPP-ED, PT) has said that this issue would be a " priority of our committee for the next six months. " The report stresses the need to " ascertain whether there is any evidence to confirm that secret prisons have been operating in some European countries ".
European governments taken to task
It is " implausible ", say MEPs, " that certain European governments were not aware of the activities linked to extraordinary rendition taking place on their territory ". Such involvement or complicity, they argue, was likely on the part of Italian authorities in the 2003 abduction of Egyptian cleric Abu Omar by CIA agents in Milan; on the part of Bosnian authorities in the abduction and transfer of six Bosnian nationals or residents of Algerian origin to Guantanamo Bay; and on the part of Swedish authorities, who expelled Egyptian nationals Mohammed Al Zary and Ahmed Agiza, handing them over to CIA agents for transfer to Egypt. The committee " deplores the reluctance of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia authorities to confirm that [German national Khaled] El-Masri was in Skopje and probably being held there before his rendition to Afghanistan by CIA agents ".
National governments are also criticised for their solicitation of " diplomatic assurances " against torture - a practice the committee labels as " unacceptable " and contradictory to EU policy guidelines on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. The committee calls on EU countries to reject such assurances in the future.
EU-level action necessary
In several EU countries, says the report, rules governing the activities of secret services seem " inadequate ". As Members see it, activities of foreign secret services on Member States' territory should be governed by more effective controls; to that effect, " rules of cooperation should be established at EU level ." Intelligence co-operation between EU countries and their allies, the committee argues, " should not be confused with the abandonment of sovereignty over European territory and airspace ".
Citing " repeated violations " of the Chicago Convention on International Civil Aviation during flights carried out by the CIA in Europe, and stressing that no European country has made consistent efforts to ensure that civilian aircraft are used for purposes compatible with international human rights, the committee calls on the Commission to harmonise national laws on the use of national airspace and airports. Current European legislation, concludes the committee, is " totally inadequate ".
2006-06-12 Temporary Committee on the alleged use of European countries by the CIA for the transport and illegal detention of prisoners Chair Carlos COELHO EPP-ED PT
Procedure: Own-initiative report
Plenary Vote: July, Strasbourg
20060612IPR08876
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
