Citizens' Forum in Helsinki: Are young people’s voices heard in Europe?
Future of Europe/European integration
2006-06-07 - 18:13
The 2 June debate in Helsinki
Youth groups in Finland met leading Members of the European Parliament on 2 June when they debated whether young people's voices are being heard in Europe. ”Power through participation" was the theme and life-long learning and health were just some of the subjects raised by young Finns. The meeting was part of the "Citizens' Forum" events being held throughout Europe. The event was organised by the Finnish and European Parliaments in cooperation with the Youth Group "Allianssi".
Enough power and influence for young people?
Finnish Parliamentary Speaker, Paavo Lipponen, opened the debate by recalling that 100 years ago Finland was the first country in Europe to introduce universal suffrage. Parliament's President Josep Borrell stressed the diversity in Europe and differing views even on fundamental questions such as EU enlargement (in Germany 85% are in favour, in the Baltic States only 45%). He asked participants to use this debate to voice their opinions on the most relevant European issues, including immigration and the future of the Union. "We are here to listen to you and to your ideas and concerns".
Voting age was a key issue in the debate. Members of the Union of High School Students argued that if young people became politically active early enough, they would remain so later. Most of the group leaders were not keen on lowering the voting age. Hans-Gert Pöttering President of the EPP-ED group recommended that the participants become involved in political youth organisations to get their voices heard. Graham Watson, leader of the ALDE group called for leadership instead of ‘followership’, saying that national politicians should share their vision and ask people to join rather than repeat what they expect people would like to hear.
University students were interested in whether the financing for life-long learning in 2007-2013 will be sufficient to meet their objectives. Martin Schulz, president of the Socialist group stressed the importance of life-long learning, as people nowadays need to learn new jobs and cannot rely on one career. Francis Wurtz (president of the European United Left) defended his group’s position that the level of financing agreed was low. It was pointed out that the extra money the European Parliament succeeded in squeezing from the Members States in budget negotiations was targeted into research and life-long learning.
With young people less involved in sport and obesity rising, suggestions to alleviate this problem ranged from promoting walking and bicycling, stressing the importance of volunteer organisations to concentrating on what we eat. Daniel Cohn-Bendit (co-president of the Greens in the European Parliament) believed that schools should play a bigger role.
Minorities: The Sami people
Sami Youth leaders asked what the group leaders knew about the Sami, the only indigenous population in Europe. Jens-Peter Bonde of the Independence and Democracy group claimed to know their situation. Swedish Youth representatives were also concerned about the discrimination of minorities, such as homosexuals. Irena Belohorskà (non-attached) stressed the importance of defending human rights and equal opportunities. Brian Crowley of the Union for Nations group said a change in attitude, not laws, was needed to get rid of discrimination. He also called for a change in attitudes towards disabled people.
20060607STO08731
EN
1
PHOTO
20060607PHT08729.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
