Structural funds 2007-13 approved by Regional Development Committee
Regional policy
2006-06-26 - 11:23
The structural funds package for 2017 to 2013 was given the go-ahead by the Regional Development Committee on Thursday, with the adoption of four reports. Once they have also been approved by the July plenary session, around €308 billion - or 35.7 per cent of the total EU budget - will be available to spend, on time, from 1 January 2007.
The four reports (two co-decision, two assent) define the objectives of Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund, the criteria for Member States and regions to be eligible under those Funds, the financial resources available and the criteria for their allocation in an enlarged EU.
General Regulation
The first report lays down the general provisions on the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF), European Social Fund (ESF) and the Cohesion Fund.
Although the European Parliament only has assent powers over the general regulation (i.e. it can accept or reject the package but not amend it), the rapporteur Konstantinos Hatzidakis (EPP-ED, EL) and the committee successfully negotiated with the Austrian Presidency to have many of the MEPs ' demands included in the Council’s position, including:
enhancement of the environmental aspect, in particular sustainable development, in the management of Structural Funds and Cohesion Fund and introduction of a new article which would ensure that this dimension is always taken into account in the implementation of the Funds;
a specific mention of the fact that Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund should support the improvement and promotion of accessibility for people with disabilities;
the strengthening of the partnership principle: namely that any other appropriate body representing civil society, environmental partners, nongovernmental organisations, and bodies responsible for promoting equality between men and women can take part in the structural funds partnership negotiations.
The Council rejected however the committee’s idea of a common declaration of Council, Commission and Parliament on a Community performance reserve which would have aimed to re-use unspent structural funds money instead of it returning to the general EU budget.
European Regional Development Fund (ERDF)
After negotiations with rapporteur Claudio Fava (PES, IT) and the Regional Development Committee, the Council has taken on board the main concerns of the committee for the ERDF:
On VAT, the Commission had proposed to render eligible non-recoverable VAT only in the case of the European Social Fund. The European Council concluded that non-recoverable VAT would be eligible under the rules of the ERDF, ESF and the Cohesion Fund only for those Member States whose GDP does not exceed 85% of the average EU GDP. The Regional Development Committee requested that this should be extended to cover all Member States. The Council finally agreed to this request.
On housing, the Commission proposed to render housing ineligible. The European Council proposed to provide for the eligibility of housing in the ERDF Regulation for Member States whose GDP does not exceed 85% of the average EU GDP. The Council finally included in its common position a specific provision, taking into account amendments proposed by the European Parliament in its first reading, rendering eligible housing expenditure for the costs of social housing renovation aimed at saving energy and protecting the environment.
Cohesion Fund
On the Cohesion Fund, the committee and the rapporteur Alfonso Andria (ALDE, IT) backed the increase from €18 billion (for the period 2000-2006) to €61.59 billion.
Following the Union’s enlargement on May 1st 2004, the Cohesion Fund applies to the 10 new Member States until the end of 2006, as well as to the three Member States eligible at the end of the 2000-2006 period (Greece, Portugal and Spain). To benefit from the Cohesion Fund, a Member State's per capita Gross National Income (GNI) must be less than 90% of the Community average National Income, which is the case for all the new Member States.
European territorial cooperation
This is a new objective proposed by the Commission, building on the experience of the Interreg initiative (interregional cooperation). It is aimed at furthering the balanced integration of the EU's territory by supporting cooperation between regions across land or sea frontiers. It will include actions to promote integrated territorial development and support for interregional cooperation and the exchange of experiences.
As part of the deal on the financial perspective, MEPs secured a further €300 million extra for territorial cohesion. The committee supported the idea that €200 million should be allocated to the trans-national area and the remaining €100 million should be given to inter-regional cooperation.
The Council decided to follow rapporteur Jan Olbrycht (EPP-ED, PL) and the Regional Development Committee’s suggestion of replacing the name of the instrument "European grouping of cross-border cooperation" with "European grouping of territorial cooperation".
What next?
The texts are due to be adopted during the July plenary in Strasbourg which means the funds can be used from 1 January 2007. Before the money can be finally allocated to the Member States, the Commission will draw up, most likely in late July, Community Strategic Guidelines, on which Parliament will vote (under the assent procedure) in September. These are the starting point for the national reference frameworks and operational plans to be negotiated between the Commission and individual Member States in the autumn.
2006-06-20 Committee on Regional Development Chair Gerardo Galeote EPP-ED ES
Procedure: Assent and Co-decision (second reading)
Plenary vote: July, Strasbourg
20060615IPR09085
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
