Protecting workers against the risk of infection from contaminated needles
Employment policy
2006-07-06 - 14:06
Every year around a million workers in Europe, mainly in the medical world, suffer injuries from used surgical needles. The consequences can be serious, including infections from HIV or hepatitis B or C. The European Parliament wants to improve existing EU legislation so as to give workers better protection. MEPs adopted a report on this subject with 465 votes in favour, 18 against and 13 abstentions.
MEPs believe that many of these "needlestick injuries" which occur in the medical world could be prevented if appropriate measures were made compulsory in medical and veterinary services. In a report by Stephen Hughes (PES, UK), MEPs say studies have shown that the use of safer needles together with regular training and organisational measures can help reduce the number of injuries. They add that safer working practices and medical devices designed to prevent accidental needlestick injuries would also produce financial savings.
Parliament says the existing directives which should in theory cover these risks have not had the desired effect. It therefore calls on the Commission to add various new provisions to one of the directives intended to improve accident prevention and the protection of workers (Directive 2000/54/EC on the protection of workers from risks related to exposure to biological agents at work). MEPs want the Commission to put forward a proposal to amend this directive within three months.
This report was referred back to the committee by the June plenary session. In the vote, MEPs adopted some changes to the version originally adopted on 20 April 2006. These changes relate to the annex to the report in which the committee makes detailed recommendations as to the contents of the proposals requested from the Commission.
20060629IPR09386 Protecting European healthcare workers from blood borne infections due to needlestick injuries
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5303952
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
