The Week Ahead 3-9 July 2006
Institutions
2006-06-30 - 09:51
Plenary Session – Strasbourg
Finnish presidency. Prime Minister Matti Vanhanen of Finland, the new President-in-Office of the Council, will set out his programme for the next six months in a debate with MEPs and the Commission. After the debate, Mr Vanhanen will join EP President Josep Borrell for a press conference. (Wednesday) CIA report. The interim report of the Temporary Committee looking into allegations of illegal CIA activity in Europe will be debated in plenary and put to the vote. The report says the CIA was directly responsible for extraordinary renditions in Europe. (debate Wednesday, vote Thursday) The committee itself will hear from Dick Marty, who is leading the parallel Council of Europe investigation. (Monday) SWIFT – USA. The Commission and Council will make statements to plenary on the transfer of private banking data from the SWIFT company to the US authorities. (debate Wednesday, vote Thursday) Structural funds. MEPs will vote on the EU’s main regional funding programmes, which account for around €308 billion. Council and Parliament representatives have reached a deal on all the key points, so the legislation should enter force in time for the programmes to start in January 2007. (Tuesday) Palestinian territories. Parliament will debate the current situation in the Palestinian territories with Council and Commission. (Wednesday) Equitable Life. Parliament’s Committee of Inquiry into the crisis of the British life insurance provider Equitable Life will present its interim report to the plenary. (debate Monday, vote Tuesday) Aviation and climate change. MEPs will consider a report on ways to reduce the climate change impact of civil aviation. (debate Monday, vote Tuesday) Spanish civil war. President Borrell and the political group leaders will make statements in plenary marking 70 years since the coup in Spain by General Franco. (Tuesday)
20060630IPR09423 For full details, see Agenda
EN
1
LINK
/news/expert/event_top_page/default/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
