MEPs debate alleged CIA illegal detention of prisoners
Justice and home affairs
2006-07-05 - 19:52
Ahead of the vote on Thursday 6 July at midday, Parliament debated the interim report on the alleged use of European countries by the CIA for the transportation and illegal detention of prisoners. MEPs expressed differing views on the allegations with many claiming that the CIA had carried out such renditions and other MEPs saying there was little or no evidence.
Introducing the debate on the temporary committee's interim report, rapporteur Giovanni Claudio FAVA (PES, IT) told the House that it was being asked to contribute to establishing the truth about abuses committed in the name of the fight against terrorism. It was "the truth on denied rights", in other words "rights denied to those accused of being our enemies but who, as human beings, as suspects, have rights - to a fair trial, to a lawyer, to a jury and to dignified humane treatment."
He continued: " Without that, we don't have law, we just have arbitrary force, exercised by some countries and accepted by others ."
He went on to say " Extraordinary renditions have been a fact - not an opinion - a fact that has even been admitted by the US Department of State ". Moreover, " some EU Member States were complicit, some covered illegal operations, some just turned their backs ."
His committee had tried to get to the truth. It had " reconstructed in detail a very complex system of flights, of ghost planes used by the CIA and of flight plans ". Many suspects were bundled on to them and into prison. " These flights stopped over at our airports and benefited from our silence". In his committee, he said, " we are trying to give voice to those whose rights have been silenced ."
In conclusion, he asked the House to authorise his committee to continue its work.
Presidency of the Council
Speaking for the Presidency of the Council, Finland's Minister for Foreign Trade and Development, Paula LEHTOMÄKI said it was important that the European Parliament and the Council of Europe had taken the initiative to investigate these issues. “ Fundamental rights in Europe and actions to combat terrorism cannot be in conflict with each other .” She said the treaties did not give the EU an power to deal with these issues, since the monitoring of intelligence services was a matter for the Member States. Nevertheless, she said the Council had not been passive, pointing to debates in November 2005 and a letter written by the then UK Presidency to US Secretary of State Condoleeza Rice. Dr Rice had made a detailed statement, saying that the US respected international agreements and the sovereignty of other countries – and did not transport people to countries where they would be tortured. Ms Lehtomäki added that dialogue with the United States administration on human rights issues was frequent, with both sides agreeing that international law must be respected. The EU had called for the closure of the Guantanamo Bay detention centre, and had welcomed President Bush's comment that he was willing to close it. “In the Presidency, Finland will continue to keep human rights issues on the agenda of our dialogue with the US ,” she concluded.
European Commission
Franco FRATTINI , Vice-President of the European Commission responsible for Justice, Freedom and Security, said that, on the eve of the first anniversary of the London bombings, this debate was an excellent opportunity to recall that the fight against terrorism is a key priority for the Commission. The respect of fundamental rights was paramount as any wavering from this could be used involuntarily as reasons for propaganda against the international community.
Mr Frattini stated that the Commission had worked closely with the Temporary Committee and had requested data from Euro-control which turned out to be a key source in the report. The Commission had also provided satellite images when requested.
On three separate occasions, Mr Frattini said that he had called on the Council and the Member States with the European Parliament Temporary Committee. He said that those Member States that had not carried out their own investigations should do so. Commissioner Frattini said he would repeat this message at the next Justice and Home Affairs Council on 24 July. The Commission, he said, would also examine the possibility of defining at EU level the rules on non-commercial flights using state aircraft.
Political group speakers
For the EPP-ED group, Jas GAWRONSKI (IT) described the interim report as " very tendentious " and " taking into account only viewpoints that were critical of the US ". Two examples, until now the committee had not wanted to include two statements by Gijs de Vries and Javier Solana because " they said things the committee didn't like ". They had " said they were not aware of any violations of the law by any of the Member States of the European Union in cooperation with the CIA ". In addition, an expert from Human Rights Watch, which had said " we have suspicions but no proof ". If the US administration had made mistakes, he argued, that was because it was doing something. In short, his group was " decisively critical of this report and very disappointed too ".
On behalf of the Socialist group, Wolfgang KREISSL-DÖRFLER (DE) argued that " the fight against terrorism should not be waged using the same weapons as the terrorists" and that "the end does not justify the means ". " It has nothing to do with anti-Americanism ", he stressed.
The question to be answered was " What is a secret service like the CIA entitled to do when it comes to even a friendly country. How are they entitled to act ?" He added " If there is suspicion of someone being a terrorist, you have to subject them to the rule of law. " In conclusion, he said " we must demonstrate that the EU is not prepared to give up its freedoms in the name of the fight against terrorism ."
For the Liberals, Sarah LUDFORD (UK) emphasised that in the EU " the area of justice and human rights is not working properly ". Some Member States had not implemented EU anti-terror legislation five years after it had been passed. Some did not even have a definition of terrorism. The result was that terrorists can escape conviction and imprisonment. Yet, " at the same time it is apparent that gross human rights abuses have been committed as part of the so-called war on terror ". So " the EU has allowed a situation to develop where we can't prosecute terrorists but we can persecute terrorist suspects ". " What credibility ", she went on, " does this give the EU at home or abroad either for effectively combating terrorism or for upholding human rights? "
The committee, she said, had heard testimony and seen corroborating evidence such as flight logs. It was " implausible " for governments not to have known about these matters and the burden of proof was now being shifted on to them. " This conspiracy of silence must stop ".
Speaking for the Greens/EFA group, Cem OZDEMIR (DE) said the practices at the centre of the investigation skirted international law and in particular the right to due procedure. It was a case of delivering people to a country where they risked being tortured or inhuman treatment: “ Most victims were arrested illegally, many have disappeared. We heard individuals speak of torture and inhuman treatment .” He said the “ outsourcing ” of torture made it difficult to estimate the sale of infringements. He mentioned the Chicago convention on air transport, under which the US and some EU governments had argued that the flights were private – the EU states, he said, were ignoring their right to investigate suspected criminal action under that same convention. “When it comes to torture, every state should take legal steps against those responsible. Italy is going along with that commitment, we should respect that and ask others to follow their example.”
Giusto CATANIA (IT), for the GUE/NGL group, said that the committee's work had shown that extraordinary renditions were part of what he called the mistaken strategy of combating terrorism through pre-emptive war and the scaling back of the rule of law: “ This has increased and radicalised terrorism and encouraged the terrorist's goals .” More than half the detainees at Guantanamo Bay had been abducted in Afghanistan, he said, which showed that NATO and European countries had been used as staging posts. He said statements by John Bellinger and Condoleeza Rice showed that, “ European governments were complicit in CIA activities in Eu rope.” He wanted Commissioner Frattini to clear up what he did or did not know when he was an Italian minister.
Konrad SZYMANSKI (PL) spoke for the UEN group. He said he wanted to soften the language of the report, which spoke of certainty and fact where there was, in his view, room for doubts. “ Until we know the scale of the phenomenon, there is nothing which allows us to say that there has been a serious violation of human rights .” He spoke of the gap of interpretation between Europe, which wanted to treat terrorists as criminals to be dealt with in the ordinary courts, while the Americans act more in line with the laws of war, which I think is more appropriate, but it does create a legal vacuum. He said there international law needed to be enhanced to deal with the current situation.
Miroslaw PIOTROWSKI (PL), for the IND/DEM group, said the temporary committee had failed to fulfil its task. “ There is not even one small piece of information that was previously unknown, just a repetition of unfounded media information. There is nothing to say we will get more facts by prolonging the work, so why waste taxpayers' money? ” He said the process was driven by political and propaganda motives, by socialists and liberals who would take any opportunity to attack the US and its allies. In the previous centuries, socialists “ committed many acts which would now be considered terrorist – their affection for such action continues, including among some in this House .”
The non-attached MEP Philip CLAEYS (BE) said the committee has found no evidence that CIA had engaged in illegal activities. “ There are just suspicions and insinuations. Some left wing colleagues just want a stage for their anti-Americanism .” If this was do be pursued, he said, it should be by the national authorities who were competent to do so.
British and Irish speakers
Eoin RYAN (UEN, IE) said that everybody in the House supported the fight against terrorism, the important point was how this was achieved. The Americans, he said, must respect the rule of law. He said the USA had acted arbitrarily in finding allies in the United Nations. The experience of Ireland had shown how terrorist organisations were built up through popular support despite being almost dismantled on several occasions. He said that it is an " undeniable fact " that rendition flights have taken place.
Roger HELMER (UK) a non aligned MEP said that after 50 hours of hearings " not a scrap of evidence " had been produced. The report was " devoid of facts and entirely circumstantial ." Evidence of flights was not the same as evidence for CIA renditions. There was no evidence and it only served as a platform for anti-Americanism.
Jean LAMBERT (Greens/EFA, UK) asked whether the EU and the Member States had really been the " good guys " on this issue. The facts had unearthed two or three clear renditions but there could be more, she said. Questions remained on whether the present law was adequate and if the law was being used effectively and fair. Ms Lambert also questioned the new memoranda of understanding between the EU and third countries regarding the extradition of suspects.
Gerard BATTEN (IND/DEM, UK) said that it was entirely predictable that the report asked for greater powers for the EU such as the harmonisation and sharing of intelligence in the EU. The report stated that some illegal renditions had taken place, but it was unlikely, he said, that the truth would ever come out.
Proinsias DE ROSSA (PES, IE) said that you could never justify the means by claiming that the ends were " noble ". " We can not defend our values by abandoning them ." It was regrettable that some MEPs would be voting against the report for simple party political reasons. EU Member States, he said, had acted actively and passively in the rendition flights. In Ireland, there had been 50 such flights including the flight from Italy to Egypt of Abu Omar.
Seán Ó NEACHTAIN (UEN, IE) said he was pleased that the interim report " does not make any findings against the Irish government ". He therefore wished to " totally refute " the claims made by Proinsias De Rossa . Shannon airport had been the loser in this matter, as the US authorities had now decided not to use it for refuelling purposes, costing the airport €10 million in lost revenue. This was " a result of the unfounded allegations made Proinsias De Rossa and others ". " They should establish the facts before they speak ", he said.
" In the past torture was mainly committed by dictatorial regimes. Now it's being promoted by democratic states ", Kathy SINNOTT (IND/DEM, IE) told the House. Closing Guantánamo was not the answer as many prisoners transferred would be tortured elsewhere. " The UN and the Red Cross should have compulsory access to all prisoners everywhere ", she urged, adding " the EU and Member States should provide more finance for the care of survivors of torture ."
Sajjad KARIM (ALDE, UK) said that it was clear that the CIA was directly responsible for abduction, detention and extraordinary rendition in EU Member States. It was clear that the security services in some Member States were acting outside proper governmental control. In the UK, there was the shoot to kill policy that had led to the death of Jean Charles de Menezes in London following the tragic bombings.
Claude MORAES (PES, UK) said that he commended the position of the rapportuer Mr FAVA as it took a balanced approach. It said it was important to extend the committee's mandate in order that the truth could be established. There was a clear difference between anti-Americanism and standing up for human rights. People that had written to me, he said, after the London bombings were not " anti-American " but wanted to ensure that this would not happen again.
Charles TANNOCK (EPP-ED, UK) said he had opposed the setting up of the committee from the start and that its work should stop straight away. It was, he said, an expensive duplication of the work of the Council of Europe, reflecting the desire of the left and liberals to bash America. The report was heavy on supposition and light on proof, he said. While some excesses were inevitable in such a vast enterprise as America's war on terror, he said, " there was not systematic US policy of sending people to be tortured in third countries or to secret camps in Poland ." He said there was a vast black hole in international law when it came to dealing with terrorism, which could not be filled by " sticking to the comfortable old ways ." He added that the immediate closure of Guantanamo Bay would not be helpful, as many of the inmates posed a real risk to the security of EU states, and they could not be deported to their home countries as they might be tortured or executed.
Simon COVENEY (EPP-ED, IE) said an honest assessment of the committee's work was that there was a mixed picture. " There is frustration that new evidence and facts have not come forward, but it has been useful in outlining an exposing those facts which were already available. We need to be realistic, we are not a court, but politicians trying to draw conclusions based on a balance of probabilities ." He regretted that some were reduced the debate to a question of being pro- or anti- American. It was not anti-American to criticise extraordinary rendition or to want to know more, especially if European countries were involved, he said. The report was not perfect, he concluded, but if EPP amendments were accepted, it would be worth supporting.
European Commission response to the debate
Vice-President Franco FRATTINI said that he recognised that there had been several different views expressed by MEPs. He stressed that the Commission had, as early as last February, set up structured political dialogue with the US authorities at expert level and the Finnish Presidency would be making further proposals in this area.
Vote: 12 noon, Thursday, 6 July 2006
20060628IPR09341 Interim report on the alleged use of European countries by the CIA for the transportation and illegal detention of prisoners
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5309292
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
