MEPs ask European Central Bank to explain its role in the SWIFT case
Justice and home affairs
2006-07-06 - 16:32
The European Parliament adopted a resolution expressing its serious concern on the "climate of deteriorating respect for privacy and data protection" being created by US security measures to fight terrorism. The last case --US government demanding international money transfer records from the Belgium-base society SWIFT-- has created unrest in Europe and made MEPs demand the European Central Bank (ECB) to explain if it was aware of the secret agreement between SWIFT and the American government.
How to balance security and privacy in transatlantic relations? A recurrent question posed many times since 9/11 and which remains without a satisfactory answer. According to MEPs, the fact that the U.S. government gained access to financial personal data of European citizens by subpoenaing the Society for Worldwide Inter-bank Financial Telecommunications (SWIFT) breaks EU law and poses a real danger: "data managed by SWIFT makes it possible to detect not only transfers linked to illegal activities, but also information on the economic activities of the individuals (...), and this could give rise to large-scale forms of economic and industrial espionage."
Parliament stresses in its resolution that all transfers of personal data to third countries are subject to data protection legislation at national and European level. Data transfers must be authorised by a judicial authority and any derogation from this rule must be "proportional and founded on a law or international agreement."
Of special concern is the fact that MEPs have never been informed before of these SWIFT transfers, even if the EU is currently negotiating a new regulation on the kind of information which must accompany the transfer of funds (see Alvaro report). Therefore they demand EU institutions and the ECB "to explain fully the extent to which they were aware of the secret agreement between SWIFT and the US government." For that purpose, MEPs propose the organisation as soon as possible of a joint hearing with the ECB and other institutions "in order to uncover what information they might have known about."
MEPs also demand the European Data Protection Supervisor to verify whether, in according with existing EU rules, the ECB was "obliged to react" to the possible violation of data protection which had come to its knowledge. Finally, the Parliament stresses its "great disappointment with the Council's unwillingness" to improve the current legislative situation on data protection in III pillar issues and "strongly disapproves of any secret operations on EU territory that affect the privacy of EU citizens."
Debate - Wednesday 5 July 2006
In recent weeks, media reports have revealed that the American authorities -- acting in the name of the fight against terrorism -- were able to gain access to European citizens' personal financial data by issuing a subpoena to the Society for Worldwide Inter-bank Financial Telecommunications (SWIFT).
Speaking on behalf of the Presidency, Paula LEHTOMÄKI, the Finnish Minister for European Affairs, opened the debate by stating that "unfortunately, the Council is unable to confirm reports in the media about exchanges of information between SWIFT and the American authorities". As she saw it, "it is up to the national authorities to do this". She did point out, however, that several pieces of legislation currently before the Council -- one being the framework decision on data protection in judicial and police cooperation -- are set "to ensure that EU citizens' personal data [held by public authorities] are afforded a high level of protection". Moreover, she later added, the EU would be ready to act "if it turns out that things have taken place that require legislation at the European level".
Justice, Freedom and Security Commissioner Franco FRATTINI noted that the European Commission -- having "only partial information" on the matter -- has requested additional reports "on how the American authorities obtained access to data on financial transactions held by SWIFT." At present, Mr. Frattini acknowledged, "it seems that there was a transfer of financial information between private companies from the EU to the United States." The information now at the Commission's disposal, he emphasised, "was not passed on to the Commission previously".
Since it is national authorities who are primarily responsible for the proper application of data protection rules, added the Commissioner, "I trust that [...] Member States will take all the necessary action to ensure that their national data protection legislation is properly applied and strictly enforced." Should developments in the SWIFT affair make it necessary, he said, the Commission "will make full use" of its powers under the treaties. At this stage, however, he noted, "I do not know whether this would be appropriate, as we have first to learn from the Belgian authorities what exactly happened, how and why."
"SWIFT apparently [...] has handed over data to the CIA," said Ewa KLAMT (EPP-ED, DE) -- this being a "question of misuse of financial data." In her view, Parliament is unsure of what legal framework to refer to in dealing with the affair: as she put it, "we don't really know precisely what the area is that we're dealing with". That said, it is "urgent" that Parliament takes a look at European legislation "to ensure that there are provisions for this kind of protection".
The US authorities, said Martine ROURE (PES, FR), have put in place a programme to monitor financial transactions processed by SWIFT -- "these are facts that President Bush and SWIFT have themselves confirmed." The European Union should investigate, therefore, whether the European Central Bank, as one of its institutions, was aware of such activities. The European Data Protection Supervisor, she added, should "ensure that the ECB" -- which forms part of an international committee which oversees SWIFT's activity -- "has respected European legislation".
Jean-Marie CAVADA (ALDE, FR) was disappointed with the Council Presidency's reaction to the SWIFT affair. Even if Council "doesn't have the necessary judicial or political means" to deal with this scandal, he said, reacting to Mrs. Lehtomäki's remarks, that "does not exempt you" from making a show of "moral virtue" and telling us "what you think" about this issue. He added: "if we could resolve this matter under your presidency, it would be a great achievement". The US has been operating secret flights and renditions in Europe, he remarked at the end of his intervention -- now it is "rifling through our private bank accounts".
Giusto CATANIA (GUE/NGL, IT) echoed such sentiments when he noted that "we would be mistaken if we understood the SWIFT case as an isolated matter". The case, as he saw it, "is the other side of the coin as rendition". With all this in mind, he added, European citizens now find themselves confronted with "what George Orwell called 'Big Brother'".
20060630IPR09433 Joint draft resolution from the PES, ALDE, Greens/EFA and GUE/NGL groups on the interception of bank transfer data from the SWIFT system by the US secret services Joint draft resolution from the EPP-ED and UEN groups Alvaro report on Combating money laundering and terrorist financing: information on the payer accompanying transfers of funds
EN
3
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5265242
-//EP//TEXT MOTION P6-RC-2006-0386 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT MOTION B6-2006-0385 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
