Criticism for Member States, Commission and OLAF on fraud
Budget
2006-06-15 - 13:43
MEPs adopted a report on protection of the financial interests of the Communities and the fight against fraud, criticising individual Member States' efforts and the Commission's lack of efforts to improve the situation. They also call upon the European Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF) to reform itself in order to confirm its credibility.
The report by Herbert BÖSCH (PES, AT) stresses that the importance of year-on-year fluctuations in losses reported should not be overestimated and that they may be affected by a wide variety of factors. However it singles out certain members of the European Union in its criticisms: Parliament regards it as completely unacceptable that there are still 'old' Member States (Germany, Greece and Spain) failing to forward notifications on irregularities to the Commission electronically, that those notifications are incomplete and that they are forwarded with several years’ delay and points out that Spain and Germany account for more than 65% of losses. Therefore the House expects a report from the Commission setting out the steps it has taken to prevail upon the Member States concerned to fulfil their Treaty obligations.
MEPs emphasise that falling figures in the area of agriculture are also the result of the effective operation of the integrated administration and control system (IACS) and therefore insist that that system be used in all Member States. The European Parliament highlights that customs, agriculture and external aid have proved to be particularly susceptible to fraud and underscores the fact that OLAF puts the financial loss resulting since 2000 from cigarette smuggling and the marketing of counterfeit products at €1 317 m.
Concerning the groundwork for amending the OLAF regulation, the report stressed that Parliament will endorse no proposal which would restrict the prerogatives it has had to date, and that it will advocate that all OLAF's investigatory powers be grouped together in a single regulation.
Parliament criticises the fact that, to date, the Commission has submitted no interim report on the activities of the 'Eurostat Task Force' despite its having been announced on several occasions. Additionally, MEPs in the committee stated concern, against the backdrop of the current risk of bird flu, that a new trend is emerging involving the illegal import of poultry meat from countries banned by the European Union (particularly China).
20060609IPR08842 Protection of the countries financial interests
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5281522
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
