Trichet: price stability is essential for more growth and jobs
Economic and monetary affairs
2006-06-21 - 17:30
ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet told MEPs on Wednesday that sticking to its goal of price stability was the best way for the Bank to support growth and employment. He was speaking to the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee in the latest session of the quarterly monetary dialogue. He also supported the idea of “naming and shaming” Member States failing to implement economic reforms under the Lisbon strategy.
On growth prospects Mr Trichet said “the conditions and economic fundamentals are in place in the euro area to remain close to its trend potential rate on a sustained basis.” Current projections were for growth of 1.8-2.4 per cent in 2006 and 1.3-2.3 per cent for 2007.
Inflation, according to Eurosystem projections, would be 2.1-2.5 per cent for 2006 and 1.6-2.8 per cent in 2007, he said. Economic and monetary analysis were both indicating that “upside risks to price stability over the medium term prevail.” This was the context for the ECB’s decision to raise rates in June, though he said monetary policy remained “accommodative”.
The ECB President made an extended defence of his institution’s approach to growth and employment, rejecting the charge that the Bank did not attach sufficient importance to them as it focused on price stability. He insisted that price stability was a necessary, if not sufficient, condition for growth and that “history has shown that growth and employment cannot be increased by inflating the economy by means of a loose monetary policy.” This thinking, he said, was in line with almost all central banks in developed countries, including the US Fed, whose successive chairmen, he said, had seen price stability both as a goal and a means to achieve its other goals of high employment and moderate interest rates.
Lisbon Strategy and Stability Pact
On the Lisbon strategy of structural reform, he said “I agree with the idea of placing national programmes within an overall European context and identifying the best and worst performers, but this naming and shaming has not been accepted by the Council. We agree with the European Parliament on this – benchmarking on the best level of credibility has worked for us.”
Asked by Alexander Radwan (EPP-ED, DE) about the stability pact, Mr Trichet said he agreed with Commissioner Almunia on the need for rigorous application of the rules: “We should not repeat the mistakes of the past,” he said calling for Member States to use the current improved economic performance to put aside what would be needed in more difficult parts of the business cycle, and to take seriously the commitment to reduce excessive deficits by 0.5 per cent of GDP per year.
ECB independence
Kurt Lauk (EPP-ED, DE) asked about proposals from Euro group chairman Jean-Claude Juncker’s proposal on enhanced relations with the ECB. Mr Trichet said the existing relationship was already “intimate” from the ECB’s standpoint and promised fiercely to defence and preserve his institution’s independence. Responding to committee chair Pervenche Berès (PES, FR), who wanted more transparency regarding the allocation of portfolios in the ECB Executive Board, Mr Trichet insisted that this was also part of the Bank’s independence and for the Board members alone to decide.
Inflation targets and risks
Ieke van den Burg (PES, NL) wanted to know if there was room for the bank to have explicit targets beyond price stability at a time of low inflationary threats. Mr Trichet said the Bank was not overdoing price stability: “Our aim is inflation below but close to 2 per cent. It is currently 1.9 per cent – who can be closer to the goal than that? We do what we have to do, no less and no more.” He stressed to Gunnar Hökmark (EPP-ED, SE) that there was no ex ante decision on a series of rate rises: “We will do all that is necessary to counter inflationary risks and anchor expectations.” Asked by Giovanni Pittella (PES, IT ) and Eoin Ryan (UEN, IE) about house price inflation, he said that at the level of the euro area as a whole this was a phenomenon to be monitored carefully, “and it was an element which was taken into account in the last three decisions to raise the key ECB interest rates.”
Eurozone enlargement
A number of MEPs, including Margarita Starkevičiūtė (ALDE, LT), Dariusz Rosati (PES, PL) and László Becsey (EPP-ED, HU), raised the decision on Lithuania’s application to join the euro, and in particular the calculations on the inflation criterion. Mr Trichet stressed that the ECB had simply applied the treaty rules, as had the Commission. If people wanted to change the rules, they would have to propose changes to the treaty, he said, though that was not easy to achieve. Slovenia's success had shown it was possible for new members to join the euro, he added.
2006-06-21 Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs Chair Pervenche Berès PES FR
Monetary Dialogue with the European Central Bank
20060615IPR09084 Follow this link for the full text of Jean-Claude Trichet's opening statement to the committee
EN
1
LINK
http://www.ecb.int/press/key/date/2006/html/sp060621.en.html
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
