HIV/AIDS: MEPs say its "time to deliver"
Public health
2006-07-06 - 14:29
In adopting a joint resolution on "HIV / AIDS - Time to Deliver", MEPs welcome the commitment to a massive scale-up of HIV prevention, treatment and care, with the aim of coming as close as possible to the goal of universal access to treatment by 2010 for all who need it, made at the 2005 meeting of the G8 nations and the September 2005 United Nations World Summit by world leaders and reconfirmed at the 2006 High-Level meeting on AIDS.
The House regrets, nevertheless, that the declaration lacks any global targets or timelines on treatment, resources and prevention, and does not provide a viable action plan to back up the goal of providing universal access for all HIV-affected people by 2010.
MEPs call on the international community to deliver on its promises during the Toronto Conference in August, and call on the Commission and Member States to ensure that health spending in developing countries reaches levels commensurate with the political commitments made. Parliament expresses grave concern at the fact that half of all new HIV infections occur among children and young people. The House expresses disappointment at the fact that, although a large number of infections occur due to the sharing of drug abuse needles, there are still no effective programmes in operation for providing clean needles to drug addicts in many countries, including Member States.
Parliament remains deeply concerned by the overall expansion and feminisation of the pandemic and the fact that women now represent 50% of people living with HIV worldwide and 60% of people living with HIV in Africa.
MEPs criticise the Commission's poor track record in development fund spending in the healthcare sector. The House stresses, for example, that in 2003 only 5.2% of the EDF was earmarked for health spending and only 4% in 2002, and deplores the fact that the Commission intends to propose that only 6% of development funds within the new development cooperation instrument be allocated to human and social development, covering not only healthcare, HIV/AIDS, sexual and reproductive health, but all other aspects of social development, including children, education and gender programmes.
The House calls on the Commission to double its budget for healthcare in developing countries within the Development Cooperation Instrument and to aim for at least 50% of all ODA to be spent on achieving the Millennium Development Goals. MEPs also call on the Commission, when appropriate and subject to strict conditions, to allow for large increases in sectoral budgetary support to health sectors, particularly to retain key health workers in developing countries, and calls for the speeding-up of the recruitment and training of health-care workers at all levels..
MEPs call on the Commission and the Member States to work with UNAIDS in its role to build on and support national efforts to set in place inclusive, transparent processes, and ambitious national targets on HIV prevention, treatment, care and support.
Finally, the House calls for comprehensive reviews of the progress achieved in realising the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS to be undertaken in 2008 and 2011, within the annual reviews of the UN General Assembly.
20060629IPR09382
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
