MEPs debate the priorities of the Finnish Presidency
European Council
2006-07-05 - 16:26
With Finland taking up the six-month EU Presidency after Austria, MEPs debated the Presidency's priorities with Finnish Prime Minister Matti VANHANEN.
A main goal of the Finnish Presidency will be "to turn the Union's gaze outwards and forwards", MEPs were told by Finnish Prime Minister Matti VANHANEN as he presented his country's work programme to the European Parliament on Wednesday. "Europe must start thinking longer-term about its position in a globalised world. The world around us will not wait".
Mr VANHANEN did not go along with the pessimistic talk of a Union in crisis: the agreements reached on the Financial Perspective and the progress on the Services Directive were proof of what could be achieved " when the political will is there".
Effectiveness and transparency
" The citizens often do not know what the Union does for them ." Things such as the right to live, work and study anywhere in the Union and to live in peace-time are taken for granted. The EU most show its citizens that it benefits them in tangible ways, said the Prime Minister..
It must " focus on fundamentals and do so effectively ". This means delivering " value added compared with what Member States could achieve individually, with regard to welfare, security and freedom ". Transparency was also crucial and Finland would fully apply the recent decision on openness of Council meetings.
Better regulation
Finland will place greater emphasis on the quality of legislation, subsidiarity and proportionality as well as " the economic, social and environmental effects " of EU laws.
Future of the EU
On the Constitution, Finland would start consultations which would form the basis for the decisions to be taken under the German presidency in 2007. Meanwhile, Finland itself was in the process of approving the Constitutional Treaty " as negotiated ".
Enlargement, said the Prime Minister, had been a success story. " Recent analyses show that both the new and old Member States have clearly benefited from the last enlargement ". The Finnish presidency would push ahead with the countries in the pipeline and " will also support the Western Balkans' European aspirations ".
Global competition
Competitiveness and growth will require an emphasis on "innovation, energy solutions, quality and productivity of labour, openness in global trade, immigration and properly functioning social protection".
However, " millions of Europeans fear global competition ", said Mr Vanhanen, and " this fear must be taken seriously ". In the end " a new balance between flexibility and security must be sought ".
Even if energy policy choices are largely a matter for the Member States, " the EU needs some energy policy guidelines ". Energy is also linked to climate change and the prime minister stressed the importance of negotiations on the UN's climate change regime after 2012.
The EU as a global actor
Finland wishes to " strengthen the EU's international role ". To do this, it will "further develop the Union's crisis management" capability. Relations with Russia and the Northern Dimension will also be among its main priorities. On Russia, relations " will not be restricted to trade and energy issues; the aim is a broad-based partnership with Russia based on our common European values and global interests ".
Justice and home affairs
The Finnish presidency will conduct a " thorough political review of progress in building an area of freedom, security and justice ". The political will of the Member States will be tested over police and criminal matters, where Finland wants to see qualified-majority voting and the Community method. Mutual recognition of judicial cooperation, as in the successful example of the European arrest warrant, must also move ahead.
Illegal immigration must be tackled not just through border controls but also cooperation with countries of origin and transit. And Finland is keen for an EU asylum policy to be in place by 2010.
Mr Vanhanen concluded by saying that the Union must look forward. He believed that to deal with the challenges it faces " the answer in most cases is rather more Europe than less Europe ". Moreover, urgency is needed. " The world around us is not going to stop and wait ".
European Commission President
José Manuel BARROSO , President of the European Commission, in his address to the Parliament said he looked forward to working with the Finnish Presidency. The Commission and presidency would work in tandem, " Europe needs harmony and this is what Finland would bring". The next 6 months, he said, would be an opportunity to demonstrate how Europe could deliver concrete results including the next steps in the constitutional process and enlargement. "It is the time to move from the period of reflection to the period of engagement ".
On enlargement , President Barroso said that it had been one of the most successful policies of the EU, " an extraordinary achievement, Europe does not enlarge by default, but for the benefit of all, an enlarged Europe was a precondition for a powerful Europe ". Mr Barroso said that, in the autumn, the Commission would present its latest enlargement report which would be about the capacity of an enlarged Europe to function properly.
On Turkey , President Barroso said that it would be a long and sometimes bumpy road but both Turkey and the EU would have to fully respect their commitments including the respect of the Ankara protocol.
On the relationship with Russia , Mr Barroso welcomed the Finnish Presidency's prioritisation of this point. The EU and Russia were working together towards a new comprehensive partnership which includes a free trade area once Russia has acceded to the WTO and a new partnership on energy. Mr Barroso also stressed the importance of the Northern Dimension including the creation of a parliamentary side to this.
President Barroso said that Europe's economy was picking up pace and the Commission would publish a " short-paper on innovation" for the forthcoming summit. It was important, he said, to promote venture capital including for SMEs.
Turning to freedom, security and justice , he stressed the importance of fighting trafficking, illegal immigration and the terrorism. On implementation of EU law, President Barroso pointed out that only 5 Member States had ratified the framework directive to combat the sexual exploitation of children.
It would be necessary to improve the EU's procedures over the next months as well as making progress on the Doha Development agenda. President Barroso said that he looked forward a more self-confident Europe over the next six months which would export its values.
Political group speakers
For the EPP-ED group, Hans-Gert POETTERING (DE) said that, as in football, " friendly competition " and " fair play " were essential in EU affairs. He likened the successive Council presidencies to a chain, of which each part must be strong, and expressed confidence in Finland's ability to guide the Union's affairs.
The EU plans to issue a joint declaration on 25 March 2007 to mark the 50th anniversary of the Treaty of Rome. Mr Poettering said a priority for the EPP-ED group under the current Finnish presidency would be the creation of a working party at political level to pave the way for this event.
On relations with Russia, he said the EU needed this country to be a " reliable, stable, democratic partner ". But he was against " friendship at all costs ". Energy was important but so were human rights.
He concluded by wishing the Finnish presidency every success. " You have us on your side ", he said.
Martin SCHULZ (PES, DE), leader of the Socialist group, backed the Finnish Prime Minister's argument that we need more Europe, not less. He was also glad to hear that Finland planned to ratify the Constitution, saying " we cannot solve our challenges with the set of tools we have ".
On justice and home affairs, the " deficit in cooperation " must be removed. The public agreed on the need for EU powers on organised crime, and using the passerelle method was certainly not a form of " cherry picking " of the Constitution.
He also voiced concern about the drift towards the right in politics in several European countries, saying governments which included " right-wing extremists and xenophobes " were now sitting in the European Council. There was, in his view, a serious threat to fundamental freedoms in Europe. " Democracy is usually threatened, not from without but from within ", he concluded.
For the ALDE group, Graham WATSON (UK) began by saying " Mr President, with your presidency's emphasis on productivity, accountability and transparency, Finlandia is music to liberal ears ". He praised Finland as country which " repeatedly tops the league tables for education, innovation and development ".
Mr Watson gave his group's backing to the priorities such as the market-driven programme, including completing the internal market, particularly in services and energy, and the portability of supplementary pensions.
Finland was right to focus on the added value EU law could bring in the area of justice and home affairs. However, it " beggars belief that the law still has borders when criminals don't ", he said. " For too long key initiatives on police and judicial cooperation have been stalled in Counci l". However, he stressed the need to use Article 42 of the Treaty to bring justice and home affairs matters within the Community sphere, so they could be decided democratically.
Mr Watson urged the Finnish presidency to " promote European values, human rights and democracy, so essential to the development of our world ". Lastly, it was important for Europeans to " draw on aspects of our common history to create a common consciousness " just as the Kalevala, the Finnish national epic, had done in that country's history.
On behalf of his group, Daniel COHN-BENDIT (Greens/EFA, DE) complained that the Finnish prime minister had " said everything we should do but not how we should do it ".
Referring to the " situation we have in Europe today ", he spoke of the rise of right-wing parties in Slovakia, Poland and the Netherlands, and wondered about the significance of this for " a Europe of values ".
Concerning Russia, he said " Europe is giving the impression of running after Putin because we're scared of losing their energy and we don't have any other option for energy". He added "That's the reality of Europe as it stands ".
Turning to Mr Vanhanen's remarks on illegal immigration, Mr Cohn-Bendit believed the real need was " to organise legal immigration properly ".
Mr Vanhanen had mentioned the Council of Europe in the context of enlargement. " Why did you not also mention the Council of Europe's discussion of the CIA ?" he asked. This was what he should be discussing if he wanted to promote the rule of law in Europe.
Ultimately, the presidency must tackle the real issues. He concluded " You haven't given Europe any real direction. That's what was lacking in your speech ".
For the GUE/NGL group, Esko SEPPÄNEN ( FI)said that the last Finnish Presidency had taken step towards a "federal Union", and this presidency was continuing down the same line. The Union, he said, had set up "military institutions" and would be carrying out military missions in Congo. Turning to the ratification of the Constitutional Treaty in Finland, he said, only 22 per cent of the Finnish people supported it and the Finnish government did not respect the democratic will expressed by the French and Dutch peoples. He supported the Commission's move towards a free trade area with Russia.
Brian CROWLEY (IE) for the UEN group said that sometimes incoming presidencies can sound "stale" despite the brilliant ideas proposed. He too welcomed the priority given to the relationship with Russia which was, he said: "About more than energy, it is about geo-political stability". Mr Crowley also welcomed the Finnish Presidency's stance on transparency. He underlined the importance of bio-fuels and the importance of exporting the Finnish model on research and development. Finally, Mr Crowley stressed caution on the move from unanimity to qualified majority voting in the area of freedom, security and justice.
Nigel FARAGE (UK) for the IND/DEM group said it was "a déjà vu moment" with the repetition of speeches by incoming presidencies. He asked the Finnish Prime Minister who he was actually representing saying that only 38 per cent of the Finnish people had said that EU membership was a good thing. The recipe should not be "more Europe". It was only the "political classes" in Europe that believed this. He said it was a disgrace that the 25 Heads of State and government had decided to move from a period of reflection to a period of engagement. Mr Farage said in doing this, they were ignoring public opinion. Europe needed to deregulate and referenda should be carried out across Europe in all Member States on the Constitutional Treaty.
Non-aligned MEP, Frank VANHECKE (BE) said that the Finnish government was ignoring its democratic values by pressing on with the ratification of the Constitutional Treaty. He also said that Turkey should not become an EU Member State and most Europeans, he said, supported this view.
British speakers in the debate
Timothy KIRKHOPE (EPP-ED, UK), leader of the British Conservative delegation in the EP, said that the Finnish Prime Minister would offer a practical presidency. He welcomed the presidency's positions on transparency and openness, and Mr Kirkhope also welcomed the opening up of Council meetings "despite the crass efforts of the British Foreign Secretary". He called for proper assessments on the need to legislation saying the assumption should be not to legislate. He called for progress on the agenda of less legislation. Finally, Mr Kirkhope called for an end to the vexed question of the European Parliament's seat.
Ian HUDGHTON (Greens/EFA, UK) said that stateless nations like Scotland and Catalonia looked to Finland as a role model of an independent state in its one hundredth anniversary year. He too welcomed Finland's position on transparency and subsidiarity. Mr Hudghton said a re-tabling of the Constitutional Treaty would be unacceptable as would continuing with the existing common fisheries policy. He also called for an end to the European Parliament meeting in Strasbourg.
Gary TITLEY (PES, UK) leader of the Labour MEPs in the EP, said Finland had a lot to teach everyone else, given its investment in high quality education and its balance between economic efficiency and social justice. He himself wished to emphasise three priorities: " action, action and action ". " Our citizens are not interested in processes but in outcomes. We will be judged by outcomes ", he said.
He described the arrest in Italy of a suspect in connection with the London bombings of 7 July 2005, which had been possible thanks to the European arrest warrant, as an example of successful EU law. But he pointed to shortcomings in crisis management and the fact that the single market was incomplete as being cases where the Member States still needed to deliver.
Sarah LUDFORD (ALDE, UK) focused first on the western Balkans, which she described as "a heavy responsibility for the EU ". Encouragement (such as the granting of visas) must be coupled with pressure (to bring war crimes suspects to the Hague tribunal).
She then turned to justice and home affairs, depicting the EU as " dysfunctional " and complaining that five years after EU anti-terror legislation had been adopted it had still not been implemented by all Member States. She also accused EU governments of " complicity " in human rights breaches in the war on terror.
Finnish Prime Minister's response
The Finnish Prime Minister replied to many of the questions raised by MEPs. To some critics, he said he was indeed "t echnocratic " but that " a cool, collected approach is needed, given the passions in Europe today ".
His country's presidency certainly hoped to emphasise " action" and " delivery ", as stressed by some speakers. As to the claim that the EU had become a " laughing stock " with its common asylum policy, he in fact believed " this is exactly what Europe needs ".
On Russia, he stressed that " energy policy must never be used as a weapon against other countries " but must be " business-based ". He rebuffed a question about Finland's " neutrality " by saying that as a member of the EU it participated in its " common values and a shared foreign policy ".
He did not believe the EU was engaging in a " military adventure", as one speaker had said, when it decided to send a mission to Congo. It was there " to safeguard democratic elections and thus bolster our core values ".
In conclusion, if there was one thing he wished the Finnish presidency to be remembered for, it was for " badgering Europe about innovation policy ".
Commission response to the debate
José Manuel BARROSO , responding to the debate for the European Commission, said that Europe is based on results and this would lead to greater support for Europe's values. Europe's institutions needed to be reformed, he said. " Nice does not go far enough ". Europe would focus on innovation and the forthcoming summit in Finland could be a true benchmark for innovation in Europe. The EU, he said, had some of the best universities, researchers and science in the world, but Europe needs to concentrate on how this could be bridged into concrete results. On security freedom and justice, President Barroso said that the problems in Spain were in fact European problems that needed European solutions. On energy, Mr Barroso said that relationship with Russia was very important, and the Commission was in favour of a constructive partnership. He called for the promotion of diversification of energy supply in the countries of origin, transit and in the EU. President Barroso stressed the importance of " continuity " for EU presidencies which had been recognised in the Constitutional Treaty.
Finally he said: " Like on the football pitch, Europe is getting results and Europe can be proud again ."
20060628IPR09340
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
