Immigration procedures and the integration of immigrants.
Immigration
2006-07-06 - 17:14
MEPs adopted two non-binding reports on asylum and immigration. The first report by Patrick GAUBERT (EPP-ED, FR) is on mutual information procedure in the areas of asylum and immigration and the second report is by Stavros LAMBRINIDIS (PES, EL) on strategies and means for the integration of immigrants in the European Union.
Parliament agrees with the general approach of the Commission proposal, which is to call on Member States to forward all proposed national measures in the field of asylum and immigration to the Commission, so that other Member States who may be affected by them can have early warning. The Parliament is asking for a few changes, notably a twice-yearly report by the Commission on the measures submitted, a more open debate on the political level in Council on immigration issues and MEPs also want to make the database open to the public.
The whole topic is of special importance to Spain because of its decision last year to regularise immigrants without consulting the other Member States of the Union, who could be affected by resulting migratory flows.
Integration of immigrants
In a second report by Stavros LAMBRINIDIS (PES, EL) on strategies and means for the integration of immigrants in the European Union come in response to the Commission's communication "A Common Agenda for Integration".
The report welcomes the Commission proposal to establish a European Fund for Integration of third-country nationals and suggests additional measures to help the integration of this population into the Union. MEPs call on the Commission to "create a permanent contact group of immigrant representatives, experts and NGOs" to advise it , to ensure that the EU institutions "reflect the composition of the Union's and the Member States' populations", and to "carry out a legal review of the existing provisions relating to EU civic citizenship in the various Member States [...] regarding the right of long-term resident immigrants to vote in local and municipal elections.". The Parliament also calls on the Member States to "establish transparent, humane, fast and reasonable procedures for the granting of long-term resident status," and encourages them to "consider appropriate affirmative action legislation for migrants". The House also urges the Council to give co-decision powers to the Parliament in this field.
2006-07-06 20060628IPR09343 Establishment of a mutual information procedure concerning Member States' measures in the areas of asylum and immigration Integration of immigrants in the European Union
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5279712
EN
2
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5319352
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
