Protecting workers against the risk of infection from contaminated needles
Employment policy
2006-06-21 - 18:20
Every year around a million workers in Europe, mainly in the medical world, suffer injuries from used surgical needles. The consequences can be serious, including infections from HIV or hepatitis B or C. The Social Affairs Committee wants to improve existing EU legislation so as to give workers better protection.
MEPs believe that many of these "needlestick injuries" which occur in the medical world could be prevented if appropriate measures were made compulsory in medical and veterinary services. In a report by Stephen Hughes (PES, UK), adopted afresh by a large majority by the Social Affairs Committee on Wednesday, MEPs say studies have shown that the use of safer needles together with regular training and organisational measures can help reduce the number of injuries. They add that safer working practices and medical devices designed to prevent accidental needlestick injuries would also produce financial savings.
The committee says the existing directives which should in theory cover these risks have not had the desired effect. It therefore calls on the Commission to add various new provisions to one of the directives intended to improve accident prevention and the protection of workers (Directive 2000/54/EC on the protection of workers from risks related to exposure to biological agents at work). MEPs want the Commission to put forward a proposal to amend this directive within three months.
This report was referred back to the committee by the June plenary session. In Wednesday's vote, MEPs adopted some changes to the version originally adopted on 20 April 2006. These changes relate to the annex to the report in which the committee makes detailed recommendations as to the contents of the proposals requested from the Commission.
These proposals were made under a little-used procedure which enables the European Parliament formally to request the Commission to draft new legislative proposals (Rule 39 of Parliament's Rules of Procedure - see link below). The draft resolution by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs must still be approved by an absolute majority of MEPs in plenary (at least 367 out of 732). Since the committee adopted the draft resolution with by 32 votes in favour to one against with one abstention, it has every chance of being adopted in plenary.
2006-06-21 Committee on Employment and Social Affairs Chair Jan Andersson PES SE
Procedure: Own-initiative (Article 192 of the EC Treaty)
Plenary vote: July or September, Strasbourg
20060411IPR07234 Link to relevant rule of procedure
-//EP//TEXT RULES-EP 20060213 RULE-039 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
