Financial instruments for external relations
External relations
2006-07-06 - 16:09
Parliament adopted three reports on three "instruments" laying down the provisions for the financing of EU foreign policy under the financial perspective 2007-2013. In final negotiations between the three institutions this week, the Commission and the Council have agreed to Parliament's wish to have another, separate instrument for actions in the field of democracy and human rights.
The Commission adopted a proposal for such an instrument on Monday 26 June. Parliament insisted on a separate instrument to ensure adequate emphasis on human rights and democracy in the EU's foreign policy.
The negotiations over the past months concerned three foreign policy instruments and one financial instrument for development cooperation. On the latter, it was agreed on Monday that this should be split into three separate regulations, one for developing countries, one for industrialised countries and one for thematic programmes. Parliament will probably vote later on this in second reading.
The three foreign policy instruments to be voted next Wednesday are the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument, the Instrument for pre-accession assistance (IPA) and the Instrument for Stability (IfS). At Parliament's insistence all programmes will expire at the end of the next FP period, i.e. in 2013; there will also be a mid-term review. Parliament also saw its wish honoured that the funds allocated under the different instruments have a geographic and thematic break-down. This means that Parliament can scrutinise more in detail where the money is going to and has strengthened the political contents of the programmes.
The ENPI regulation (rapporteur Konrad SZYMAŃSKI (UEN, PL) will lay down the provisions for foreign policy programmes relating to the neighbouring countries to the east and south of the EU, viz. Algeria, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Egypt, Georgia, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Libya, Moldova, Morocco, Palestinian Authority, Russia, Syria, Tunisia and Ukraine. Parliament has co-decision powers here.
The second instrument is a regulation for pre-accession assistance (IPA). This framework regulation will replace Phare, Sapard, Ispa, Cards and other regulations. Beneficiary countries will be divided into two categories: candidate countries (Croatia, FYR of Macedonia and Turkey) and potential candidate countries (Albania, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Montenegro, Serbia). Potential candidate countries will receive help for institution building and democratisation, social and economic development, regional and cross-border cooperation. Candidate countries will additionally receive help in the preparation for the implementation of structural funds after accession. Parliament has consultation powers only here and the rapporteur is István SZENT-IVÁNYI (ALDE, HU).
Finally, there is the Instrument for Stability (IfS). This instrument is meant for providing peacekeeping actions, for helping other countries in the fight against organised crime, terrorism and other transnational threats and for helping other countries in a nuclear crisis or against the threat of weapons of mass destruction. Parliament has obtained co-decision powers here by taking out nuclear safety as a separate component. The rapporteur is Angelika BEER (Greens/EFA, DE).
20060629IPR09385 European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument Instrument for Stability Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance (IPA)
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5205332
EN
2
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5206222
EN
3
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5204572
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
