MEPs give thumbs up to Schüssel on transparency, but look for more progress on constitution
Institutions
2006-06-22 - 17:46
MEPs congratulated the Austrian Presidency for making Council meetings public
Political groups congratulated the Austrian Presidency on opening Council meetings to the public and improving transparency in the EU, and most speakers were pleased to hear that no Member State was taking issue with the substance of the proposed EU constitution. But many MEPs said they would have liked clearer conclusions on how to proceed after 12 months of reflection and better involvement of citizens.
The Austrian Chancellor Wolfgang Schüssel came to a special plenary session of the European Parliament in Brussels to report back on the work of the Austrian Presidency and on the European Council meeting of 15-16 June 2006. Mr Schüssel said the Austrian presidency could be described by the motto “From reflection to action.” They had followed a two track approach: “we want a Europe of practical projects, and to revive debate on constitution.” He said the presidency had put together a document of 30 practical projects for the EU to work on up to 2010. The Financial Perspective had been agreed with Parliament, assuring the finances of the EU until 2013. “The services directive sent clear message that we can reach agreement on controversial issues. Parliament showed the way as the pioneer able to find solutions.” Better cooperation on consular services for EU citizens aboard and better coordination of efforts to help crisis-hit regions had also been agreed. Mr Schüssel praised the idea of free debates at the summits, which began with discussion of energy at the Spring Council and continued with integration and migration last week, where the problem of migrants attempting to reach the Canary Islands was discussed. Plans for a European Institute of Technology had been confirmed, he said, with work to start in 2009. The euro area had been widened to Slovenia, showing it was not a closed shop, and the path smoothed for other new entrants. However, “we cannot change the entry criteria – our credibility is at stake.” Work had started on a new energy policy, with an action plan for security of supply. The President-in-Office of the Council stressed in particular a project to take joint action to tackle rare diseases, especially in children, which would form part of the Seventh Framework Programme for Research. He added that the approach to training and employment issues had been rethought at the Spring Summit, with a new instrument now before the Council. Regarding the constitutional project, he said that after the ‘no’ votes, a pause for reflection had been needed, even if it had often seemed like there was more pausing than reflection underway. The Union now needed to act: new elements would have to be brought into the Treaty: “It is hard to envisage the treaty as it stands being approved, but the substance should not be altered. And no Member State called the substance of the treaty into question.” A final decision on how to proceed should be taken no later than the beginning of the French presidency in 2007, and preferably before, he said. He also stressed plans for a special European Council to adopt a new declaration fifty years after the signing of the Treaty of Rome, on 25 March 2007. On enlargement, he said the European Council had confirmed the target date of 1 Jan 2007 for Bulgaria and Romania. The negotiating framework for Croatia and Turkey had been confirmed, as had Albania’s status as an applicant state. “We recognise the independence of Montenegro, and we are also considering a special action plan for Serbia to give some prospects for them.” He said the notion of the Union’s absorption capacity needed to be defined in a measurable way, and this issue would return in the autumn. The Austrian Chancellor also highlighted the agreement on comitology, which he said put the European Parliament on an equal footing with the Council when it came to monitoring the Commission’s work in implementing codecision legislation. He said the fact that there were two million more jobs over twelve months had shown the target of 10 million new jobs by 2010 was realistic. He was pleased at the greater national ownership of the Lisbon Strategy evident in the fact that 15 Member States now had appointed their internal market ministers as Lisbon coordinators. Among transport projects, he highlighted in particular the Brenner tunnel plan. “A year ago there was quite a bit of gloom after failure of budget discussions and the ‘no’ votes. There were the London bombings, and the REACH and services directive seemed a nightmare. There was a widening gap between EU and citizens. Not all this has been solved, but a financial framework is in place, the services directive seems settled and five further Member States have ratified the treaty... our anthem, the Ode to Joy, is not about gloom and sadness. It is time to wave those goodbye, and to tackle our daily work with more joy and enthusiasm.” Commission President's statement Commission President José Mauel Barroso opened his speech by arguing that the European Council had "challenged the mistaken perception that Europe was at some sort of standstill". In fact Europe was now moving forward by pursuing a two-track strategy of practical measures of concern to the public plus a step-by-step approach towards the institutional issues. The EU knew that security, freedom and justice were priorities for its citizens, along with migration and integration. Mr Barroso believed more use should be made of the Article 42 "passerelle" and of codecision for these policy areas in future. The Austrian presidency had made significant progress on a "Europe of results", including policies such as innovation, energy, emissions trading and the creation of a European Institute of Technology. Decisions had also been taken to conduct a fundamental review of the single market and take stock of the social situation in Europe, including demographic challenges. Overall, it was crucial to show that the EU was not as bureaucratic as its opponents claimed but could deal with the everyday events facing its citizens. Europe must be seen "not as technocratic but as democratic". Turning to the constitution, he, like Mr Schüssel, stressed that the entire European Council had recognised that reform was still needed and that "an institutional settlement is needed". However, changing the rules was not enough. Looking ahead, the "Berlin declaration" due to be produced by 25 March 2007 must be a restatement of Europe's values, including a "commitment to deliver". It must be signed not just by the Member States but also by the Commission and Parliament, as a "collective act of will". Last week's summit had shown that solutions were forthcoming. Now was the time to leave pessimism behind and "lead with confidence". Political groups' spokespeople For the EPP-ED group , Hans-Gert Pöttering (DE) began by saying that trust was the key issue in Europe, including between the institutions. The services directive had been a success for Parliament's compromise agreement, which the Council had been able to accept. On the constitution, the EPP had never thought it was dead. Now it was up to a succession of Council presidencies to find a solution, with 2009 as the target date. On next year's Berlin declaration, he believed a working party at political level of Parliament, Council and Commission should be set up to ensure the declaration was not a purely Council affair. Turning to this week's EU-US summit, it was important to make it clear that, while Europeans were "friends and partners of America", the situation at Guantánamo was "not compatible with the principles of basic law" and also that it was essential to support democracy in Belarus. In conclusion he returned to the issue of trust, saying "our confidence in the Austrian presidency has been justified". Martin Schulz (DE), leader of the Socialist group , welcomed the Austrian Presidency’s cooperative approach. In particular, he was pleased that “the neo-liberal spirit is, thank God, exhausted. The attitude is penetrating even the Commission that economic and monetary union will not work without a social dimension.” He pointed out that it was Parliament which had “written” the services directive, since the proposal from Mr Bolkestein had always been unfeasibly neo-liberal in approach. “I am glad the EPP-ED group followed our socially responsible line.” He said that problems in the legislative process were usually caused by the Council. Mr Schulz was pleased that the substance of constitution was accepted by all EU leaders, though he told Mr Schüssel: “Your colleagues do not shout it from the rooftops... We have wasted another year. We should have used this time to carry out necessary reforms, to give us the capacity to enlarge.” Now there was to be further delay. The Socialist group leader urged Mr Schüssel to take a clear line on Guantanamo at the forthcoming EU-US summit, since, he said “a legal black hole is not acceptable.” Silvana Koch-Mehrin (DE) spoke for the ALDE group . She said the Austrian Presidency had been calm, if not quiet. The Financial Perspective and the services directive had gone through, but there had been little meat at last week’s summit. “We have had a year of reflection, we have a timetable and we need results... but people aren’t really doing this. National government chalk up successes for themselves and blame bad policymaking on Europe. At least they understand we should continue with substance of the treaty, if not in present form.” She welcomed the opening up of Council meetings as an important step for public confidence, but regretted the lack of discussion on the Strasbourg issue: “This shows a lack of contact with reality and is an admission of defeat. 600 000 people have already signed up to this initiative.” She also pointed to the blocking in Council of the deregulation scoreboard approach, which was needed to show people what Brussels was responsible for and what lay with national governments. Greens/EFA group co-president Monica Frassoni (IT) asked Mr Schüssel to raised the issue of CIA flight in Europe with President Bush. On the constitution, she said “We now have extended limbo and silence. Despite your mandate there is no interim report and no roadmap with substance. You have not helped to create more than talking shops.” She said she was “rather frightened” by the idea of a solemn ceremony among the European Council, which would not encourage dialogue with citizens. National parliaments and leaderships were more concerned about own prerogatives than team playing, she said. She called from clear proposals on changes to treaty. She said the Austrian presidency would be remembered for the increase in the research budget for nuclear power, with four or five times more being spent on this dangerous technology than on renewables or energy efficiency. Rather than the Brenner tunnel, she would have liked to see ratification of Alpine Treaty. On sustainable development, the Council had repeated the same “tired goals which are never achieved.” On immigration, she said the Council needed to go beyond repressive measures and look to ensure development in poorer countries, as well as opening possibilities for legal immigration. Gabriele Zimmer (DE), speaking for the GUE/NGL group , welcomed the Council's decision to hold codecision debates in public. However, she was critical of other developments. The services directive had been a "shabby compromise". Legislation on security and freedom had in fact resulted in more repression and more of a fortress Europe. And the planned European "border intervention teams" in the Mediterranean sounded like commandos being sent against immigrants. Overall, the EU was failing to tackle global problems and the summit had not looked at the real causes of the no votes in France and the Netherlands. UEN group co-president Brian Crowley (IE) said the keynote of the Austrian presidency had been realism or "doing things that are achievable". On the gap between the EU and its citizens, he believed those best placed to speak to the public were national politicians but they must do so "honestly, not with forked tongues". In this connection he criticised the debate in France on the services directive, which had sent out the false message that the directive would destroy jobs. Lastly, he advised the Commission not to use the Article 42 passerelle for justice and home affairs, saying this manoeuvre would "alienate" people. For the Independence and Democracy group , Jens-Peter Bonde (DK) welcomed the decision to hold Council meetings in public but added that working groups which currently operated in secret should also meet in public. He also called for a new Convention to draft a new institutional text, which should then be put to the vote by the people in all countries. Non-aligned Member Hans-Peter Martin (AT), believed there was too much "false happiness" in the air. This could lead to "political depression". He complained of a lack of transparency, in particular the "silence" which had greeted his questions about OLAF. "What we need is democracy, scrutiny and justice", he concluded. Other UK speakers Andrew Duff (ALDE, UK) said he could sense Mr Schüssel’s frustration at the problem of shepherding “25 feline-like characters to get a mandate for a fresh IGC.” He asked the Austrian leader for his own top three priorities for renegotiation of Part III of the treaty. Malcolm Harbour (EPP-ED, UK) said the Austrian presidency had been one of "real substance and achievement". The passage of the services directive had been one such success, though largely thanks to Parliament's efforts to reach a compromise. He welcomed the decision on transparency in the Council and criticised the British foreign minister for opposing this measure. Gerard Batten (IND/DEM, UK) told the House it should be grateful to Mr Schüssel for saying openly that the constitution must go ahead, i.e. that the people must be ignored. Reacting to the Austrian leader's reference to the European anthem, the Ode to Joy, he said as a British citizen he preferred another song and proceeded to recite: "Who do you think you are kidding, Mr Schüssel?" Roger Helmer (NA, UK) argued that disregarding the results of the referendums amounted to "contempt for democracy". (Note: Mr Crowley was the only Irish speaker in the debate.) Council Presidency response Chancellor Schüssel said the transatlantic dialogue was a high priority. “If Europe and the US work hand in hand, we can achieve something. With all the legitimate criticisms regarding the behaviour of the Americans, we should not forget that European-US partnership and friendship is a basic foundation for our future work.” He cited developments on product piracy and energy policy as examples, as well as the Middle East, Iran, Iraq and Afghanistan. The ultimate goal, he said, was a transatlantic free trade zone. Human rights, Guantanamo and CIA renditions needed to be discussed, he said: “We cannot have an area where the law does not apply. We cannot allow people simply to be abducted and sent to secret prisons. But we must recognise at the same time that there is much to be done to export democracy and strengthen NGOs.” He said the Austrian presidency had pioneered a dialogue with the US State Department on international law. Regarding transparency, he highlighted the Europe café project as an Austrian initiative to contact citizens directly, along with the use of the internet. On enlargement, he compared the present situation with 1998, when the issue of Czech membership of the EU had been a difficult one, with an income gap of 1 to 10 – it was now half that. “We need to benefit from the growth prospects just outside the front door.” He had, he said, fought hard to ensure talks with Turkey got started, but the Ankara protocol obligations were maintained and must be implemented. On the Constitutional treaty, he said there needed to be new elements, and perhaps a change of name. He wanted to find a way to assuage fears by highlighting the social guarantees of the treaty. He concluded that European teams had so far had a good record in the World Cup, which showed the spirit needed for the EU as well. Commission response Commissioner Olli Rehn welcomed the summit's conclusions on enlargement, stressing that it amounted to "enlightened self-interest" to carry this policy further. He noted that the European Council had highlighted the success of enlargement in "spreading peace and security, growth and prosperity". It had decided not to change, or add to, the enlargement criteria. It had, however, stressed the need for the EU to be able to function properly, adding that its "absorption capacity" must be taken into account in any further enlargements. The Commission would now draft a document on enlargement, including the question of absorption capacity, by October or November this year and would look forward to a "substantial enlargement debate with Parliament, the Council and civil society". The time had indeed come to arrive at a new consensus on this issue, involving both the rigorous application of "conditionality" for EU membership and better communication with the EU's citizens. This was the way to make a real success of enlargement.
20060621STO09207
EN
1
PHOTO
20060620PHT09186.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
