Post-Briefing : 3-6 July 2006 : Strasbourg
2006-07-10 - 15:20
Minute's silence for the two children murdered in Liège and the victims of the train accident in Valencia, Spain
Launch of Finnish Presidency - MEPs debate priorities
MEPs approve €306bn Structural Funds package 2007-2013
CIA "directly responsible" in some cases for illegal activities in Europe, says Parliament
Reducing the climate change impact of civil aviation
Batteries to be collected and recycled, nature protected
Immigration procedures and the integration of immigrants
MEPs ask ECB to explain its role in the SWIFT case
Equitable Life - Committee of Inquiry mandate extended
HIV/AIDS - MEPs say its "time to deliver"
Human rights - Somalia, Mauritania and freedom of expression on the Internet
Cross-border shipments of radioactive waste
20060628BRI09328
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Opening of the Strasbourg Plenary Session - Minute's silence for recent tragedies
2006-07-10 - 15:20
President Josep BORRELL opened the session with an expression of grief for Stacey Lemmens and Nathalie Mahy, the two Belgian girls found murdered in Liège recently. Belgium had been "overwhelmed by tragedy", he said. In a message to the families he continued "On behalf of the European Parliament, I want to say that we share your pain".
President BORRELL also told the House he had just learnt of the train accident in Valencia, Spain, in which, according to latest reports, around 40 people have died and 100 injured. At the President's request, the House observed a minute's silence in memory of all these victims.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
MEPs make statements on "70 years after General Franco's coup d'etát in Spain"
2006-07-10 - 15:20
President of the European Parliament Josep BORRELL made a statement on "70 years after General Franco's coup d'état in Spain" recalling that it was on 18 July 1936 that the coup occurred in Spain. There was a generation of people who suffered, and who fought for democracy.
President BORRELL said: "It is easy to have a selective memory, I am a member of this generation and I have a particular relationship with this time in history. The aim of this institutional statement is to look to the future and learn the lessons of the past".
The 1931 government in Spain, he said, had been a yardstick for democracy in Europe, but the coup d'état gave rise to a long and cruel war. It represented the confrontation between two different world philosophies. The Spanish Civil War was the first war of the Second World War. It was a test-bed for the future. Europeans died on both sides. "In the post-war phase, Spain was left outside the mainstream of democracy, Spain was isolated".
The events of that time were still fresh in the mind for many people. It was necessary to learn from the past and not repeat the mistakes of the past. President Borrell paid homage to the victims who fought for democracy so Spain could return to Europe where she belonged.
Jaime MAYOR OREJA (ES), for the EPP-ED group, stressed the importance of the transition to democracy. It was now thirty years since this transition. Democracy was achieved with the support of the Spanish King and the total support of the Spanish people. This democracy was entrenched in the Spanish Constitution of 1978. Spain managed to avoid the tragedy of falling into the trap of "two Spains". The EU, he said, in many ways, was borne out of what happened in Spain. It was important not to repeat the mistakes of the past. A second Spanish Constitution was not needed, neither was self-determination for peoples that have never existed in Spain.
Martin SCHULZ (DE), for the PES group, said that the Franco regime stood for the hatred of people, violence and the destruction of institutions. "It was a case of either agreeing with Franco or death", he said. "The Spanish Civil War was not just Spanish, it was the start of a much bigger war". There had been three Spanish Presidents of the European Parliament since direct elections to the European Parliament in 1979. He concluded: "Freedom has won, and Franco has lost and this is the best thing that could happen for Europe".
For the ALDE group, Bronisław GEREMEK (PL) chose to evoke not just Spain in 1936, which he acknowledged had been "split off from Europe for half a century" but also the 1956 uprisings in Poznan, Poland, and in Hungary, saying these too were part of the fight for freedom in Europe. He preferred not "to tot up the examples of injustice". The Spanish experience had been "one facet of the experience of Europe". And while paying tribute to the courage of the people of Spain, he wished to emphasise the need for reconciliation, dialogue and peace.
Daniel Marc COHN-BENDIT (Greens/EFA, DE), speaking for his group, argued that there were four lessons to be drawn from the events of 1936 in Spain. Firstly, the courage of the Spanish people. Secondly, the barbarity of fascism: Guernica, he said, was a symbol of an "international fascist project". Thirdly, the cowardice of Europeans: here he singled out the French and British governments of the time for what he described as "appeasement". And fourthly, the terrible intolerance of totalitarianism: there had been the International Brigades, who wanted to save the Spanish people, but there had also been "communists who murdered Trotskyists who killed anarchists, and vice-versa". He concluded: "liberation is not about having a single idea of the truth". Underlining this point by referring to Bosnia, he said the lesson today was that we must recognise the value of diversity.
On behalf of the GUE/NGL group, Francis WURTZ (FR) said the putschists of 1936 had proved unable to destroy the Popular Front, despite the support of fascist Italy and Germany. He spoke of the "lynching of democrats and republicans by the neighbouring so-called democracies" and the "indifference" of western leaders to the atrocities committed by Franco. But on the brighter side, the Spanish civil war had triggered "an unprecedented wave of solidarity" throughout Europe, such as the 40,000 volunteers of the International Brigades, many of whom later took part in the liberation of Europe at the end of World War II All of us have a duty to pay tribute to them, he said in conclusion.
Brian CROWLEY (IE), for the UEN group, argued that a reading of history would show there could be a commemoration every single day for an atrocity committed in Europe. The common thread running through these events was "intolerance and a lack of respect for others". But rather than point the finger, he said, it was best to look at positive examples. "We in Europe have found a way today whereby people with different ideologies, from different countries... can come together and find common ground and common cause", he said. And in this connection, he called on the European Parliament to support Spanish Prime Minister Zapatero in his efforts to deal with the problems of the Basque region, saying he was trying "to bring previously irreconcilable peoples together to find a way forward".
For the Independence and Democracy group, Jens-Peter BONDE (DK) spoke of a Danish poet who had left his wife and family to "keep the fascists out of Spain" and said "let us praise those who defended Spain, those who were volunteers, those who showed both courage and foolhardiness".
On behalf of the non-aligned Members, Maciej Marian GIERTYCH (NI, PL) took a different line from other speakers, saying "we have civil liberties, tolerance and freedom in eastern Europe today", which he said was "a consequence of communism not having been installed on our continent". Thanks to Franco the communist attack on catholic Spain, in which "7,000 members of the clergy were murdered and churches were desecrated", had been thwarted. He complained that christian Europe today was losing ground to socialists and atheists.
This last speech provoked a heated response from the leaders of the PES and EPP-ED groups. Martin SCHULZ (PES, DE) said "What we have just heard is the spirit of General Franco. It was a fascist speech, which has no place in the European Parliament!".
Hans-Gert POETTERING (EPP-ED, DE) told the House "As a catholic I wish to say that we are committed to human dignity, human rights, the rule of law, democracy and freedom. We regard dictators and supporters of any totalitarian regime - whether fascism, national socialism or communism - as unsuited to defend our ideals. We defend our ideals with our own convictions."
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
New deal on comitology: Parliament can block Commission decisions
2006-07-10 - 15:20
The European Parliament endorsed, by an overwhelming majority, the compromise reached with representatives of the Commission and the Council on the so-called comitology procedure. The new agreement allows MEPs, for the first time, to block implementing decisions taken by the Commission. It also means Parliament will be informed of these decisions in all official languages and extends the time available for Parliamentary scrutiny.
In the debate held on Wednesday 5 July, rapporteur Richard CORBETT (PES, UK) said: "with this agreement, there is a transformation of the situation". According to him, the new compromise improves "accountability and transparency of the whole Community system."
After five months of negotiation, undertaken on behalf of the Parliament by Mr Corbett and Joseph DAUL (EPP-ED, FR), the three EU Institutions agreed to reform the current comitology system, which gives no real blocking power to MEPs. The agreement also improves Parliament's rights to be informed, by ensuring that the Commission provides detailed information on all comitology activities in all official languages.
The new compromise: main achievements for the Parliament
The main accomplishment of the new agreement is the new article 5 of a Council Decision modifying the 1999 act on the implementing rights of the Commission (1999/468/EC). This introduces a new Regulatory procedure with scrutiny. According to the new procedure, Parliament will be able to block, by an absolute majority of MEPs (i.e. 367 votes are needed for the resolution to pass), quasi-legislative implementing measures under co-decision legislation by simply saying "No". If this happens, the Commission cannot enact the measures and has to propose either a new comitology decision or a new legislative act under the co-decision procedure.
The system of transmission of information from the Commission to Parliament has been improved. At present, documents are delivered in one or up to three languages. The Commission has now agreed to set up a detailed information system on all comitology committees' activities in all Parliaments' official languages. The time limit for MEPs to scrutinise the proposed decisions is increased from one month to three, extendable to four for the most complex issues. The clock will start ticking only when the EP has received full documentations in all official languages.
The EU legislator - when the co-decision procedure is used, this means the Parliament and the Council - often delegates powers to Commission to adopt the detailed measures need to implement legislation. The comitology system enables the Council to scrutinise the work of the Commission and, in most important cases, to block its decisions. The comitology procedures have been criticised since their introduction, mainly because Parliament does not enjoy the same rights as the Council, despite its role as co-legislator. At present, the Commission, when exercising these delegated implementing powers, can proceed with decisions, even if the Parliament opposes them. With the new agreement, Parliament and Council are now put on equal footing for all comitology procedures related to co-decision acts.
The agreement and the associated Joint Declaration must be ratified by all three institutions to come into force. The Commission formally approved the texts on 22 June.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Parliament calls for an update on MEPs privileges and immunities
2006-07-10 - 15:20
In adopting a resolution on the Protocol on Privileges and Immunities of MEPs, the House recalls the Council's undertaking to convene an Intergovernmental Conference in order to modify the Protocol on Privileges and Immunities in respect of the provisions relating to Members of the European Parliament.
The House also confirmed that the basis for the IGC must be the Statute approved by the European Parliament on 3 and 4 June 2003. Finally, MEPs call on the Council to ensure the appropriate European Parliament involvement in that IGC.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
European Council
MEPs debate the priorities of the Finnish Presidency
2006-07-10 - 15:20
With Finland taking up the six-month EU Presidency after Austria, MEPs debated the Presidency's priorities with Finnish Prime Minister Matti VANHANEN.
A main goal of the Finnish Presidency will be "to turn the Union's gaze outwards and forwards", MEPs were told by Finnish Prime Minister Matti VANHANEN as he presented his country's work programme to the European Parliament on Wednesday. "Europe must start thinking longer-term about its position in a globalised world. The world around us will not wait".
Mr VANHANEN did not go along with the pessimistic talk of a Union in crisis: the agreements reached on the Financial Perspective and the progress on the Services Directive were proof of what could be achieved "when the political will is there".
Effectiveness and transparency
"The citizens often do not know what the Union does for them." Things such as the right to live, work and study anywhere in the Union and to live in peace-time are taken for granted. The EU most show its citizens that it benefits them in tangible ways, said the Prime Minister..
It must "focus on fundamentals and do so effectively". This means delivering "value added compared with what Member States could achieve individually, with regard to welfare, security and freedom". Transparency was also crucial and Finland would fully apply the recent decision on openness of Council meetings.
Better regulation
Finland will place greater emphasis on the quality of legislation, subsidiarity and proportionality as well as "the economic, social and environmental effects" of EU laws.
Future of the EU
On the Constitution, Finland would start consultations which would form the basis for the decisions to be taken under the German presidency in 2007. Meanwhile, Finland itself was in the process of approving the Constitutional Treaty "as negotiated".
Enlargement, said the Prime Minister, had been a success story. "Recent analyses show that both the new and old Member States have clearly benefited from the last enlargement". The Finnish presidency would push ahead with the countries in the pipeline and "will also support the Western Balkans' European aspirations".
Global competition
Competitiveness and growth will require an emphasis on "innovation, energy solutions, quality and productivity of labour, openness in global trade, immigration and properly functioning social protection".
However, "millions of Europeans fear global competition", said Mr Vanhanen, and "this fear must be taken seriously". In the end "a new balance between flexibility and security must be sought".
Even if energy policy choices are largely a matter for the Member States, "the EU needs some energy policy guidelines". Energy is also linked to climate change and the prime minister stressed the importance of negotiations on the UN's climate change regime after 2012.
The EU as a global actor
Finland wishes to "strengthen the EU's international role". To do this, it will "further develop the Union's crisis management" capability. Relations with Russia and the Northern Dimension will also be among its main priorities. On Russia, relations "will not be restricted to trade and energy issues; the aim is a broad-based partnership with Russia based on our common European values and global interests".
Justice and home affairs
The Finnish presidency will conduct a "thorough political review of progress in building an area of freedom, security and justice". The political will of the Member States will be tested over police and criminal matters, where Finland wants to see qualified-majority voting and the Community method. Mutual recognition of judicial cooperation, as in the successful example of the European arrest warrant, must also move ahead.
Illegal immigration must be tackled not just through border controls but also cooperation with countries of origin and transit. And Finland is keen for an EU asylum policy to be in place by 2010.
Mr Vanhanen concluded by saying that the Union must look forward. He believed that to deal with the challenges it faces "the answer in most cases is rather more Europe than less Europe". Moreover, urgency is needed. "The world around us is not going to stop and wait".
European Commission President
José Manuel BARROSO , President of the European Commission, in his address to the Parliament said he looked forward to working with the Finnish Presidency. The Commission and presidency would work in tandem, "Europe needs harmony and this is what Finland would bring". The next 6 months, he said, would be an opportunity to demonstrate how Europe could deliver concrete results including the next steps in the constitutional process and enlargement. "It is the time to move from the period of reflection to the period of engagement".
On enlargement, President Barroso said that it had been one of the most successful policies of the EU, "an extraordinary achievement, Europe does not enlarge by default, but for the benefit of all, an enlarged Europe was a precondition for a powerful Europe". Mr Barroso said that, in the autumn, the Commission would present its latest enlargement report which would be about the capacity of an enlarged Europe to function properly.
On Turkey, President Barroso said that it would be a long and sometimes bumpy road but both Turkey and the EU would have to fully respect their commitments including the respect of the Ankara protocol.
On the relationship with Russia, Mr Barroso welcomed the Finnish Presidency's prioritisation of this point. The EU and Russia were working together towards a new comprehensive partnership which includes a free trade area once Russia has acceded to the WTO and a new partnership on energy. Mr Barroso also stressed the importance of the Northern Dimension including the creation of a parliamentary side to this.
President Barroso said that Europe's economy was picking up pace and the Commission would publish a "short-paper on innovation" for the forthcoming summit. It was important, he said, to promote venture capital including for SMEs.
Turning to freedom, security and justice, he stressed the importance of fighting trafficking, illegal immigration and the terrorism. On implementation of EU law, President Barroso pointed out that only 5 Member States had ratified the framework directive to combat the sexual exploitation of children.
It would be necessary to improve the EU's procedures over the next months as well as making progress on the Doha Development agenda. President Barroso said that he looked forward a more self-confident Europe over the next six months which would export its values.
Political group speakers
For the EPP-ED group, Hans-Gert POETTERING (DE) said that, as in football, "friendly competition" and "fair play" were essential in EU affairs. He likened the successive Council presidencies to a chain, of which each part must be strong, and expressed confidence in Finland's ability to guide the Union's affairs.
The EU plans to issue a joint declaration on 25 March 2007 to mark the 50th anniversary of the Treaty of Rome. Mr Poettering said a priority for the EPP-ED group under the current Finnish presidency would be the creation of a working party at political level to pave the way for this event.
On relations with Russia, he said the EU needed this country to be a "reliable, stable, democratic partner". But he was against "friendship at all costs". Energy was important but so were human rights.
He concluded by wishing the Finnish presidency every success. "You have us on your side", he said.
Martin SCHULZ (PES, DE), leader of the Socialist group, backed the Finnish Prime Minister's argument that we need more Europe, not less. He was also glad to hear that Finland planned to ratify the Constitution, saying "we cannot solve our challenges with the set of tools we have".
On justice and home affairs, the "deficit in cooperation" must be removed. The public agreed on the need for EU powers on organised crime, and using the passerelle method was certainly not a form of "cherry picking" of the Constitution.
He also voiced concern about the drift towards the right in politics in several European countries, saying governments which included "right-wing extremists and xenophobes" were now sitting in the European Council. There was, in his view, a serious threat to fundamental freedoms in Europe. "Democracy is usually threatened, not from without but from within", he concluded.
For the ALDE group, Graham WATSON (UK) began by saying "Mr President, with your presidency's emphasis on productivity, accountability and transparency, Finlandia is music to liberal ears". He praised Finland as country which "repeatedly tops the league tables for education, innovation and development".
Mr Watson gave his group's backing to the priorities such as the market-driven programme, including completing the internal market, particularly in services and energy, and the portability of supplementary pensions.
Finland was right to focus on the added value EU law could bring in the area of justice and home affairs. However, it "beggars belief that the law still has borders when criminals don't", he said. "For too long key initiatives on police and judicial cooperation have been stalled in Council". However, he stressed the need to use Article 42 of the Treaty to bring justice and home affairs matters within the Community sphere, so they could be decided democratically.
Mr Watson urged the Finnish presidency to "promote European values, human rights and democracy, so essential to the development of our world". Lastly, it was important for Europeans to "draw on aspects of our common history to create a common consciousness" just as the Kalevala, the Finnish national epic, had done in that country's history.
On behalf of his group, Daniel COHN - BENDIT (Greens/EFA, DE) complained that the Finnish prime minister had "said everything we should do but not how we should do it".
Referring to the "situation we have in Europe today", he spoke of the rise of right-wing parties in Slovakia, Poland and the Netherlands, and wondered about the significance of this for "a Europe of values".
Concerning Russia, he said "Europe is giving the impression of running after Putin because we're scared of losing their energy and we don't have any other option for energy". He added "That's the reality of Europe as it stands".
Turning to Mr Vanhanen's remarks on illegal immigration, Mr Cohn-Bendit believed the real need was "to organise legal immigration properly".
Mr Vanhanen had mentioned the Council of Europe in the context of enlargement. "Why did you not also mention the Council of Europe's discussion of the CIA?" he asked. This was what he should be discussing if he wanted to promote the rule of law in Europe.
Ultimately, the presidency must tackle the real issues. He concluded "You haven't given Europe any real direction. That's what was lacking in your speech".
For the GUE/NGL group, Esko SEPPÄNEN (FI)said that the last Finnish Presidency had taken step towards a "federal Union", and this presidency was continuing down the same line. The Union, he said, had set up "military institutions" and would be carrying out military missions in Congo. Turning to the ratification of the Constitutional Treaty in Finland, he said, only 22 per cent of the Finnish people supported it and the Finnish government did not respect the democratic will expressed by the French and Dutch peoples. He supported the Commission's move towards a free trade area with Russia.
Brian CROWLEY (IE) for the UEN group said that sometimes incoming presidencies can sound "stale" despite the brilliant ideas proposed. He too welcomed the priority given to the relationship with Russia which was, he said: "About more than energy, it is about geo-political stability". Mr Crowley also welcomed the Finnish Presidency's stance on transparency. He underlined the importance of bio-fuels and the importance of exporting the Finnish model on research and development. Finally, Mr Crowley stressed caution on the move from unanimity to qualified majority voting in the area of freedom, security and justice.
Nigel FARAGE (UK) for the IND/DEM group said it was "a déjà vu moment" with the repetition of speeches by incoming presidencies. He asked the Finnish Prime Minister who he was actually representing saying that only 38 per cent of the Finnish people had said that EU membership was a good thing. The recipe should not be "more Europe". It was only the "political classes" in Europe that believed this. He said it was a disgrace that the 25 Heads of State and government had decided to move from a period of reflection to a period of engagement. Mr Farage said in doing this, they were ignoring public opinion. Europe needed to deregulate and referenda should be carried out across Europe in all Member States on the Constitutional Treaty.
Non-aligned MEP, Frank VANHECKE (BE) said that the Finnish government was ignoring its democratic values by pressing on with the ratification of the Constitutional Treaty. He also said that Turkey should not become an EU Member State and most Europeans, he said, supported this view.
British speakers in the debate
Timothy KIRKHOPE (EPP-ED, UK), leader of the British Conservative delegation in the EP, said that the Finnish Prime Minister would offer a practical presidency. He welcomed the presidency's positions on transparency and openness, and Mr Kirkhope also welcomed the opening up of Council meetings "despite the crass efforts of the British Foreign Secretary". He called for proper assessments on the need to legislation saying the assumption should be not to legislate. He called for progress on the agenda of less legislation. Finally, Mr Kirkhope called for an end to the vexed question of the European Parliament's seat.
Ian HUDGHTON (Greens/EFA, UK) said that stateless nations like Scotland and Catalonia looked to Finland as a role model of an independent state in its one hundredth anniversary year. He too welcomed Finland's position on transparency and subsidiarity. Mr Hudghton said a re-tabling of the Constitutional Treaty would be unacceptable as would continuing with the existing common fisheries policy. He also called for an end to the European Parliament meeting in Strasbourg.
Gary TITLEY (PES, UK) leader of the Labour MEPs in the EP, said Finland had a lot to teach everyone else, given its investment in high quality education and its balance between economic efficiency and social justice. He himself wished to emphasise three priorities: "action, action and action". "Our citizens are not interested in processes but in outcomes. We will be judged by outcomes", he said.
He described the arrest in Italy of a suspect in connection with the London bombings of 7 July 2005, which had been possible thanks to the European arrest warrant, as an example of successful EU law. But he pointed to shortcomings in crisis management and the fact that the single market was incomplete as being cases where the Member States still needed to deliver.
Sarah LUDFORD (ALDE, UK) focused first on the western Balkans, which she described as "a heavy responsibility for the EU". Encouragement (such as the granting of visas) must be coupled with pressure (to bring war crimes suspects to the Hague tribunal).
She then turned to justice and home affairs, depicting the EU as "dysfunctional" and complaining that five years after EU anti-terror legislation had been adopted it had still not been implemented by all Member States. She also accused EU governments of "complicity" in human rights breaches in the war on terror.
Finnish Prime Minister's response
The Finnish Prime Minister replied to many of the questions raised by MEPs. To some critics, he said he was indeed "technocratic" but that "a cool, collected approach is needed, given the passions in Europe today".
His country's presidency certainly hoped to emphasise "action" and "delivery", as stressed by some speakers. As to the claim that the EU had become a "laughing stock" with its common asylum policy, he in fact believed "this is exactly what Europe needs".
On Russia, he stressed that "energy policy must never be used as a weapon against other countries" but must be "business-based". He rebuffed a question about Finland's "neutrality" by saying that as a member of the EU it participated in its "common values and a shared foreign policy".
He did not believe the EU was engaging in a "military adventure", as one speaker had said, when it decided to send a mission to Congo. It was there "to safeguard democratic elections and thus bolster our core values".
In conclusion, if there was one thing he wished the Finnish presidency to be remembered for, it was for "badgering Europe about innovation policy".
Commission response to the debate
José Manuel BARROSO , responding to the debate for the European Commission, said that Europe is based on results and this would lead to greater support for Europe's values. Europe's institutions needed to be reformed, he said. "Nice does not go far enough". Europe would focus on innovation and the forthcoming summit in Finland could be a true benchmark for innovation in Europe. The EU, he said, had some of the best universities, researchers and science in the world, but Europe needs to concentrate on how this could be bridged into concrete results. On security freedom and justice, President Barroso said that the problems in Spain were in fact European problems that needed European solutions. On energy, Mr Barroso said that relationship with Russia was very important, and the Commission was in favour of a constructive partnership. He called for the promotion of diversification of energy supply in the countries of origin, transit and in the EU. President Barroso stressed the importance of "continuity" for EU presidencies which had been recognised in the Constitutional Treaty.
Finally he said: "Like on the football pitch, Europe is getting results and Europe can be proud again."
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Justice and home affairs
CIA "directly responsible" in some cases for illegal activities in Europe , says Parliament
2006-07-10 - 15:20
The CIA was in some cases directly responsible for the "illegal seizure, removal, abduction and detention of terrorist suspects" in Europe, says an interim report adopted by the European Parliament. The report also criticises the involvement and complicity by certain EU States. MEPs have also given the responsible Temporary Committee the green light to continue its work for another six months. The report was adopted by 389 votes in favour, 137 against with 55 abstentions.
The CIA, noted the European Parliament in its report, has been "directly responsible" in some cases for the extraordinary rendition, "illegal seizure, removal, abduction and detention of terrorist suspects on the territory of Member States, accession and candidate countries" - all of which constitute violations of fundamental rights under international law. As MEPs determined, the CIA - using aircraft hired by front companies - has made use of such practices for the illegal transfer of terrorist suspects to countries which frequently use torture during interrogations. With that in mind, MEPs call for extraordinary renditions to be "clearly prohibited" in international law.
Member States "may be held liable" for failure to comply with the European Convention of Human Rights, added MEPs. Under the case law of the European Court of Human Rights, EU countries have the positive obligation to prevent human rights violations on their territory -- and to carry out investigations "to ascertain whether their territory and their airspace" have been used in connection with human rights violations.
European governments taken to task
It is "implausible", say MEPs, "that certain European governments were not aware of the activities linked to extraordinary rendition taking place on their territory". Such involvement or complicity, they argue, was likely on the part of Italian authorities in the 2003 abduction of Egyptian cleric Abu Omar by CIA agents in Milan; on the part of Bosnian authorities in the abduction and transfer of six Bosnian nationals or residents of Algerian origin to Guantanamo Bay and on the part of Swedish authorities, who expelled Egyptian nationals Mohammed Al Zary and Ahmed Agiza, handing them over to CIA agents for transfer to Egypt. Likewise, the EP "condemns" the 2003 abduction of German national Khaled El-Masri by the CIA and "deplores the reluctance of [the FYROM authorities] to confirm that El-Masri was in Skopje and was probably being held there before his rendition to Afghanistan by CIA agents." Measures allegedly taken by the FYROM government to investigate the matter, the Parliament points out, were "inadequate."
National governments are also criticized for their solicitation of "diplomatic assurances" against torture - a practice the EP labels as "unacceptable" and contradictory to EU policy guidelines on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment. MEPs calls on EU countries to reject such assurances in the future.
At the same time, the EP noted that EU-Coordinator for Counter-Terrorism Gijs the Vries and CFSP High Representative Javier Solana had both told MEPs that they were not aware of any violation of national, European or international law by Member States cooperating with the CIA, adding that they were not competent to request relevant information from Member States.
EU-level action necessary
In several EU countries, reads the report, rules governing the activities of secret services seem "inadequate". As members point out, activities of foreign secret services on Member States' territory should be governed by more effective controls; to that effect, rules of cooperation should be established at EU level. Intelligence co-operation between EU countries and their allies, the EP argues, "should not be confused with the abandonment of sovereignty over European territory and airspace".
Citing "repeated violations" of the Chicago Convention on International Civil Aviation during flights carried out by the CIA in Europe - and underlining that no European country has made consistent efforts to ensure that civilian aircraft are used for purposes compatible with international human rights - the Parliament calls on the Commission to harmonise national laws on the use of national airspace and airports. Current European legislation, MEPs conclude, is "totally inadequate".
So far, no evidence of black sites in Europe
MEPs adopted an amendment tabled by the EPP-ED, in which they acknowledge that "the work of the temporary committee has so far not revealed any evidence or proof of the existence of secret prisons in the EU". The Parliament adds, however, that the committee will focus more closely on this subject in the months to come (AM 19). The issue was also the key point of the exchange of views between Council of Europe rapporteur Dick Marty and MEPs last Monday 3 July.
Next steps
Having "shown the need to carry out further checks" - reads the report - the Temporary Committee on the alleged use of European countries by the CIA for the transport and illegal detention of prisoners (TDIP) will continue its work for the remainder of its twelve-month term. The Committee's final report, therefore, is due to appear by January / February 2007.
MEPs plan, among other things, to invite the Secretary-General of NATO to a hearing to clarify the possible involvement of SFOR and KFOR forces in the illegal detention of the six Bosnians who still remain in Guantanamo. MEPs again call for the closure of the prison at Guantanamo, asking Member States to "take a proactive role" in finding a solution for the detainees.
Finally, most amendments tabled by the EPP-ED and UEN groups -- aimed to soften the accusations against the CIA and the US government (and to state that there is insufficient evidence of renditions) -- were rejected (example: AM 20, 32, 33, 38, 42). It is for this reason that many members of these two groups decided to vote against the report or abstained.
Debate
Ahead of the vote which took place on Thursday 6 July at midday, Parliament debated the interim report on the alleged use of European countries by the CIA for the transportation and illegal detention of prisoners. MEPs expressed differing views on the allegations with many claiming that the CIA had carried out such renditions and other MEPs saying there was little or no evidence.
Introducing the debate on the temporary committee's interim report, rapporteur Giovanni Claudio FAVA (PES, IT) told the House that it was being asked to contribute to establishing the truth about abuses committed in the name of the fight against terrorism. It was "the truth on denied rights", in other words "rights denied to those accused of being our enemies but who, as human beings, as suspects, have rights - to a fair trial, to a lawyer, to a jury and to dignified humane treatment."
He continued: "Without that, we don't have law, we just have arbitrary force, exercised by some countries and accepted by others."
He went on to say "Extraordinary renditions have been a fact - not an opinion - a fact that has even been admitted by the US Department of State". Moreover, "some EU Member States were complicit, some covered illegal operations, some just turned their backs."
His committee had tried to get to the truth. It had "reconstructed in detail a very complex system of flights, of ghost planes used by the CIA and of flight plans". Many suspects were bundled on to them and into prison. "These flights stopped over at our airports and benefited from our silence". In his committee, he said, "we are trying to give voice to those whose rights have been silenced."
In conclusion, he asked the House to authorise his committee to continue its work.
Presidency of the Council
Speaking for the Presidency of the Council, Finland's Minister for Foreign Trade and Development, Paula LEHTOMÄKI said it was important that the European Parliament and the Council of Europe had taken the initiative to investigate these issues. “Fundamental rights in Europe and actions to combat terrorism cannot be in conflict with each other.” She said the treaties did not give the EU an power to deal with these issues, since the monitoring of intelligence services was a matter for the Member States. Nevertheless, she said the Council had not been passive, pointing to debates in November 2005 and a letter written by the then UK Presidency to US Secretary of State Condoleeza Rice. Dr Rice had made a detailed statement, saying that the US respected international agreements and the sovereignty of other countries – and did not transport people to countries where they would be tortured. Ms Lehtomäki added that dialogue with the United States administration on human rights issues was frequent, with both sides agreeing that international law must be respected. The EU had called for the closure of the Guantanamo Bay detention centre, and had welcomed President Bush's comment that he was willing to close it. “In the Presidency, Finland will continue to keep human rights issues on the agenda of our dialogue with the US,” she concluded.
European Commission
Franco FRATTINI , Vice-President of the European Commission responsible for Justice, Freedom and Security, said that, on the eve of the first anniversary of the London bombings, this debate was an excellent opportunity to recall that the fight against terrorism is a key priority for the Commission. The respect of fundamental rights was paramount as any wavering from this could be used involuntarily as reasons for propaganda against the international community.
Mr Frattini stated that the Commission had worked closely with the Temporary Committee and had requested data from Euro-control which turned out to be a key source in the report. The Commission had also provided satellite images when requested.
On three separate occasions, Mr Frattini said that he had called on the Council and the Member States with the European Parliament Temporary Committee. He said that those Member States that had not carried out their own investigations should do so. Commissioner Frattini said he would repeat this message at the next Justice and Home Affairs Council on 24 July. The Commission, he said, would also examine the possibility of defining at EU level the rules on non-commercial flights using state aircraft.
Political group speakers
For the EPP-ED group, Jas GAWRONSKI (IT) described the interim report as "very tendentious" and "taking into account only viewpoints that were critical of the US". Two examples, until now the committee had not wanted to include two statements by Gijs de Vries and Javier Solana because "they said things the committee didn't like". They had "said they were not aware of any violations of the law by any of the Member States of the European Union in cooperation with the CIA". In addition, an expert from Human Rights Watch, which had said "we have suspicions but no proof". If the US administration had made mistakes, he argued, that was because it was doing something. In short, his group was "decisively critical of this report and very disappointed too".
On behalf of the Socialist group, Wolfgang KREISSL-DÖRFLER (DE) argued that "the fight against terrorism should not be waged using the same weapons as the terrorists" and that "the end does not justify the means". "It has nothing to do with anti-Americanism", he stressed.
The question to be answered was "What is a secret service like the CIA entitled to do when it comes to even a friendly country. How are they entitled to act?" He added "If there is suspicion of someone being a terrorist, you have to subject them to the rule of law." In conclusion, he said "we must demonstrate that the EU is not prepared to give up its freedoms in the name of the fight against terrorism."
For the Liberals, Sarah LUDFORD (UK) emphasised that in the EU "the area of justice and human rights is not working properly". Some Member States had not implemented EU anti-terror legislation five years after it had been passed. Some did not even have a definition of terrorism. The result was that terrorists can escape conviction and imprisonment. Yet, "at the same time it is apparent that gross human rights abuses have been committed as part of the so-called war on terror". So "the EU has allowed a situation to develop where we can't prosecute terrorists but we can persecute terrorist suspects". "What credibility", she went on, "does this give the EU at home or abroad either for effectively combating terrorism or for upholding human rights?"
The committee, she said, had heard testimony and seen corroborating evidence such as flight logs. It was "implausible" for governments not to have known about these matters and the burden of proof was now being shifted on to them. "This conspiracy of silence must stop".
Speaking for the Greens/EFA group, Cem OZDEMIR (DE) said the practices at the centre of the investigation skirted international law and in particular the right to due procedure. It was a case of delivering people to a country where they risked being tortured or inhuman treatment: “Most victims were arrested illegally, many have disappeared. We heard individuals speak of torture and inhuman treatment.” He said the “outsourcing” of torture made it difficult to estimate the sale of infringements. He mentioned the Chicago convention on air transport, under which the US and some EU governments had argued that the flights were private – the EU states, he said, were ignoring their right to investigate suspected criminal action under that same convention. “When it comes to torture, every state should take legal steps against those responsible. Italy is going along with that commitment, we should respect that and ask others to follow their example.”
Giusto CATANIA (IT), for the GUE/NGL group, said that the committee's work had shown that extraordinary renditions were part of what he called the mistaken strategy of combating terrorism through pre-emptive war and the scaling back of the rule of law: “This has increased and radicalised terrorism and encouraged the terrorist's goals.” More than half the detainees at Guantanamo Bay had been abducted in Afghanistan, he said, which showed that NATO and European countries had been used as staging posts. He said statements by John Bellinger and Condoleeza Rice showed that, “European governments were complicit in CIA activities in Europe.” He wanted Commissioner Frattini to clear up what he did or did not know when he was an Italian minister.
Konrad SZYMANSKI (PL) spoke for the UEN group. He said he wanted to soften the language of the report, which spoke of certainty and fact where there was, in his view, room for doubts. “Until we know the scale of the phenomenon, there is nothing which allows us to say that there has been a serious violation of human rights.” He spoke of the gap of interpretation between Europe, which wanted to treat terrorists as criminals to be dealt with in the ordinary courts, while the Americans act more in line with the laws of war, which I think is more appropriate, but it does create a legal vacuum. He said there international law needed to be enhanced to deal with the current situation.
Miroslaw PIOTROWSKI (PL), for the IND/DEM group, said the temporary committee had failed to fulfil its task. “There is not even one small piece of information that was previously unknown, just a repetition of unfounded media information. There is nothing to say we will get more facts by prolonging the work, so why waste taxpayers' money?” He said the process was driven by political and propaganda motives, by socialists and liberals who would take any opportunity to attack the US and its allies. In the previous centuries, socialists “committed many acts which would now be considered terrorist – their affection for such action continues, including among some in this House.”
The non-attached MEP Philip CLAEYS (BE) said the committee has found no evidence that CIA had engaged in illegal activities. “There are just suspicions and insinuations. Some left wing colleagues just want a stage for their anti-Americanism.” If this was do be pursued, he said, it should be by the national authorities who were competent to do so.
British and Irish speakers
Eoin RYAN (UEN, IE) said that everybody in the House supported the fight against terrorism, the important point was how this was achieved. The Americans, he said, must respect the rule of law. He said the USA had acted arbitrarily in finding allies in the United Nations. The experience of Ireland had shown how terrorist organisations were built up through popular support despite being almost dismantled on several occasions. He said that it is an "undeniable fact" that rendition flights have taken place.
Roger HELMER (UK) a non aligned MEP said that after 50 hours of hearings "not a scrap of evidence" had been produced. The report was "devoid of facts and entirely circumstantial." Evidence of flights was not the same as evidence for CIA renditions. There was no evidence and it only served as a platform for anti-Americanism.
Jean LAMBERT (Greens/EFA, UK) asked whether the EU and the Member States had really been the "good guys" on this issue. The facts had unearthed two or three clear renditions but there could be more, she said. Questions remained on whether the present law was adequate and if the law was being used effectively and fair. Ms Lambert also questioned the new memoranda of understanding between the EU and third countries regarding the extradition of suspects.
Gerard BATTEN (IND/DEM, UK) said that it was entirely predictable that the report asked for greater powers for the EU such as the harmonisation and sharing of intelligence in the EU. The report stated that some illegal renditions had taken place, but it was unlikely, he said, that the truth would ever come out.
Proinsias DE ROSSA (PES, IE) said that you could never justify the means by claiming that the ends were "noble". "We can not defend our values by abandoning them." It was regrettable that some MEPs would be voting against the report for simple party political reasons. EU Member States, he said, had acted actively and passively in the rendition flights. In Ireland, there had been 50 such flights including the flight from Italy to Egypt of Abu Omar.
Seán Ó NEACHTAIN (UEN, IE) said he was pleased that the interim report "does not make any findings against the Irish government". He therefore wished to "totally refute" the claims made by Proinsias De Rossa . Shannon airport had been the loser in this matter, as the US authorities had now decided not to use it for refuelling purposes, costing the airport €10 million in lost revenue. This was "a result of the unfounded allegations made Proinsias De Rossa and others". "They should establish the facts before they speak", he said.
"In the past torture was mainly committed by dictatorial regimes. Now it's being promoted by democratic states", Kathy SINNOTT (IND/DEM, IE) told the House. Closing Guantánamo was not the answer as many prisoners transferred would be tortured elsewhere. "The UN and the Red Cross should have compulsory access to all prisoners everywhere", she urged, adding "the EU and Member States should provide more finance for the care of survivors of torture."
Sajjad KARIM (ALDE, UK) said that it was clear that the CIA was directly responsible for abduction, detention and extraordinary rendition in EU Member States. It was clear that the security services in some Member States were acting outside proper governmental control. In the UK, there was the shoot to kill policy that had led to the death of Jean Charles de Menezes in London following the tragic bombings.
Claude MORAES (PES, UK) said that he commended the position of the rapportuer Mr FAVA as it took a balanced approach. It said it was important to extend the committee's mandate in order that the truth could be established. There was a clear difference between anti-Americanism and standing up for human rights. People that had written to me, he said, after the London bombings were not "anti-American" but wanted to ensure that this would not happen again.
Charles TANNOCK (EPP-ED, UK) said he had opposed the setting up of the committee from the start and that its work should stop straight away. It was, he said, an expensive duplication of the work of the Council of Europe, reflecting the desire of the left and liberals to bash America. The report was heavy on supposition and light on proof, he said. While some excesses were inevitable in such a vast enterprise as America's war on terror, he said, "there was not systematic US policy of sending people to be tortured in third countries or to secret camps in Poland." He said there was a vast black hole in international law when it came to dealing with terrorism, which could not be filled by "sticking to the comfortable old ways." He added that the immediate closure of Guantanamo Bay would not be helpful, as many of the inmates posed a real risk to the security of EU states, and they could not be deported to their home countries as they might be tortured or executed.
Simon COVENEY (EPP-ED, IE) said an honest assessment of the committee's work was that there was a mixed picture. "There is frustration that new evidence and facts have not come forward, but it has been useful in outlining an exposing those facts which were already available. We need to be realistic, we are not a court, but politicians trying to draw conclusions based on a balance of probabilities." He regretted that some were reduced the debate to a question of being pro- or anti- American. It was not anti-American to criticise extraordinary rendition or to want to know more, especially if European countries were involved, he said. The report was not perfect, he concluded, but if EPP amendments were accepted, it would be worth supporting.
European Commission response to the debate
Vice-President Franco FRATTINI said that he recognised that there had been several different views expressed by MEPs. He stressed that the Commission had, as early as last February, set up structured political dialogue with the US authorities at expert level and the Finnish Presidency would be making further proposals in this area.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Justice and home affairs
MEPs ask European Central Bank to explain its role in the SWIFT case
2006-07-10 - 15:20
The European Parliament adopted a resolution expressing its serious concern on the "climate of deteriorating respect for privacy and data protection" being created by US security measures to fight terrorism. The last case --US government demanding international money transfer records from the Belgium-base society SWIFT-- has created unrest in Europe and made MEPs demand the European Central Bank (ECB) to explain if it was aware of the secret agreement between SWIFT and the American government.
How to balance security and privacy in transatlantic relations? A recurrent question posed many times since 9/11 and which remains without a satisfactory answer. According to MEPs, the fact that the U.S. government gained access to financial personal data of European citizens by subpoenaing the Society for Worldwide Inter-bank Financial Telecommunications (SWIFT) breaks EU law and poses a real danger: "data managed by SWIFT makes it possible to detect not only transfers linked to illegal activities, but also information on the economic activities of the individuals (...), and this could give rise to large-scale forms of economic and industrial espionage."
Parliament stresses in its resolution that all transfers of personal data to third countries are subject to data protection legislation at national and European level. Data transfers must be authorised by a judicial authority and any derogation from this rule must be "proportional and founded on a law or international agreement."
Of special concern is the fact that MEPs have never been informed before of these SWIFT transfers, even if the EU is currently negotiating a new regulation on the kind of information which must accompany the transfer of funds (see Alvaro report). Therefore they demand EU institutions and the ECB "to explain fully the extent to which they were aware of the secret agreement between SWIFT and the US government." For that purpose, MEPs propose the organisation as soon as possible of a joint hearing with the ECB and other institutions "in order to uncover what information they might have known about."
MEPs also demand the European Data Protection Supervisor to verify whether, in according with existing EU rules, the ECB was "obliged to react" to the possible violation of data protection which had come to its knowledge. Finally, the Parliament stresses its "great disappointment with the Council's unwillingness" to improve the current legislative situation on data protection in III pillar issues and "strongly disapproves of any secret operations on EU territory that affect the privacy of EU citizens."
Debate - Wednesday 5 July 2006
In recent weeks, media reports have revealed that the American authorities -- acting in the name of the fight against terrorism -- were able to gain access to European citizens' personal financial data by issuing a subpoena to the Society for Worldwide Inter-bank Financial Telecommunications (SWIFT).
Speaking on behalf of the Presidency, Paula LEHTOMÄKI , the Finnish Minister for European Affairs, opened the debate by stating that "unfortunately, the Council is unable to confirm reports in the media about exchanges of information between SWIFT and the American authorities". As she saw it, "it is up to the national authorities to do this". She did point out, however, that several pieces of legislation currently before the Council -- one being the framework decision on data protection in judicial and police cooperation -- are set "to ensure that EU citizens' personal data [held by public authorities] are afforded a high level of protection". Moreover, she later added, the EU would be ready to act "if it turns out that things have taken place that require legislation at the European level".
Justice, Freedom and Security Commissioner Franco FRATTINI noted that the European Commission -- having "only partial information" on the matter -- has requested additional reports "on how the American authorities obtained access to data on financial transactions held by SWIFT." At present, Mr. Frattini acknowledged, "it seems that there was a transfer of financial information between private companies from the EU to the United States." The information now at the Commission's disposal, he emphasised, "was not passed on to the Commission previously".
Since it is national authorities who are primarily responsible for the proper application of data protection rules, added the Commissioner, "I trust that [...] Member States will take all the necessary action to ensure that their national data protection legislation is properly applied and strictly enforced." Should developments in the SWIFT affair make it necessary, he said, the Commission "will make full use" of its powers under the treaties. At this stage, however, he noted, "I do not know whether this would be appropriate, as we have first to learn from the Belgian authorities what exactly happened, how and why."
"SWIFT apparently [...] has handed over data to the CIA," said Ewa KLAMT (EPP-ED, DE) -- this being a "question of misuse of financial data." In her view, Parliament is unsure of what legal framework to refer to in dealing with the affair: as she put it, "we don't really know precisely what the area is that we're dealing with". That said, it is "urgent" that Parliament takes a look at European legislation "to ensure that there are provisions for this kind of protection".
The US authorities, said Martine ROURE (PES, FR), have put in place a programme to monitor financial transactions processed by SWIFT -- "these are facts that President Bush and SWIFT have themselves confirmed." The European Union should investigate, therefore, whether the European Central Bank, as one of its institutions, was aware of such activities. The European Data Protection Supervisor, she added, should "ensure that the ECB" -- which forms part of an international committee which oversees SWIFT's activity -- "has respected European legislation".
Jean-Marie CAVADA (ALDE, FR) was disappointed with the Council Presidency's reaction to the SWIFT affair. Even if Council "doesn't have the necessary judicial or political means" to deal with this scandal, he said, reacting to Mrs. Lehtomäki's remarks, that "does not exempt you" from making a show of "moral virtue" and telling us "what you think" about this issue. He added: "if we could resolve this matter under your presidency, it would be a great achievement". The US has been operating secret flights and renditions in Europe, he remarked at the end of his intervention -- now it is "rifling through our private bank accounts".
Giusto CATANIA (GUE/NGL, IT) echoed such sentiments when he noted that "we would be mistaken if we understood the SWIFT case as an isolated matter". The case, as he saw it, "is the other side of the coin as rendition". With all this in mind, he added, European citizens now find themselves confronted with "what George Orwell called 'Big Brother'".
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Environment
Reducing the climate change impact of civil aviation
2006-07-10 - 15:20
International aviation is neither subject to Kyoto or other commitments nor to fuel tax or VAT. In a report adopted by 439 votes in favour to 74 against and 102 abstentions, MEPs proposed that the EU takes a leadership position in global aviation in order to reduce the climate change impact of aviation. Parliament advocates an aviation scheme as well as its inclusion in the EU Emissions Trading Scheme (ETS).
The scope of the aviation scheme
MEPs back the immediate introduction of kerosene taxes by requiring a tax on all domestic and intra-EU flights (with the possibility to exempt all carriers on routes on which non-EU carriers operate). They also call on the Commission to propose arrangements for their worldwide introduction. Furthermore, they agree that tax exemptions on air transport and other imbalances lead to very unfair competition between aviation and other transport sectors, and therefore ending the VAT exemption would further level the playing field, and bring fiscal as well as environmental benefits.
Parliament says that a comprehensive package of measures is needed to address the impact of aviation on the climate, as well as applying the “polluter pays” principle. The House emphasises the need for a method, which also properly reflects the sector's dynamic nature, and rewards past and future good performance.
MEPs ask that special attention be paid to the situation of the most isolated territories which are particularly dependent on air transport services, and especially to insular or outermost regions, where alternative solutions are limited, or do not exist.
On inclusion of aviation into the EU ETS
Parliament recognises that emissions trading has the potential to play a role as part of a comprehensive package of measures to address the climate impact of aviation, provided it is appropriately designed. MEPs stress that the environmental effectiveness of any emissions trading scheme will depend on it having sufficiently broad geographical scope; a rigorous cap; full auctioning of initial allocation; the technological level and early actions taken into account in the allocation; and addressing full climate impact.
Parliament proposes, however, the introduction of a separate dedicated scheme for aviation emissions, recognising that, due to the lack of binding commitments for international aviation emissions under the UNFCCC (United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change) and the Kyoto Protocol, the aviation sector would be unable to actually sell into the ETS.
The report stresses that, if aviation is to be eventually incorporated into the wider ETS, there should at least be a pilot phase of a separate scheme covering the period 2008-2012.
MEPs propose that, should aviation be eventually incorporated into a wider ETS, special conditions be applied to ensure it does not distort the market to the detriment of less protected sectors: a cap on the number of emission rights it is permitted to buy from the market, and a requirement to make a proportion of the necessary emissions reductions without trading, before being allowed to buy permits.
Finally, the House asked the Commission to present immediately an impact assessment on the specific parameters of its design proposals, e.g. level of cap for aviation, compliance, choice of participating entity (aircraft operators, airlines or airports), and to present proposals to ensure that the ETS will be applicable to airlines from outside the European Union
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Environment
Batteries to be collected and recycled, nature protected
2006-07-10 - 15:20
After two years of negotiation, MEPs approved a directive which will ensure that schemes for collecting spent portable batteries and accumulators are set up throughout Europe by 2008. Only six Member States currently have such schemes. Collected batteries will be recycled. Strict limits to the content of cadmium and mercury in batteries have also been fixed, as these substances are harmful to the environment and health.
"This is the sixth piece of legislation we have agreed under conciliation in this parliamentary term", said Dagmar ROTH-BEHRENDT (PES, DE), who led the European Parliament delegation. "Once more Parliament has managed to improve the draft legislation a great deal. There was a constructive spirit of negotiation on both sides, in the Parliament and the Council. This new directive will help consumers to consume more intelligently and producers to reduce pollution, such as mercury, cadmium and lead, from the products they sell".
Karl-Heinz FLORENZ (EPP-ED, DE), chair of Parliament's Environment Committee, pointed out that "there can be no recycling without collection. Collection schemes and the requirement for distributors to take back waste batteries are the key points of this directive, in my view. Another important point is the registration of producers using similar procedures in all Member States. That should prevent us having the same problems as those we now have with the directive on waste electrical and electronic equipment".
Target of 45%
In 2002 the collection rates of portable batteries in the six countries which have already set up schemes were: Belgium 59%, Sweden 55%, Austria 44%, Germany 39%, the Netherlands 32% and France 16%. The new directive lays down minimum collection rates to be reached by all Member States: 25% by 2012 and 45 % by 2016.
Everything will depend on the quality of the schemes set up, the information provided to consumers and the willingness of the latter to play their part. Things will be much easier now for consumers: labels will have to indicate the real capacity of the batteries and accumulators they buy.
In the view of Johannes BLOKLAND (IND/DEM, NL), who drafted Parliament's report on the directive, this represents important progress: "This provision was not in the original proposal but Parliament thought the consumer should be able to choose higher-performance and long-life batteries. Cheap batteries are not necessarily the best choice for the environment if they have a shorter life. As of 2009, labels on all batteries and accumulators must show their real capacity."
Other points of the directive
Entry into force and transposition. The directive enters into force on the day it is published in the Official Journal (in the course of 2006) and the Member States have two years to transpose it into national law.
Bans. The directive bans the sale of batteries and accumulators containing more than 0.0005% of mercury and 0.002% of cadmium, except emergency and alarm systems, medical equipment and cordless power tools.
Collection schemes. Easily accessible collection points must be available to consumers in their own neighbourhood two years after the directive enters into force (2008). Thanks to Parliament, distributors will have to take back the spent portable batteries and accumulators at no cost to the consumer and regardless of when they were placed on the market. And they must inform consumers that this possibility exists.
Information. Producers must bear any net costs of information campaigns.
Registration. All producers must be registered and, at Parliament's insistence, this must be done under similar procedures in all Member States, to ensure producers cannot duck their responsibilities.
Exemptions. Parliament has sharply reduced the possible exemptions from the rules on collection and recycling that Member States wanted for small producers. These exemptions will be subject to strict conditions regarding compliance with competition rules.
Recycling rates. The targets laid down in the directive for recycling are 65% by average weight for lead-acid batteries and accumulators, 75% for nickel-cadmium and 50% for others.
Removability. At Parliament's insistence, manufacturers will have to design appliances in such a way that spent batteries and accumulators can be easily removed.
Research. The EP has added provisions to the directive to encourage research into better technologies for recycling and for manufacturing less polluting batteries.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Environment
Conciliation: more transparency for an environmentally-friendly Europe
2006-07-10 - 15:20
MEPs approved a conciliation agreement which means Europe's citizens will in future have easier access to information on the environment and be able to play a more active role in EU decisions in this area. Under the new regulation agreed, the EU's institutions will be required to comply with the rules of the Aarhus Convention.
This convention, concluded in 1998 under the auspices of the UN, aims to involve Europe's citizens in environmental policies by entitling them to gain access to information and to participate in decision-making and, if these rights are not respected, to take legal action to enforce them. The new EU regulation, the remaining points of which were agreed, will apply these rules to the institutions and bodies of the European Union.
MEPs fight for the public's rights
"This regulation is a new step towards more openness and transparency in the European institutions. Much has already been done in this field but the public and environmental organisations will now have the best possible opportunity to obtain information and to participate fully in European affairs", said Alejo VIDAL-QUADRAS ROCA (EPP-ED, ES), chair of the EP delegation to the Conciliation Committee.
Parliament took the negotiations to the final stage of the co-decision procedure - involving "conciliation" between representatives of the EP and the Member States - in order to defend the public's rights. Eija Riitta KORHOLA (EPP-ED, FI), who piloted the legislation through Parliament, said: "In these negotiations the EP has strongly supported the rights of citizens and made it easier for them to obtain better information and to do so more quickly. For example, we have introduced longer time-limits for citizens to take action and tougher requirements on the institutions to open their files."
María SORNOSA MARTÍNEZ (PES, ES)who represented the Socialist group in the exploratory talks, said: "Everyone wins: this regulation will put pressure on the institutions to conduct policies which are more in line with the public's interests."
This was one of the points most frequently stressed by the Environment Committee: "We in the Environment Committee are extremely concerned about the management and implementation of Community policies. This regulation is to be welcomed as it will make the institutions more accountable", was the satisfied reaction of Karl-Heinz FLORENZ (EPP-ED, DE), who chairs the committee.
The detail of the agreement
Access to information. Thanks to the EP, access to information will cover information held by subcontractors and include data not available in electronic format as well as information on the different steps in legal proceedings for infringements of Community law.
MEPs also succeeded in limiting some exceptions wanted by the Council, although not those relating to banking activities (notably the EIB). But, at Parliament's insistence, any other exceptions can only be interpreted in a restrictive manner. However, to ensure that any infringement cases launched by the Commission against the Member States proceed smoothly, information on any current cases will be confidential.
All information made available to the public will be provided free of charge
Public participation. A time-limit of at least eight weeks must be set for receiving comments from persons or organisations with an interest in EU environmental projects. When hearings or meetings are held, they must be announced at least four weeks in advance. And, in particular, Community institutions and bodies must take "due account" of this public-participation process. Parliament successfully pushed for this point to be made compulsory.
Internal review and access to justice. Who can request an internal review and take a case to court? The answer is: independent and accountable organisations which have demonstrated that their primary objective is to promote environmental protection. They must first lodge an application for internal review within six weeks after the administrative decision in question has been taken. Only then can they go to the Court of Justice of the European Communities.
Implementation. The Council and Commission were keen to have sufficient time to prepare for the new rules. Following pressure from Parliament, the institutions will have to adapt their internal rules swiftly to apply the new regulation. This should be done by mid-2007, nine months after the regulation is published in the Official Journal.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Regional policy
MEPs approve €308bn Structural Funds 2007-13 package
2006-07-10 - 15:20
Parliament gave the green-light to the Structural Funds package for 2007 to 2013 with the adoption of five separate reports. They define the objectives, the financial resources available and the criteria for their allocation in an enlarged EU. Around €308 billion - or 35.7 per cent of the total EU budget - will now be available to spend, as scheduled, from 1 January 2007. The structural funds aim to increase solidarity and reduce disparities between regions of the EU.
General Regulation
The first report adopted by 533 votes in favour, 41 against and 53 abstentions lays down the general provisions on the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF), European Social Fund (ESF) and the Cohesion Fund.
Although the European Parliament only has assent powers over the general regulation (i.e. it can accept or reject the package but not amend it), the rapporteur Konstantinos HATZIDAKIS (EPP-ED, EL) and the Parliament successfully negotiated with the Austrian Presidency to have many of the MEPs' demands included in the Council’s position, including:
- enhancement of the environmental aspect, in particular sustainable development, in the management of Structural Funds and Cohesion Fund and introduction of a new article which would ensure that this dimension is always taken into account in the implementation of the Funds;
- a specific mention of the fact that Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund should support the improvement and promotion of accessibility for people with disabilities;
- the strengthening of the partnership principle: namely that any other appropriate body representing civil society, environmental partners, non-governmental organisations and bodies responsible for promoting equality between men and women can take part in the structural funds partnership negotiations.
The Council rejected however the Parliament’s idea of a common declaration of Council, Commission and Parliament on a Community performance reserve which would have aimed to re-use unspent structural funds money instead of it returning to the general EU budget.
Mr Hatzadakis said: "As a Greek citizen, I can say this is the end of a marathon, it means there has been no cuts in the cohesion budget and it means that European tax payers money will be spent more effectively and efficiently".
European Regional Development Fund (ERDF)
After negotiations with rapporteur Claudio FAVA (PES, IT) and the European Parliament, the Council has taken on board the main concerns of the Parliament, for the ERDF:
On VAT, the Commission had proposed to render eligible non-recoverable VAT only in the case of the European Social Fund. The European Council concluded that non-recoverable VAT would be eligible under the rules of the ERDF, ESF and the Cohesion Fund only for those Member States whose GDP does not exceed 85% of the average EU GDP. Parliament requested that this should be extended to cover all Member States. The Council finally agreed to this request.
On housing, the Commission proposed to render housing ineligible. The European Council proposed to provide for the eligibility of housing in the ERDF Regulation for Member States whose GDP does not exceed 85% of the average EU GDP. The Council finally included in its common position a specific provision, taking into account amendments proposed by the European Parliament in its first reading, rendering eligible housing expenditure for the costs of social housing renovation aimed at saving energy and protecting the environment.
Cohesion Fund
On the Cohesion Fund, Parliament and the rapporteur Alfonso ANDRIA (ALDE, IT) backed the increase from €18 billion (for the period 2000-2006) to €61.59 billion with the adoption of a report with 567 votes in favour 29 against and 36 abstentions.
Following the Union’s enlargement on 1 May 2004, the Cohesion Fund applies to the 10 new Member States until the end of 2006, as well as to the three Member States eligible at the end of the 2000-2006 period (Greece, Portugal and Spain). To benefit from the Cohesion Fund, a Member State's per capita Gross National Income (GNI) must be less than 90% of the Community average National Income, which is the case for all the new Member States.
European territorial cooperation
This is a new objective proposed by the Commission, building on the experience of the Interreg initiative (interregional cooperation). It is aimed at furthering the balanced integration of the EU's territory by supporting cooperation between regions across land or sea frontiers. It will include actions to promote integrated territorial development and support for interregional cooperation and the exchange of experiences.
As part of the deal on the financial perspective, MEPs secured a further €300 million extra for territorial cohesion. The House supports the idea that €200 million should be allocated to the trans-national area and the remaining €100 million should be given to inter-regional cooperation.
The Council decided to follow rapporteur Jan OLBRYCHT (EPP-ED, PL) and the European Parliament's suggestion of replacing the name of the instrument "European grouping of cross-border cooperation" with "European grouping of territorial cooperation".
European Social Fund
Parliament adopted a co-decision report in second reading approving the Council Common Position concerning the regulation on the European Social Fund (ESF) for 2007 to 2013.
The rapporteur underlined that Council had incorporated a great number of the Parliament's first reading amendments in its Common Position. Parliament wanted to strengthen aspects like the fight against social exclusion, non-discrimination and gender equality, as well as the integration of disabled people and inactive people, especially long term unemployed young people.
The ESF regulation for 2007 to 2013 provides a focussed framework for ESF interventions throughout the EU. It lays down specific provisions concerning the type of activities which may be financed by the ESF.
The ESF is the major financial instrument of European social policy. It contributes to the economic and social cohesion objective set in article 158 of the EC Treaty, by supporting policies and priorities aimed to achieve progress towards full employment, improve quality and productivity at work and promote social inclusion and cohesion in line with the guidelines and recommendations under the European Employment Strategy (EES).
In order to achieve this objective, the ESF needs to address three major challenges: employment disparities, social inequalities, skills gaps and labour shortage in an enlarged Union; economic and social restructuring due to globalisation and the development of the knowledge-based economy; demographic changes which have resulted in a shrinking and ageing workforce.
What next?
Following the adoption of the texts by plenary, the funds can be used from 1 January 2007. Before the money can be finally allocated to the Member States, the Commission will draw up, most likely in late July, Community Strategic Guidelines, on which Parliament will vote (under the assent procedure) in September. These are the starting point for the national reference frameworks and operational plans to be negotiated between the Commission and individual Member States in the Autumn.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Immigration
Immigration procedures and the integration of immigrants
2006-07-10 - 15:20
MEPs adopted two non-binding reports on asylum and immigration. The first report by Patrick GAUBERT (EPP-ED, FR) is on mutual information procedure in the areas of asylum and immigration and the second report is by Stavros LAMBRINIDIS (PES, EL) on strategies and means for the integration of immigrants in the European Union.
Parliament agrees with the general approach of the Commission proposal, which is to call on Member States to forward all proposed national measures in the field of asylum and immigration to the Commission, so that other Member States who may be affected by them can have early warning. The Parliament is asking for a few changes, notably a twice-yearly report by the Commission on the measures submitted, a more open debate on the political level in Council on immigration issues and MEPs also want to make the database open to the public.
The whole topic is of special importance to Spain because of its decision last year to regularise immigrants without consulting the other Member States of the Union, who could be affected by resulting migratory flows.
Integration of immigrants
In a second report by Stavros LAMBRINIDIS (PES, EL) on strategies and means for the integration of immigrants in the European Union come in response to the Commission's communication "A Common Agenda for Integration".
The report welcomes the Commission proposal to establish a European Fund for Integration of third-country nationals and suggests additional measures to help the integration of this population into the Union. MEPs call on the Commission to "create a permanent contact group of immigrant representatives, experts and NGOs" to advise it , to ensure that the EU institutions "reflect the composition of the Union's and the Member States' populations", and to "carry out a legal review of the existing provisions relating to EU civic citizenship in the various Member States [...] regarding the right of long-term resident immigrants to vote in local and municipal elections.". The Parliament also calls on the Member States to "establish transparent, humane, fast and reasonable procedures for the granting of long-term resident status," and encourages them to "consider appropriate affirmative action legislation for migrants". The House also urges the Council to give co-decision powers to the Parliament in this field.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External relations
Financial instruments for external relations
2006-07-10 - 15:20
Parliament adopted three reports on three "instruments" laying down the provisions for the financing of EU foreign policy under the financial perspective 2007-2013. In final negotiations between the three institutions this week, the Commission and the Council have agreed to Parliament's wish to have another, separate instrument for actions in the field of democracy and human rights.
The Commission adopted a proposal for such an instrument on Monday 26 June. Parliament insisted on a separate instrument to ensure adequate emphasis on human rights and democracy in the EU's foreign policy.
The negotiations over the past months concerned three foreign policy instruments and one financial instrument for development cooperation. On the latter, it was agreed on Monday that this should be split into three separate regulations, one for developing countries, one for industrialised countries and one for thematic programmes. Parliament will probably vote later on this in second reading.
The three foreign policy instruments to be voted next Wednesday are the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument, the Instrument for pre-accession assistance (IPA) and the Instrument for Stability (IfS). At Parliament's insistence all programmes will expire at the end of the next FP period, i.e. in 2013; there will also be a mid-term review. Parliament also saw its wish honoured that the funds allocated under the different instruments have a geographic and thematic break-down. This means that Parliament can scrutinise more in detail where the money is going to and has strengthened the political contents of the programmes.
The ENPI regulation (rapporteur Konrad SZYMAŃSKI (UEN, PL) will lay down the provisions for foreign policy programmes relating to the neighbouring countries to the east and south of the EU, viz. Algeria, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Egypt, Georgia, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Libya, Moldova, Morocco, Palestinian Authority, Russia, Syria, Tunisia and Ukraine. Parliament has co-decision powers here.
The second instrument is a regulation for pre-accession assistance (IPA). This framework regulation will replace Phare, Sapard, Ispa, Cards and other regulations. Beneficiary countries will be divided into two categories: candidate countries (Croatia, FYR of Macedonia and Turkey) and potential candidate countries (Albania, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Montenegro, Serbia). Potential candidate countries will receive help for institution building and democratisation, social and economic development, regional and cross-border cooperation. Candidate countries will additionally receive help in the preparation for the implementation of structural funds after accession. Parliament has consultation powers only here and the rapporteur is István SZENT-IVÁNYI (ALDE, HU).
Finally, there is the Instrument for Stability (IfS). This instrument is meant for providing peacekeeping actions, for helping other countries in the fight against organised crime, terrorism and other transnational threats and for helping other countries in a nuclear crisis or against the threat of weapons of mass destruction. Parliament has obtained co-decision powers here by taking out nuclear safety as a separate component. The rapporteur is Angelika BEER (Greens/EFA, DE).
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Economic and monetary affairs
Parliament calls for a decisive strategy on the impact of industrial restructuring
2006-07-10 - 15:20
MEPs adopted a resolution calling on the Commission to adopt a more decisive strategy to tackle industrial restructuring and its social impact. They consider that aid from public funds should be linked to long-term agreements by the management of a company in matters of employment and local development.
Parliament calls on the Commission to ensure that companies respect their social and financial responsibilities, act in a corporately responsible fashion and are fair to all stakeholders, including local and regional authorities and the communities where they are based.
MEPs call on the Commission and the Member States to promote a European dialogue on industrial restructuring as well as on structural reforms of the labour market to secure the advantages of globalisation, while minimising the negative social impact. They stress the importance of a well functioning European Works Council Directive that ensures that information and consultation of workers are properly carried out, and call on the Commission to evaluate of the application of the directive on collective redundancies and company closures and to make proposals for measures to ensure compliance.
Parliament welcomes the forthcoming Globalisation Fund, which will support workers and improve the social and educational infrastructure with regard to collective redundancies, and calls on the Council to adopt its Common Position as soon as possible after Parliament's first reading and to ensure that it can apply retrospectively where the effects of current closures carry over to 2007
Finally, MEPs express their solidarity with all the workers, their families and their communities affected by redundancies.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Public health
HIV/AIDS: MEPs say its "time to deliver"
2006-07-10 - 15:20
In adopting a joint resolution on "HIV / AIDS - Time to Deliver", MEPs welcomed the commitment to a massive scale-up of HIV prevention, treatment and care, with the aim of coming as close as possible to the goal of universal access to treatment by 2010 for all who need it, made at the 2005 meeting of the G8 nations and the September 2005 United Nations World Summit by world leaders and reconfirmed at the 2006 High-Level meeting on AIDS.
The House regretted, nevertheless, that the declaration lacks any global targets or timelines on treatment, resources and prevention, and does not provide a viable action plan to back up the goal of providing universal access for all HIV-affected people by 2010.
MEPs called on the international community to deliver on its promises during the Toronto Conference in August, and call on the Commission and Member States to ensure that health spending in developing countries reaches levels commensurate with the political commitments made. Parliament expresses grave concern at the fact that half of all new HIV infections occur among children and young people. The House expresses disappointment at the fact that, although a large number of infections occur due to the sharing of drug abuse needles, there are still no effective programmes in operation for providing clean needles to drug addicts in many countries, including Member States.
Parliament remains deeply concerned by the overall expansion and feminisation of the pandemic and the fact that women now represent 50% of people living with HIV worldwide and 60% of people living with HIV in Africa.
MEPs criticised the Commission's poor track record in development fund spending in the healthcare sector. The House stresses, for example, that in 2003 only 5.2% of the EDF was earmarked for health spending and only 4% in 2002, and deplores the fact that the Commission intends to propose that only 6% of development funds within the new development cooperation instrument be allocated to human and social development, covering not only healthcare, HIV/AIDS, sexual and reproductive health, but all other aspects of social development, including children, education and gender programmes.
The House called on the Commission to double its budget for healthcare in developing countries within the Development Cooperation Instrument and to aim for at least 50% of all ODA to be spent on achieving the Millennium Development Goals. MEPs also call on the Commission, when appropriate and subject to strict conditions, to allow for large increases in sectoral budgetary support to health sectors, particularly to retain key health workers in developing countries, and calls for the speeding-up of the recruitment and training of health-care workers at all levels..
MEPs called on the Commission and the Member States to work with UNAIDS in its role to build on and support national efforts to set in place inclusive, transparent processes, and ambitious national targets on HIV prevention, treatment, care and support.
Finally, the House called for comprehensive reviews of the progress achieved in realising the Declaration of Commitment on HIV/AIDS to be undertaken in 2008 and 2011, within the annual reviews of the UN General Assembly.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Development and cooperation
Fair Trade and Development - call for the Commission to act
2006-07-10 - 15:20
MEPs adopted an own-initiative report on fair trade development urging the Commission to issue a recommendation on Fair Trade, recognising that a non-binding legislative act is the appropriate form at this point in time and would not carry the risk of over-regulation.
The report stressed that the most significant part of the increase in Fair Trade sales has been achieved with respect to labelled products and that Fair Trade labelling initiatives have been developed in most European countries. The House calls on the Commission to undertake a study to examine how Fair Trade could develop into a model for sustainable trade policy which would be capable of stimulating balanced North-South trade, and identify the obstacles to trade which impact most seriously on the world's poor.
Parliament called on the Commission to recognise that there are also other credible schemes that, alongside the Fair Trade movement and under the umbrella of the International Social and Environmental Accreditation and Labelling Alliance (ISEAL), collaborate to define social and environmental standard-setting in third-party certification.
MEPs called on the Commission and Member States to take appropriate measures to ensure that consumers have access to all information they need in order to make informed choices. Parliament believes that consumers must have the right to access quickly product information, which must be easily comprehensible and presented in a transparent way.
The House called on the Commission to liaise with the international Fair Trade movement in supporting clear and widely-applicable criteria against which consumer assurance schemes can be assessed, underpinning consumer confidence in such schemes and consolidating the Fair Trade product sectors. The House also calls on the Commission to launch specific "calls for proposals" with objectives targeted at Fair Trade in order to raise consumer awareness, support assurance schemes and labelling, as well as systematic data collection and assessment of effects across the EU.
Parliament also urged the Commission to develop a coherent policy for the promotion and protection of small and marginalised producers, including Fair Trade, incorporating their views as well as the views of the producers of other independently monitored trading initiatives contributing to raising social and environmental standards, in bilateral, regional and multilateral trade negotiations, such as the Economic Partnership Agreements (EPAs). Finally, the report calls on the Commission to take the Fair Trade and other social and environmental trading approaches into account when formulating the EU trade policy.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Employment policy
Protecting workers against the risk of infection from contaminated needles
2006-07-10 - 15:20
Every year around a million workers in Europe, mainly in the medical world, suffer injuries from used surgical needles. The consequences can be serious, including infections from HIV or hepatitis B or C. The European Parliament wants to improve existing EU legislation so as to give workers better protection. MEPs adopted a report on this subject with 465 votes in favour, 18 against and 13 abstentions.
MEPs believe that many of these "needlestick injuries" which occur in the medical world could be prevented if appropriate measures were made compulsory in medical and veterinary services. In a report by Stephen Hughes (PES, UK), MEPs say studies have shown that the use of safer needles together with regular training and organisational measures can help reduce the number of injuries. They add that safer working practices and medical devices designed to prevent accidental needlestick injuries would also produce financial savings.
Parliament says the existing directives which should in theory cover these risks have not had the desired effect. It therefore calls on the Commission to add various new provisions to one of the directives intended to improve accident prevention and the protection of workers (Directive 2000/54/EC on the protection of workers from risks related to exposure to biological agents at work). MEPs want the Commission to put forward a proposal to amend this directive within three months.
This report was referred back to the committee by the June plenary session. In the vote, MEPs adopted some changes to the version originally adopted on 20 April 2006. These changes relate to the annex to the report in which the committee makes detailed recommendations as to the contents of the proposals requested from the Commission.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Industry
Cross-border shipments of radioactive waste
2006-07-10 - 15:20
Parliament adopted a report with a few non-binding amendments on a draft directive laying down a Community system for monitoring crossborder shipments of radioactive waste and spent fuel.
The Commission proposal would amend the existing Directive 92/3 Euratom. It seeks to modify terms and definitions, address new situations and ensure consistency with other Community and international texts.
It does not significantly alter the existing prior authorisation system but clarifies procedures, for example for Member States to consent to, or refuse to allow, shipments of waste and fuel into their territory.
Parliament's amendments seek to improve the new procedure for acknowledging receipt of applications for shipments. It wants to tackle the issue of liability for costs arising when the shipment cannot be completed. And it wishes to make it absolutely clear that any country has the right to ban imports both of radioactive waste for final treatment (except in the case of reshipment) and foreign spent fuel for final disposal.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Transport
New rules for flight-time limitations and rest periods
2006-07-10 - 15:20
Parliament adopted a second reading report on establishing harmonised technical provisions of aircraft engaged in commercial air transportation. These new provisions include, inter alia, flight and duty time limitations and rest requirements, instruments and equipment, communication and navigation equipment, maintenance and transport of dangerous goods by air.
In an adopted compromise amendment, tabled by EPP-ED, PES, ALDE and Greens/EFA, it was pointed out that the aim of this regulation is to provide harmonised safety standards of a high level, including in the field of flight and duty time limitations and rest periods. But in some Member States, collective labour agreements and/or legislation already exist which provide for better conditions as regards flight and duty time limitations and as regards working conditions for cabin crew.
MEPs stressed that nothing in this regulation should limit the possibility of concluding or retaining such agreements and that these Member States will be allowed to maintain legislation which contains more favourable provisions.
Flight and duty time limitations and rest periods
The maximum basic daily Flight Duty Period (FDP) is 13 hours, but can be extended by up to one hour. When a FDP starts at night (between 22:00h to 04:59h) the FDP is limited to a maximum of 11.45 hours. The minimum rest at "home base" shall be at least as long as the preceding duty period or at least 12 hours ("away from home", the minimum rest is at least 10 hours).
Parliament decided that, within two years after entry of the regulation (the Council had proposed three years) a scientific and medical evaluation of the provisions on flight and duty times limitations and rest requirements and, where relevant, of the provisions on cabin crews should be made.
Particular situation of express overnight cargo
The application of provisions regarding flight and duty time limitations can result in significant disruption of rosters for (in particular freight cargo) undertakings of which the operating models are exclusively based on night-time operation. Parliament demands that the Commission should, on the basis of evidence by the parties concerned, carry out an assessment and propose ad adjustment of the provisions regarding flight and duty time limitations to take account of these special operating models.
Harmonisation of cabin crew training
Finally, Parliament calls for the harmonisation of cabin crew training standards in order to create uniform, high standards. This should facilitate the free movement of cabin crew personnel within the Community. In this context the possibility of further harmonisation of cabin crew qualifications should be re-examined.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Transport
Inland waterway vessels - technical requirements
2006-07-10 - 15:20
Parliament adopted, with one minor amendment, the Council's common position on this draft directive on technical requirements for inland waterway shipping. The legislation covers areas from engine design and vessel manoeuvrability to crew safety and accommodation.
The aim is to align Community technical rules with the advanced standards governing navigation of the Rhine, so as to establish a single scheme for the entire European inland waterway network. The directive will create a level playing field in the single market for inland waterway transport, thereby increasing competition and promoting higher safety, environmental and social standards.
This is the final stage in a long process of revising the rules on inland waterway shipping which reached a standstill in Council because of a conflict of competences between the EC and the Central Commission for the Navigation on the Rhine. Under the new legislation, this conflict will be resolved by mutual recognition of certificates.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Petitions
Equitable Life - Committee of Inquiry mandate extended
2006-07-10 - 15:20
MEPs have endorsed the interim report of the committee of inquiry into the crisis of the Equitable Life Assurance Society, which asked for its one-year mandate to be extended by three months (i.e. to April 2007) to enable it to take account of a report by the UK Parliamentary Ombudsman which is due for publication in November.
The committee is investigating the crisis at Equitable Life, which resulted in major financial losses to over a million policyholders, mainly in the UK but also in Ireland and Germany. MEPs have so far heard evidence from British, Irish and German policyholders' representatives, the CEO of Equitable Life and the UK and Irish regulatory bodies. The interim report, by Diana WALLIS (ALDE, UK), simply updates MEPs on the work of the committee and calls for its investigation to continue.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Human rights
Democracy and human rights: Somalia, Mauritania and the Internet
2006-07-10 - 15:20
The Strasbourg plenary session concluded in its customary way with three debates on democracy and human rights around the world. In the resolutions it adopted following these debates, Parliament urges the different parties in Somalia to pursue the path of dialogue, it backs the democratisation process in Mauritania and it calls for the EU to support freedom of expression on the internet in countries where this is under threat.
Somalia
In its resolution on Somalia, Parliament voices concern at the prolonged civil war as well as its implications for peace and reconciliation and for the security and stability of the Horn of Africa as a whole. The EP condemns the recent fighting in the country and appeals to all parties to refrain from any action likely to escalate current tensions.
MEPs say there are fears that the Union of Islamic Courts, whose militia seized control of much of southern Somalia on 4 June 2006, includes groups accused of having links to Al-Qaida and international terrorism.
However, Parliament notes that the Arab League initiated a dialogue in Khartoum on 22 June 2006 between the Transitional Federal Institutions and the Union of Islamic Courts, in which the Transitional Federal Government recognised the 'reality' of the Union of Islamic Courts which, in return, recognised the 'legality' of the government.
The resolution urges all parties to pursue the path of dialogue and to extend the necessary cooperation to the Transitional Federal Government and parliament as the legitimate central authorities in Somalia governed by the framework of the Transitional Federal Charter.
Parliament supports the initiatives taken by the African Union (AU), the Arab League and the Inter-Governmental Authority on Development (IGAD) aimed at sustaining the peace and reconciliation process. It also urges the Transitional Federal Institutions and the Union of Islamic Courts to assume their responsibilities in implementing the dialogue initiated in Khartoum.
In addition, MEPs call on the newly formed International Somalia Contact Group, consisting of the AU, the UN, the EU, the USA and others, to focus on governance and institution-building, humanitarian assistance and regional stability and security.
MEPs maintain that, if the international community considers the transitional institutions to have sole legitimacy, pending the holding of free elections they must be given the resources needed to establish institutions such as a police force.
Parliament therefore calls on the EU, in coordination with the AU and working closely with IGAD and the Arab League, to provide political, financial and logistical support, including the deployment of the AU Peace Support Mission. The international community, in particular the EU, is asked to increase humanitarian aid to internally displaced persons and the populations in need.
International humanitarian law must be respected and relief agencies allowed access to the populations in need. Lastly, the arms embargo against Somalia imposed by the UN in 1992 must be strictly enforced.
Mauritania
In a resolution on Mauritania, Parliament reviews the situation since the overthrow of former President Ould Taya on 3 August 2005.
The resolution notes that the Military Council for Justice and Democracy (MCJD) undertook to restore democracy in Mauritania. The EP encourages the authorities to conduct this process as promised and stresses that it will carefully monitor how it progresses.
Parliament welcomes the abolition of media censorship and the freedom of expression enjoyed by political parties and civil society in Mauritania.
MEPs note that a consensus has emerged among political parties and civil society in support of the current process. An electoral timetable has been adopted for a constitutional referendum, as well as general, municipal and presidential elections.
There was a turnout of 76.36% in the referendum of 25 June 2006 in which 96.96% of the electorate voted in favour of constitutional change but MEPs point out that large sections of the population were unable to prove their identity in order to obtain a polling card in accordance with electoral law.
Parliament therefore calls on the Mauritanian authorities to ensure that all Mauritanians can vote in the forthcoming elections, and to enable Mauritanians abroad, including those in refugee camps in Senegal and Mali, to vote in future elections too.
A large number of political parties have been created since 3 August 2005. The resolution recommends that these parties be funded on the basis of their representation in the municipal elections, in which proportional representation makes it easier to take account of the country’s diversity.
Lastly, MEPs call on the Military Council for Justice and Democracy (MCJD) and the transitional government to focus on humanitarian problems, refugees and the legacy of slavery, as well as economic crime, including corruption. The current and future authorities should also tackle wealth inequalities and bring a minimum of social justice to the country.
Freedom of expression on the Internet
Lastly, Parliament adopted a resolution condemning government-imposed restrictions on internet content which conflict with freedom of expression. It stresses that freedom of expression is a key value shared by all EU countries and that concrete steps must be taken to defend it.
The resolution refers in positive terms to the statement issued by the World Summit on the Information Society of 16-18 November 2005 in Tunis on the importance of the information society for democracy, human rights and fundamental freedoms. This includes the freedom to receive and access information.
The EP points out that the struggle for free speech has today largely shifted on-line as the internet has become the channel of choice for political dissidents, democracy activists, human rights defenders and journalists worldwide.
However, authoritarian regimes have been working on ever more far-reaching methods of controlling the internet. MEPs pinpoint China, Belarus, Burma, Cuba, Iran, Libya, Maldives, Nepal, North Korea, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Tunisia, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan and Vietnam. They also say many cyber-dissidents are currently in prison, most of them in China.
The resolution also draws attention to the role of western companies, saying that the means to censor the web and monitor electronic communications are often provided by firms based in democratic states.
The resolution singles out Yahoo, Google and Microsoft, which have been persuaded by the Chinese Government to facilitate censorship of their services in the Chinese market. Equipment and technologies supplied by western companies such as CISCO Systems, Telecom Italia and Wanadoo (a subsidiary of France Telecom) have been used by governments to censor the web, says Parliament.
MEPs welcome the introduction by US legislators in February 2006 of a draft law, the Global On-line Freedom Act, aimed at regulating the activities of internet businesses when they operate in repressive countries.
They believe the EU too should stand up for the rights of internet users. They therefore call on the Council and Member States to agree a joint statement confirming their commitment to the protection of internet users' rights and the promotion of free expression on the internet world-wide.
The Commission and Council are also asked to take the following steps:
- to press the authorities of countries that have imprisoned journalists and others for expressing views on the internet to release them immediately;
- to draft a voluntary code of conduct limiting the activities of companies in repressive countries;
- to take into account, when considering EU assistance programmes with third countries, the need for unhindered internet access by the citizens of those countries.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Results of votes at the July Plenary session in Strasbourg
2006-07-10 - 15:20
Following is a list of all the reports put to the vote during the plenary session of 3-6 July 2006 in Strasbourg. A selection of more detailed press releases on various votes are included in this publication.
Votes of Thursday 7 July 2006
Simplification of VAT charging to counter tax evasion and avoidance
Proposal for a Council directive amending Directive 77/388/EEC as regards certain measures to simplify the procedure for charging value added tax and to assist in countering tax evasion and avoidance, and repealing certain Decisions granting derogations
(A6-0209/2006)
Rapporteur: Christoph Konrad (EPP-ED, DE)
Report adopted by a show of hands
EU-Caribbean partnership for growth, stability and development
EU-Caribbean partnership for growth, stability and development
(A6-0211/2006)
Rapporteur: Gabriele Zimmer (EUL/NGL, DE)
Report adopted by a show of hands
Protecting European healthcare workers from blood borne infections due to needle stick injuries
Recommendations to the Commission on protecting European healthcare workers from blood borne infections due to needlestick injuries
(A6-0218/2006)
Rapporteur: Stephen Hughes (PES, UK)
Report adopted by 465 votes in favour to 18 against with 13 abstentions
European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument
Proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down general provisions establishing a European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument
(A6-0164/2006)
Rapporteur: Konrad Szymański (UEN, PL)
Report adopted by a show of hands with amendments
Instrument for Stability
Proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing an Instrument for Stability
(A6-0157/2006)
Rapporteur: Angelika Beer (Greens/EFA, DE)
Report adopted by a show of hands with amendments
Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance (IPA)
Proposal for a Council regulation establishing an Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance (IPA)
(A6-0155/2006)
Rapporteur: István Szent-Iványi (ALDE, HU)
Report adopted by a show of hands
Implementing powers conferred on the Commission (Interinstitutional agreement)
Interinstitutional agreement taking the form of a joint statement concerning the draft for a Council decision amending Decision 1999/468/EC laying down the procedures for the exercise of implementing powers conferred on the Commission.
(A6-0237/2006)
Rapporteur: Richard Corbett (PES, UK)
Report adopted by a show of hands with one amendment
Implementing powers conferred on the Commission (procedures)
Amended proposal for a Council decision amending Decision 1999/468/EC laying down the procedures for the exercise of implementing powers conferred on the Commission
(A6-0236/2006)
Rapporteur: Richard Corbett (PES, UK)
Report adopted by a show of hands
Payer information with transfers of funds
Proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on information on the payer accompanying transfers of funds
(A6-0196/2006)
Rapporteur: Alexander Alvaro (ALDE, DE)
Report adopted by 442 votes in favour to 16 against with 130 abstentions, with amendments
Financial Regulation applicable to the general budget of the European Communities
Proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation (EC, Euratom) No 1605/2002 on the Financial Regulation applicable to the general budget of the European Communities
(A6-0057/2006)
Rapporteur: Ingeborg Gräßle (EPP-ED, DE)
Report adopted by a show of hands
Mutual information procedure
Proposal for a Council decision on the establishment of a mutual information procedure concerning Member States' measures in the areas of asylum and immigration
(A6-0186/2006)
Rapporteur: Patrick Gaubert (EPP-ED, FR)
Report adopted by a show of hands with amendments
Modification of the Protocol on Privileges and Immunities
Motion for a resolution
(B6-0275/2006/rev)
Resolution adopted by a show of hands
Economic and social consequences of business restructuring in Europe
Motion for a resolution
(RC6-0387/2006)
Joint resolution adopted by a show of hands with amendments
Interception of bank transfer data from the SWIFT system by the US secret services
Motions for resolutions
B6-0385/2006, RC-B6-0386/2006, B6-0386/2006, B6-0391/2006, B6-0393/2006, B6-0395/2006
Joint resolution adopted by 302 votes in favour to 219 against with 22 abstentions
Integration of immigrants in the European Union
On strategies and means for the integration of immigrants in the European Union
(A6-0190/2006)
Rapporteur: Stavros Lambrinidis (PES, EL)
Report adopted by a show of hands with amendments
Development and migration
On development and migration
(A6-0210/2006) -
Rapporteur: Marie-Arlette Carlotti (PES, FR)
Report adopted by 472 votes in favour to 24 against with 30 abstentions, with amendments
Fair trade and development
On Fair Trade and Development
(A6-0207/2006)
Rapporteur: Frithjof Schmidt (Greens/EFA, DE)
Report adopted by a show of hands
AIDS - Time to deliver
Motions for resolutions
RC-B6-0375/2006, B6-0375/2006, B6-0376/2006, B6-0377/2006, B6-0378/2006, B6-0379/2006, B6-0380/2006
Joint resolution adopted by a show of hands
Origin marking of certain imported products
RC-B6-0384/2006, B6-0384/2006, B6-0390/2006, B6-0392/2006, B6-0394/2006, B6-0396/2006, B6-0397/2006
Joint resolution adopted by 63 votes in favour, none against and one abstention, with amendments
Somalia
RC-B6-0400/2006, B6-0400/2006, B6-0405/2006, B6-0406/2006, B6-0410/2006, B6-0412/2006, B6-0415/2006
Joint resolution adopted by a show of hands with amendments
Mauritania
RC-B6-0399/2006, B6-0399/2006, B6-0403/2006, B6-0407/2006, B6-0409/2006, B6-0413/2006, B6-0416/2006
Join resolution adopted by a show of hands with one amendment
Freedom of expression on the internet
RC-B6-0401/2006, B6-0401/2006, B6-0402/2006, B6-0404/2006, B6-0408/2006, B6-0411/2006, B6-0414/2006
Joint resolution adopted by 65 votes in favour, none against and two abstentions
Vote of Wednesday 5 July 2006
Strengthening cross-border police cooperation
Initiative by the Kingdom of the Netherlands with a view to the adoption of a Council decision on strengthening cross-border police cooperation with regard to meetings attended by large numbers of people from more than one Member State, at which policing is primarily aimed at maintaining law and order and security and preventing and combating criminal offences
(A6-0222/2006)
Rapporteur: Frieda Brepoels (EPP-ED, BE)
Report adopted by a show of hands
Technical requirements for inland waterway vessels
Council common position for adopting a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down technical requirements for inland waterway vessels and repealing Council Directive 82/714/EEC
(A6-0208/2006)
Recommendation for second reading: Renate Sommer (EPP-ED, DE)
Common position adopted with one amendment
Harmonisation of technical requirements and administrative procedures in air transport
Council common position for adopting a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Regulation (EEC) No 3922/91 on the harmonisation of technical requirements and administrative procedures in the field of civil aviation
(A6-0212/2006)
Recommendation for second reading: Ulrich Stockmann (PES, DE)
Common position adopted with amendments
Shipments of radioactive waste and nuclear spent fuel
Proposal for a Council directive on the supervision and control of shipments of radioactive waste and nuclear spent fuel
(A6-0174/2006)
Rapporteur: Esko Seppänen (EUL/NGL, FI)
Report adopted by 523 votes in favour to 86 against with 37 abstentions
Investing for growth and employment
Implementing the Community Lisbon Programme: more research and innovation investing for growth and employment: A common approach
(A6-0204/2006)
Rapporteur: Pilar del Castillo Vera (EPP-ED, ES)
Report adopted by a show of hands with one amendment
Towards a more integrated approach for industrial policy
Policy framework to strengthen EU manufacturing - towards a more integrated approach for industrial policy
(A6-0206/2006)
Rapporteur: Joan Calabuig Rull (PES, ES)
Report adopted by 484 votes in favour to 58 against with 54 abstentions with amendments
Votes of Tuesday 4 July 2006
The impact and consequences of structural policies on EU cohesion
Request to consult the European Economic and Social Committee
Rule 117
Request approved by a show of hands
The impact and consequences of structural policies on EU cohesion
Request to consult the Committee of the Regions
Rule 118
Request approved by a show of hands
Transnational organised crime (the smuggling of migrants)
Amended proposal for a Council decision on the conclusion, on behalf of the European Community, of the Protocol Against the Smuggling of Migrants by Land, Sea and Air, supplementing the United Nations Convention Against Transnational Organised Crime
(A6-0215/2006)
Rapporteur: Jean-Marie Cavada (ALDE, FR)
Report adopted by a show of hands
Transnational organised crime (trafficking in persons)
Amended proposal for a Council decision on the conclusion, on behalf of the European Community, of the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women And Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention Against Transnational Organised Crime
(A6-0214/2006)
Rapporteur: Jean-Marie Cavada (ALDE, FR)
Report adopted by a show of hands
Application of the Aarhus Convention to EC institutions and bodies
Common joint text, approved by the Conciliation Committee for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the application of the provisions of the Aarhus Convention on Access to Information, Public Participation in Decision-making and Access to Justice in Environmental Matters to Community institutions and bodies
(A6-0230/2006)
Rapporteur: Eija-Riitta Korhola (EPP-ED, SE)
Joint text approved by a show of hands
Batteries, accumulators and their waste
Joint text, approved by the Conciliation Committee for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on batteries and accumulators and waste batteries and accumulators and repealing Directive 91/157/EEC
(A6-0231/2006)
Rapporteur: Johannes Blokland (IND:DEM, NL)
Joint text approved by a show of hands
European Social Fund
Council common position for adopting a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the European Social Fund and repealing Regulation (EC) No 1784/1999
(A6-0220/2006)
Recommendation for second reading: José Albino Silva Peneda (EPP-ED, PT)
Common position declared adopted
European Regional Development Fund
Council common position for adopting a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the European Regional Development Fund and repealing Regulation (EC) No 1783/1999
(A6-0225/2006) -
Recommendation for second reading: Giovanni Claudio Fava (PES, IT)
Common position declared adopted
European grouping of territorial co-operation (EGTC)
Council common position for adopting a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a European grouping of territorial co-operation (EGTC)
(A6-0227/2006)
Recommendation for second reading: Jan Olbrycht (EPP-ED, PL)
Common position declared adopted
Service of documents in civil or commercial matters
Proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Regulation (EC) No 1348/2000 of 29 May 2000 on the service in the Member States of judicial and extrajudicial documents in civil or commercial matters
(A6-0024/2006)
Rapporteur Jean-Paul Gauzès (EPP-ED, FR)
Report adopted by a show of hands with amendments
ERDF, ESF, Cohesion Fund (general provisions)
Proposal for a Council regulation laying down general provisions on the European Regional Development Fund, the European Social Fund and the Cohesion Fund and repealing Regulation (EC) No 1260/1999
(A6-0224/2006)
Recommendation: Konstantinos Hatzidakis (EPP-ED, EL)
Parliamentary assent granted by 533 votes in favour to 41 against with 53 abstentions
Establishment of a Cohesion Fund
Proposal for a Council regulation establishing a Cohesion Fund and repealing Regulation (EC) No 1164/94
(A6-0226/2006)
Recommendation: Alfonso Andria (ALDE, IT)
Parliamentary assent granted by 567 votes in favour to 29 against with 36 abstentions
Maritime transport, cabotage and international tramp services
Proposal for a Council regulation repealing Regulation (EEC) No 4056/86 laying down detailed rules for the application of Articles 85 and 86 to maritime transport, and amending Regulation (EC) No 1/2003 as regards the extension of its scope to include cabotage and international tramp services
(A6-0217/2006)
Rapporteur: Corien Wortmann-Kool (EPP-ED, NL)
Report adopted by 534 votes in favour to 89 against with 16 abstentions, with amendments
Own resources
Proposal for a Council decision on the system of the European Communities' own resources
(A6-0223/2006)
Rapporteur: Alain Lamassoure ((EPP-ED, FR)
Report adopted by a show of hands
Crisis of Equitable Life
The crisis of the Equitable Life Assurance Society - interim report
(A6-0221/2006)
Rapporteur: Diana Wallis (ALDE, UK)
Report adopted by a show of hands with one amendment
Consolidation in the financial services industry
On further consolidation in the financial services industry
(A6-0170/2006)
Rapporteur: Joseph Muscat (PES, MT)
Report adopted by a show of hands with amendments
Recent developments in and prospects for company law
On recent developments in and prospects in relation to company law
(A6-0229/2006)
Rapporteur: Andrzej Jan Szejna (PES, PL)
Report adopted by a show of hands with one amendment
Reducing the climate change impact of aviation
On reducing the climate change impact of aviation
(A6-0201/2006)
Rapporteur: Caroline Lucas (Greens/EFA, UK)
Report adopted by 439 votes in favour to 74 against with 102 abstentions, with amendments Result of the votes at the July plenary session in Strasbourg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060707IPR09693 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-024-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Agenda for September I Plenary
2006-07-10 - 15:20
The agenda for the September I sitting (4-7 September 2006) in Strasbourg is now available on our website and can be accessed via the link* below. * only visible on the on-line version of this publication. A copy can be faxed or sent by email if requested.
Legislative Observatory - Agenda for September I sitting with link to reports on agenda
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-025-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Adopted texts
2006-07-10 - 15:20
You can access all the texts adopted* by Parliament during the July plenary in Strasbourg. * only visible on the on-line version of this publication.
Texts adopted during the July plenary in Strasbourg
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert.do#
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-024-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-024-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-025-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-FULL DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-FULL DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-024-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060628BRI09328 ITEM-025-EN DOC XML V0//EN
