The Week Ahead 10-16 July 2006
Institutions
2006-07-07 - 10:35
Committee meetings - Brussels
President in China. European Parliament President Josep Borrell undertakes an official visit to China during which he will meet senior representatives of the state and the People's Assembly and also make a visit to Tibet (8 to 14 July) .
Turkey and Albania. Two reports, one on Turkey's progress towards EU membership and the other on the association and stabilisation agreement with Albania, will be put to the vote at the Foreign Affairs Committee (Wednesday) .
Services of general interest. The Economic Affairs Committee will give its views on the white paper on services of general interest. A key issue is how far these services should be open to competition (Wednesday) .
Vehicle pollution. The Environment Committee will vote on whether the regulation on vehicle emissions should include, alongside the Euro 5 standard, a Euro 6 standard with other even lower limit values (Thursday) .
2007 budget. Parliament and Council start negotiations on the 2007 budget at the traditional conciliation meeting which precedes the Council's first reading (Friday at the Justus Lipsius building) .
Finnish presidency. Representatives of the Finnish Council presidency will set out their work programme to Parliament's committees. Finland took over the rotating EU presidency on 1 July (Monday-Thursday) .
Hearing on wine. Following the Commission's recent presentation of its plans to reform the wine market, the EP Agriculture Committee is holding a hearing on sustainable development in this sector (Thursday) .
Afghanistan. The Development and Foreign Affairs Committees have a joint meeting with Afghanistan's Foreign Minister Rangin Dafar Spanta (Tuesday).
Benin. The President of Benin, Thomas Yayi Boni, addresses the Development Committee (Tuesday).
20060707IPR09684 For full details, see The Agenda
EN
1
LINK
/news/expert/event_top_page/default/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
