MEPs ready to cooperate actively with newly elected Congolese parliament
External relations
2006-08-02 - 14:27
MEPs expressed admiration for the Congolese people when they presented their preliminary findings of the way presidential and parliamentary elections were held in Congo on 30 July. They announced they will seek ways for the European Parliament to cooperate actively with the newly elected parliament of the Democratic Republic of Congo.
At a press conference in the Congolese capital Kinshasa on Wednesday, Jürgen Schröder, who led the 12-strong election observation delegation of the European Parliament in Congo, said he was “deeply moved by the enthusiasm, the determination and the orderliness” with which the Congolese had thronged to the polling stations in order to vote in multi-party, democratic elections for the first time in four decades. He said that the European Parliament, with its wide diversity of nationalities and languages, would be most happy to share its experience with the new parliament of Congo and to learn from the Congolese experience.
MEPs did, however, note a number of unnecessary problems during the elections. They mentioned some last-minute changes to voters’ registration lists and to polling centres which were not communicated in good time, as well as the similarity between some voters’ registration numbers, which caused confusion. In a political climate as sensitive as the Congo's, these problems should have been avoided.
But MEPs were impressed by the dedication of the people staffing the polling stations. “There were a number of difficulties,” Schröder said, “such as ballot papers which were far too voluminous, voting booths which were too cramped and a lack of adequate lighting, and these were solved only thanks to the dedication and inventiveness of the staff manning the polling stations.” The EP delegation called on the Congolese authorities to improve physical conditions in the polling stations in time for the next round of elections, scheduled for 29 October. MEPs were particularly concerned by the fact that electoral officials had gone without food and drink for periods as long as 24 hours.
The final results of the elections are expected within around three weeks. A run-off in the presidential elections, which may be necessary if none of the 33 candidates has won an absolute majority, is scheduled for 29 October.
The EU deployed some 300 long-term and short-term observers throughout Congo and contributed €149 million towards the cost of the elections. In all, there were some 1,200 international and over 50,000 national observers in the field.
The other members of the EP delegation are: Margrete Auken (Greens/EFA, DK), Robert Evans (PES, UK), Ana Gomes (PES, PT), Fiona Hall (ALDE, UK), Richard Howitt (PES, UK), Peter Olajos (EPP-ED, HU), José Pomés (EPP-ED, ES), Francesco Speroni (NI, IT), Ulrich Stockmann (PES, DE), Johan Van Hecke (ALDE, BE) and Zbigniew Zaleski (EPP-ED, PL).
20060717IPR09889
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
