MEPs and their 5001 questions...but who has the answers?
Institutions
2006-08-30 - 16:56
MEPs and their written questions
Last year MEPs submitted over 5000 written questions to the European Commission and Council of Ministers - that's almost 100 a week - but why and what about? They are written for several reasons; to raise issues that are of concern to an MEP or their constituents; to clarify aspects of EU law and policies, to highlight abuses and injustices or to raise the profile of an issue or policy. Questions also oblige the Commission and Council to publicly explain their actions.
Questions - action
And the questions can lead to concrete results. In a recent reply to a written question by Catherine Stihler MEP about a job advert which said "smokers need not apply" - the Commission replied that anti-discrimination legislation did not in fact cover tobacco users. Prior to the World Cup this summer MEPs used written questions to ask the Commission to investigate some aspects of the ticketing arrangements - notably the possible need for a "Mastercard" credit card or a German bank account to buy a ticket. Under some pressure, FIFA, football's governing body, took action. Other issues raised in MEPs' questions include aircraft noise, roaming charges and the conflict in the Middle-East.
How does it work?
Written questions can be put by any MEP who submits them to Parliament President Josep Borrell who then sends them to either the Commission or the Council. There are two types of written questions: "priority questions" and "non-priority questions", depending on the urgency and on the level of research involved. The first ones requiring a quicker answer but no detailed research. Each MEP can put one priority question per month, with no limit for non-priority questions.
Who answers the questions?
If a written question is addressed to the Commission, it is the Commissioner responsible who gives the answer i.e the Trade Commissioner Peter Mandelson would answer questions on WTO issues. If the question is directed to the Council, the answer is given by the country holding the six-month rotating EU Presidency - currently Finland. If it is a priority question, the answer must be given within three weeks and, if it is a non-priority question, it must be given within six weeks.
Should an institution fail to reply, the MEP can request that it is put on the agenda of the next appropriate committee meeting - so, a question on development aid would be taken up by the EP Development Committee.
The questions and replies are published in the Official Journal of the European Union and are available on the Parliament's website. We will delve deeper into some of the questions raised by MEPs in future articles.
20060829STO10141 Written Questions - a full list
EN
1
PHOTO
20060828PHT10135.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/QP-WEB/home.jsp?language=en
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
