Highlights of the Strasbourg Plenary session: 4-7 September 2006
Institutions
2006-09-04 - 12:17
Strasbourg Plenary Session 4-7 September
After the summer recess, MEPs return to Strasbourg for the first of two plenary sessions in September. In a much modified agenda, the House will debate and vote on resolutions on subjects ranging from the Middle East, China, the failure at the WTO talks, the costs of interpretation in the EU institutions and the future of the European Social Model. MEPs will be formally addressed by Finnish President Tarja Halonen who will hold a joint press conference with EP President Josep Borrell.
At 5pm on Tuesday 5 September, President Borrell will also hold a joint press conference with the Prime Minister of Bulgaria - Mr Sergei Stanishev Monday 4 September The session starts with a debate on the taxation of cars with the Economics Committee calling for cars to be taxed on pollution rather than registration. MEPs will tackle a legislative report on funding to deal with pollution caused by ships. The last point Monday evening is a debate with a resolution on forest fires and flooding . The House will debate the recent elections in the Democratic Republic of Congo. Tuesday 5 September Tuesday starts with a debate on the suspension of the talks on the WTO Doha Development Round . Parliament will also debate and vote on a resolution on the counterfeiting of medicines. There will also be a report on improving the mental health of the population and having a strategy on mental health for the EU. The report draws attention to the "sizeable differences" in mental health expenditure in individual Member States and welcomes the Commission's commitment to mental health promotion. At midday on Tuesday, Finnish President, Mrs Tarja Halonen will address the House in a formal sitting.
The House will also vote on a report related to the costs of interpretation incurred by the EU institutions. Tuesday afternoon sees the Council presentation of the 2007 preliminary draft budget for the EU set at some €125.75 billion . Also debated will be a report on the future of the European Social Model. MEPs then turn their attention of the system for exchanging emissions quotas and their national action plans. Wednesday 6 September Wednesday morning starts with a debate on the Union's future role in Kosovo . The House will debate the Stabilisation and Association Agreement with Albania including a statement from the Finnish Presidency. Parliament then turns its attention to EU-China relations with a report which takes a critical line on the political and human rights situation in the country - on issues ranging from Tibet to Taiwan, and the death penalty to animal welfare. Wednesday afternoon is dedicated to a wide ranging debate on the situation in the Middle East. The Foreign Affairs Committee has voiced their support for the EU reinforcement of UN forces in Lebanon. They called for a clear definition of the mandate and the mission of the peacekeepers, and for the disarmament of Hezbollah, the strengthening of democracy in Lebanon and a stronger political role for the European Union in the region. A vote on the resolution will be take place on Thursday. Thursday 7 September There is a joint debate on protection of passenger data with a report on the transfer of data to the US to prevent and combat terrorism. On Thursday, MEPs debate the European natural and architectural cultural heritage in rural and insular areas. As usual the session ends with three human rights debates and resolutions on the following subjects, Sri Lanka, North Korean asylum seekers, particularly in Thailand and Zimbabwe.
Please follow the link below for more detail about the subjects mentioned and changes to the agenda.
20060904STO10267 Detailed Briefing on the Plenary Session
EN
1
PHOTO
20050819PHT00703.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060706BRI09653 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
