Monday in the Plenary
Institutions
2006-09-06 - 17:44
President Borrell opens the Plenary session
Parliament's President Josep Borrell used his opening remarks to recall the "tragic events" of the war in Lebanon and the "dramatic humanitarian issues" raised by migration into Europe. Later, Parliament's Foreign Affairs Committee debated Turkey's progress towards EU membership. MEPs expressed support for eventual membership, but said Ankara must work harder on political reform. They voted on a draft resolution in preparation for Parliament's next Plenary session. (See more below).
War in Lebanon: President Borrell reminded MEPs that Parliament had been at the forefront of calls for a ceasefire. He recounted a meeting of the leaders of Parliament's Political Groups on 1 August that called for an immediate ceasefire, a halt to attacks on civilians and a UN force with a strong European contribution. During the crises the Parliament had urged EU members and institutions to "speak with one voice" he recalled. The deployment of an EU force was now "a test of credibility" for the Union he said. Also welcomed were diplomatic initiatives by the Euro-Med Parliamentary Assembly (EMPA) during the crises which were "an example of European and Arab Parliamentarians working together".
Immigration: This summer 10,000 African immigrants landed illegally at Lampedusa in Italy and a further 20, 000 in the Canary Islands. Hundreds more are feared drowned in the attempt. President Borrell spoke of the "dramatic humanitarian issues" this raised and that wealth inequality meant this influx "would not be a one-off". He called for EU immigration and development policy to tackle the problem.
Floods and fires: MEPs debated yesterday a resolution on floods and fires which affected some EU countries this summer. The resolution will be put to a vote on Thursday this week.
Turkey: At a meeting of Parliament's Foreign Affairs Committee later in the evening, MEPs showed their concern over the slowing down of political reforms in Turkey when they voted a draft resolution in preparation of Parliament's next Plenary session. MEPs made clear that they firmly hoped that Turkey will eventually become a member of the EU, but that it will have to work harder on the changes which are necessary for Turkey to fulfil all the conditions for EU membership.
For now, the MEPs are increasingly worried about Turkey's refusal to admit vessels and airplanes from Cyprus, an EU member state but which also continues to be divided in a Turkish northern and a Greek southern part. The resolution which was voted on Monday evening warned that the EU governments in September last year had said that Turkey must admit the Cypriot planes and vessels by the end of 2006 or risk a halt to negotiations.
The MEPs in the Foreign Affairs Committee also referred to "persistent shortcomings" in such areas as the freedom of expression, religious and minority rights, the role of the military in state matters, law enforcement, women's rights and trade union rights.
Today, Tuesday 5 September in Plenary: MEPs will debate a serious of health and social welfare issues. They include efforts to combat mental health problems in Europe and the problem of counterfeiting medicines, as well as the fight against violence (“Daphne III”). The "European Social Model" and the social protection it provides are also on the agenda. Finnish President Tarja Halonen, whose country holds the EU Presidency, is due to address the Chamber.
.
Read more? For more on these and other subjects and changes to the agenda, please click on the "Info" link below.
Want to watch, Listen live? Click on "EP Live" link below.
More information on Turkey? See the Press Info below
20060905STO10327 "Info" - More on opening session and other issues EP Live! Press Info on Turkey meeting
EN
1
PHOTO
20060905PHT10330.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/eplive/public/short_story_page_eplive/10235-20060901SST10234-01-09-2006/default_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060901IPR10224 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060904IPR10273 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
