Oil pollution at sea: €154m for satellite imagery services and anti-pollution vessels
Transport
2006-09-05 - 16:56
Parliament adopted a first-reading report (in agreement with Council) on funding for the action of the European Maritime Safety Agency (EMSA) in the field of response to pollution caused by ships. Just before EMSA's official launch on 14 September next week, MEPs agreed to provide €154m for the period 2007-2013 to allow the implementation of the Agency's new tasks.
MEPs believe that the time is ripe for taking measures additional to those taken by coastal states in order to provide an effective response to cases of maritime pollution.
The activities of the Agency should, however, not relieve coastal states of their responsibility to have appropriate pollution response mechanisms in place. In the event of a maritime pollution incident, EMSA should assist the Member State(s) affected, under the authority of which the clean-up operation will be conducted.
Anti-pollution vessels
On request, EMSA will provide anti-pollution vessels to combat oil pollution and other types of pollution, such as that caused by hazardous and noxious substances to combat oil pollution, such as that caused by hazardous and noxious substances. EMSA should play particular attention to those areas identified and most vulnerable without prejudice to any other area in need.
Satellite imagery service
The Agency will play an important role in developing a centralised satellite imagery service for the surveillance, the early detection of pollution and identification of the ships responsible. This new system will improve the availability of data and the effectiveness of the response to pollution caused by ships.
Not just oil pollution
An amendment was also adopted pointing on the definition of "oil". Oil means petroleum in any form; including crude oil, fuel oil, sludge, oil refuse and refined products as established by the Convention on Oil Pollution Preparedness, Response and Co-operation OPRC in 1990.
Hazardous and noxious substances
In addition to the Commission proposals, Parliament took the view that hazardous and noxious substances should also be under the scope of this regulation. These substances are likely to create hazards to human health, to harm living resources and marine life, to damage amenities or to interfere uses of the sea.
20060901IPR10226 European Maritime Safety Agency - response to pollution caused by ships European Maritime Safety Agency based in Lisbon
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5250822
EN
2
LINK
http://www.emsa.europa.eu/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
