Finnish President focuses on international issues
Institutions
2006-09-05 - 15:15
In his welcome to Finnish President Tarja HALONEN, who came to address the House on behalf of Finland's presidency of the Council, EP President BORRELL praised the country for its example in promoting research and innovation and facing up to issues such as energy security. He also stressed that, given the problems facing the EU, there was no question of Finland's term of office being a "transitional" one, as some commentators had predicted.
In her speech to the House, President Halonen focused on the EU's international role, which she pointed out had increased greatly in recent years.
" The international threats we are facing are increasingly non-military ", she said. They included " climate change, pollution, natural disasters, contagious diseases and economic insecurity ". International crime and terrorism were further threats requiring cooperation between Member States. The EU aimed to promote multilateral solutions to these problems.
Security linked to development and human rights
It was important to acknowledge " the link between human rights, development and security ". Indeed, " EU development policy can also be seen as part of EU security policy ". She therefore urged the EU institutions to agree on continued EU funding for development beyond 2007. There was also a link between development and trade - although " not always automatically a positive one ". Developing countries must undertake reforms " to promote good governance and eliminate corruption " but "the poorest countries also need special measures". In October the EU's development and trade ministers aimed to agree " a strong EU commitment to the Aid for Trade recommendations of the WTO ".
On human rights, Ms Halonen said " the EU must pursue a consistent human rights policy in all parts of the world ". The Council of Europe was an important partner in this area and " the accession of the EU to the European Human Rights Convention remains an important goal ".
The Finnish president welcomed the EU's " rapidly developing crisis management policy ", including the sending of a force to help the UN in Congo and its support for the peacekeeping operation in Darfur.
Middle East
Turning to the Middle East, she argued that " a coherent EU is a strong actor, as the Lebanon situation has shown " and said "the determined action of the EU has increased confidence in the EU as a peace broker in the region". The decision by the Member States to commit 7,000 peacekeepers to the UNIFIL operation showed they were able to take decisions " that were difficult domestically". Measures to tackle the humanitarian situation had been a success, including the pledge of over 300 million euros in aid.
The EU must also take the initiative in promoting efforts to resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. This must include confidence-building at grass-roots level, including an active role for women. The EU must continue to work to bring about stability and security in the Middle East. " The region is our neighbourhood, after all ", she emphasised.
Russia
Another key topic was Russia, whose leadership had repeatedly declared that it was " turned irreversibly towards Europe ". Broad cooperation on a range of issues, including energy and the environment, was thus inevitable. At the EU-Russia summit in November, a key goal would be to agree on a renewal of the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement due to expire next year. And the Northern Dimension, which focuses on the environment, social welfare and health, should be given greater prominence.
Enlargement
Turning to EU enlargement, Ms Halonen believed " the EU should remain open to all European countries that fulfil the membership criteria " since " the EU membership is a powerful incentive for implementing reforms ". However, it was also important to remember what the criteria do not include. " We share common values but we are not seeking cultural harmonisation ". " Plurality of cultures is Europe's richness and strength ". Another form of plurality was also crucial, namely that of political views, as evidenced in the European Parliament itself. " A pluralistic Union needs to have a multidimensional parliamentarism ".
Lastly, the Finnish president mentioned the ASEM summit of EU and Asian nations being held in Finland this week, where the two sides would discuss the global challenges they both faced.
20060901IPR10243 Full speech by President of the Republic of Finland Tarja Halonen at the European Parliament on 5 September 2006 Finnish President homepage
EN
1
LINK
http://www.eu2006.fi/news_and_documents/speeches/vko36/en_GB/1157453549821/
EN
2
LINK
http://www.tpk.fi/english/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
