Balancing security and data protection for air travel and judicial cooperation
Justice and home affairs
2006-09-04 - 10:12
The alleged plot this August to blow up US-bound planes flying from London led to renewed debate on how to protect air transport from terrorism. Two related issues will be debated at the first of September's two plenary sessions: how to replace the agreement on passenger data sharing with the US annulled by the Court of Justice, and how to apply data protection standards to judicial cooperation between EU members states.
On the passenger data agreement, a draft recommendation to the Council was adopted unanimously by the Civil Liberties Committee in July. Following the decision of the European Court of Justice to annul the existing agreement on passenger name records (PNR) with effect from 30 September 2006, MEPs say that the new agreement on the transfer of PNR should run only until November 2007. After that, they want to see Parliament granted full co-decision rights over future agreements.
When is comes to cooperation between the police and judicial systems of the Member States in the fight against terrorism and crime more generally, Parliament is continuing to push for proper data protection standards to be applied.
20060901BKG10232
Parliament's two-step strategy on PNR
The committee proposes a two-step negotiation strategy. According to the rapporteur, Sophie In't Veld (ALDE, NL), the EU should reach a new short-term international agreement to run for the period covered by the original, now annulled, deal, with MEPs present at the negotiations as observers.
MEPs in the committee want to ensure that the US offers adequate protection of European passenger data and that sufficient safeguards are in place. This would in particular mean ensuring that deficiencies already identified in the current agreement be rectified, such as the switch to a PUSH system - US officers should request the specifically required data on a case by case basis, instead of being granted access to the full database - and reducing the number of PNR data fields which can be checked.
For the medium and long term, MEPs propose "a more coherent approach (...) towards the exchange of passenger data". By the time of the review of the agreement in 2007, MEPs want the Council to give Parliament full co-decison rights on such issues so they can ensure future agreements are properly respect data protection safeguards. Such a change would mean invoking the so called "passerelle" clause of the Treaty, which allows the Council, by a unanimous decision, to move policy areas from decision making by unanimity in Council and consultation of Parliament to qualified majority voting in Council and co-decision with Parliament.
Finally, MEPs also propose a dialogue this year with parliamentarians from the EU, US, Canada and Australia, to help prepare for the review.
Privacy rights need to be respected - even in police cooperation
In parallel to the vote on Ms In 't Veld’s report, the European Parliament is also expected to endorse a Commission proposal to extend data protection rules to the transfer of information in police and judicial cooperation, an policy area in which Member States alone make decisions and which so far falls outside the scope of existing community laws to protect data. MEPs have tabled more than 60 non-binding amendments to limit the use and access to personal data to essential cases and when there is a real threat to public security.
Although the vote on the consultation report drafted by Martine Roure (PES, FR) was scheduled for the plenary session in June, MEPs approved a last minute motion to postpone it, hoping that the current Finnish presidency would be more willing to take into account Parliament's demands.
The Commission proposal responds to a longstanding request from Parliament, which since the creation of the ‘third pillar’ (i.e. justice and home affairs matters managed at EU level via intergovernmental cooperation) has been calling for data protection standards to apply to judicial and police cooperation. In the light of negotiations on the PNR issue, MEPs in the committee are pushing for a quick adoption of this draft decision by the Council, as it would affect future agreements with the United States.
Strict criteria to collect and access data
Data collection and access for national governments or competent authorities must be limited "to specific purposes", only "if strictly necessary", and carried out with the "principles of proportionality and necessity" and for the purpose of "preventing a threat to public security or to a person", say MEPs. This personal data made available to a given Member State should be further processed by others only with the consent of the authority which made available the information in the first place, according to another amendment.
The report goes on to say that sensitive data such as biometric or DNA information will require additional specific safeguards to ensure they are accurate and that they can be challenged by the person concerned. MEPs also demand different treatment for personal data depending on the status of the person concerned: information related to "non-suspects" would be used "only for the specific purpose they were collected, for a limited period of time and with adequate limitations on access to them and on their transmission".
Data transfers to third countries
One of the main concerns for MEPs is the potential access to personal data that authorities from third countries could request in the name of fight against terrorism and organised crime. In this case, members of the Civil Liberties Committee propose an amendment forbidding such transfer to authorities outside the EU except if the transfer "is provided by a law clearly obliging or authorising it" and if the Member States can ensure that the level of protection afforded by the third country is adequate. This assessment would be based on specific criteria listed in the text. This adequacy decision can be omitted only exceptionally, to prevent an imminent serious danger threatening public security.
Finally, the Committee members propose amendments to impose criminal sanctions on authorities in case of intentional offence or gross negligence.
Background information on airline security and data protection issues
Since February 2003, the Unites States has required in-bound airlines operating to the United States to provide US border authorities with electronic access to Passenger Name Records - PNRs. The US says the information is necessary for the fight against terrorism. PNRs include a list of items of data on passengers and crew, such as departure and return flights, credit card information, addresses and the passenger's meal choice. Airlines face the prospect of fines of €6 000 per passenger as well as the potential loss of landing rights in the US if they fail to provide US agencies with this data.
In September 2004, the European Parliament brought a case against the Commission in the European Court of Justice (ECJ), calling for annulment of the agreement between the European Community and the US on the transfer of those personal data. MEPs argued that the legal basis (Article 95 EC) was incorrect, that Parliament should have had assent rather than simple consultation, that the agreement was in breach of the principle of proportionality and that the US did not offer adequate data protection.
On 30 May 2006 the ECJ annulled the Council international agreement, on the grounds that the legal basis was not considered appropriate since the transfer to the US and the use of PNR data relates to data processing operations concerning public security and activities of the State in areas of criminal law (i.e. the 'third pillar'), which fall outside the scope of Directive 95/46/EC that concerns ordinary Community legislation (the 'first pillar'). Consequently it was ruled that EU-US agreement on PNR will have no further legal effect after 30 September 2006. The ECJ chose to consider only the procedural issues, and did not express any views on the EP's objections to the substance of the agreement.
After the court's ruling
The Council decided, at ambassadorial level, on 22 June to negotiate a new PNR agreement with the US government, based on article 38 and 24 of the EU treaty (which means no formal consultation of Parliament or competence for the Court), with the same substance as the current agreement, to expire at the same time, November 2007.
Following the 10 August alleged terrorist plot in London, the interior ministers of the UK, Germany, France, Finland and Portugal held an informal meeting in London on 15 August with the European Union’s justice commissioner and its counter-terrorism coordinator, to give "an urgent response". They agreed to present plans to an EU meeting in September. The proposals include expanding data-sharing on airline passengers, possibly including details of travellers’ biometric identifiers, such as fingerprints or iris scans.
In addition, Commissioner Frattini announced the need for an EU PNR system - extending the PNR transfer system to all flights within Europe - despite the fact that Parliament has on three different occasions rejected this idea.
What's next?
Negotiations are ongoing, directly between Council and the US, with a formal negotiating session in the first week of September. A key debate will take place at the 20-21 September Tampere II informal Justice and Home Affairs Council, while 30 September 2006 is the deadline imposed by the Court of Justice for the EU to end data transfers to the US or come up with a new agreement.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
