Watch this space: how EU legislation will impact the UK over the Autumn
Institutions
United Kingdom
2006-09-05 - 18:51
How will the European Parliament impact on the UK this Autumn?
As MPs head off to their respective party conferences, MEPs are already back in Brussels and Strasbourg embarking on a busy autumn in the European Parliament agenda. Progress is expected in the coming weeks on many of the main pieces of legislation to come before the European Parliament in this legislature. The eyes of the UK media, trade bodies and NGOs will be on the European Parliament as MEPs discuss these proposals at both committee stage and in the full Parliament.
In this piece, we aim to give you a taste of what's to come and an indication of who has been talking about it in the UK so far.
Services Directive and REACH
Top of the Parliament's agenda will be two proposals coming back for their 2nd reading this Autumn: the Services Directive and the REACH Regulation on chemicals.
The Services Directive is intended to open up the market across the EU for service industries such as architects; hairdressers; plumbers; car rental; travel agencies, tourism; sports centres and amusement parks. The European Parliament's 1st reading largely shaped the current version of the Directive - MEPs have to give their views on the latest text this Autumn, with a draft report expected by 13 September and a committee vote in October. Trade unions, employers' organisations and trade bodies in the UK have all been lobbying hard on this and will no doubt continue to do so until the final European Parliament vote in November.
Also back for 2nd reading is the REACH proposal to regulate, evaluate and analyse chemicals for their safety. The UK Women's Institutes made REACH their main campaign theme for 2005 along with the Worldwide Fund for Nature (WWF); on the other hand, industry bodies such as the Chemical Industries' Association and trade bodies as diverse as the Food & Drink Federation and the Construction Products Association have also been preparing for the new regime and putting forward their views to MEPs on how REACH should work in practice. How to balance consumer and industry needs is the aim when the proposal comes back to committee this month, followed by a plenary vote in October.
Environment Committee
The Environment Committee will be dealing with three other proposals which may well hit the UK headlines this Autumn.
South West Conservative MEP Caroline Jackson will be leading the debate when the new EU Waste Directive is discussed later this Autumn. Caroline Jackson was also rapporteur on the existing Landfill Directive seven years ago, so she is something of an expert in a field which is constantly on the UK political agenda. Expect the Environment Committee to adopt its 1st reading in October, with the full Parliament voting in November.
Vodka is also likely to be much discussed this Autumn as MEPs reach their 1st reading on the proposed Regulation on defining spirit drinks. The subject has already hit the headlines in the UK, which is the 2nd biggest producer of vodka in the EU. Finland is challenging the ingredients used to make vodka in the UK and MEPs will be having to decide just how vodka being sold on the EU market can be labelled. Committee vote expected November with plenary adoption in January 2007.
Mercury will come under scrutiny this month as the Environment Committee looks at the latest proposal to amend the rules on hazardous substances. There was a bit of a hoo-ha in the UK media earlier this year with fears that the Commission's proposals might mean that barometers and medical thermometers would be affected by this directive. Now is the chance for MEPs to clarify just how far the mercury ban will extend - committee will vote later this month, with full Parliament vote in October.
TV Product placement
The TV Without Frontiers Directive is up for revision this Autumn and one of the main issues is to define when and how producers can use product placement on television programmes. The BBC and Ofcom have already made their views known on the European Commission's proposal and we can expect strong views also from consumer groups before MEPs vote in the Culture Committee in October, with the 1st reading vote in plenary expected before the end of the year.
Shipping - flagging up problems?
Some sections of the UK media have suggested that the Red Ensign is about to be replaced by the EU flag on European Community ships. MEPs have the chance to clarify policy on flags when they discuss the package of proposals on shipping in the Transport Committee this Autumn. The proposed directives cover obligations of flag states; civil liabilities of shipowners in the event of accident and investigation of accidents in the maritime sector. The full Parliament is not due to vote until early 2007 but committee discussions will get underway this Autumn.
Other issues
The website of the European Parliament's UK Information Office has a tracking table for these and some of the other major legislative proposals currently before the European Parliament - see http://www.europarl.org.uk/news/NWS-soon-main.htm Other reports highlighted in that table include: shareholder voting rights; pensions portability; car spare parts markets; animal welfare; biofuels strategy.
Also this autumn, the Equitable Life Committee of Inquiry continues its work and is expected to visit the UK to take evidence this autumn - date to be confirmed.
The Temporary Committee into CIA flights is also planning a visit to the UK to take evidence in October - dates also still to be confirmed.
At least two groups of petitioners from the UK will be presenting their petitions in the Petitions Committee in the coming weeks:- an environmental group from Gateshead are protesting about a landfill site proposed for their neighbourhood and petitioners from Middlesbrough will be giving evidence to the Committee on alleged infringements of civil liberties against Middlesbrough football fans after a UEFA Cup game in Rome last year.
20060905IPR10359 What happens soon - from the UK Office of the European Parliament Forthcoming plenary sessions - information day by day on reports before the European Parliament Links to all 20 European Parliament committees, 2 sub committees, 1 temporary committee and 1 committee of inquiry UK MEPs by region
EN
1
PHOTO
20060905PHT10368.jpg
EN
2
A
http://www.europarl.org.uk/news/NWS-soon-main.htm
EN
3
LINK
http://www.europarl.org.uk/news/NWS-soon-main.htm
EN
4
LINK
/oeil/activities.jsp?form=/pe/byday
EN
5
LINK
/activities/expert/committees.do;jsessionid=B69159BB4E6A2E81551710F10899460A.node2?language=EN
EN
6
LINK
/members/public/geoSearch/zoneList.do?country=GB&language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
