2006: An important year for EU-Russia relations
External relations
2006-07-17 - 16:08
Mapping out future relations with Russia
On the eve of the G8 Summit in St Petersburg, it is worth examining the future of relations between the European Union and Russia. A working group of the EU-Russia Parliamentary Co-operation Committee recently met in Moscow and Riga. Visa Facilitation and Readmission agreements were signed at a recent Summit in Sochi by the Russian and EU authorities, and a new EU-Russia Partnership and Cooperation Agreement will be negotiated soon.
This year is certainly an important year for the future of EU-Russia relations. Russia is for the first time chairing the G8 and puts energy security, healthcare and education as its priorities. Russia is a strategic partner of the enlarged EU, sharing many common interests and challenges. Both sides are interested in stability, energy efficiency and increased competitiveness while facing similar threats of crime, trafficking, migration and terrorism. Nevertheless, future co-operation can come under pressure because of not always coinciding viewpoints on human rights and market economy issues.
In its resolution on the Annual Report on Human Rights in the World 2005, the European Parliament welcomed the start of the EU human rights consultations with Russia and hoped that these consultations will develop "into a frank and genuine EU-Russia Human Rights Dialogue". Nevertheless, concerns about the new Russian NGO legislation are expressed and "extrajudicial killings, disappearances and torture in custody in Chechnya" are criticised. Tense foreign policy issues range from Belarus, Iran, unresolved conflicts in areas bordering Russia to border agreements with Estonia and Latvia.
Joint interests - different perceptions
Over a quarter of the EU's oil and gas comes from Russia. Russia is both a major supplier of energy products and a market for EU products and services. "Russia is as much dependent on the EU, as the EU is dependent on Russia", says Danish Liberal MEP Anne Jensen.
Russia has not yet ratified the Energy Charter Treaty. MEPs regret the failure to reach an agreement on energy in the last EU-Russia Summit, as non-existence of energy trade rules leaves the EU vulnerable. Czech Communist MEP Vladimír Remek thinks that too many people are dependent on this issue, therefore stable and pragmatic relations with Russia are needed.
The G8 Summit – few substantial decisions expected
"Unfortunately I do not believe that the upcoming G8 summit will lead to many concrete decisions. Mr Putin is definitely going to use the Russian chairmanship as a PR exercise", argues Ms Jensen. She thinks that the G8 "has lost much of its ideological coherence since Russia joined", which makes decisions harder. Nevertheless, she assumes that WTO membership perspectives will make Russia sign the Energy Charter. Mr Remek also does not expect a major breakthrough in this forum where national interests compete either, but he hopes that the framework for future energy relations will be defined.
Lithuanian Conservative MEP Vytautas Landsbergis is worried that the G8 Summit will improve the image of Russia without real steps taken to increase its credibility. "Russia’s choice of priorities does not include a chance to resolve the issues of great importance", - he says. Mr Landsbergis finds the G8 too polarised, which makes it "not a problem solving, but problem denouncing body".
MEPs see internal EU problems complicating the relationship with Russia. They advocate a greater unity as the way towards improving it. "If we speak with one voice our criticism will carry more weight and Russia will then no longer be able to put pressure on single countries without feeling the response of the whole Union", insists Ms Jensen. "We need a common policy towards Russia", she concludes.
20060714STO09874 G8 presidency of the Russian Federation EP Delegation to the EU-Russia Parliamentary Cooperation Committee European Parliament resolution on the EU-Russia Summit held in Sochi on 25 May 2006 Annual Report on Human Rights in the World 2005 and the EU's policy on the matter Russian chairmanship of the Council of Europe (Committee of Ministers)
EN
1
PHOTO
20060712PHT09795.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://en.g8russia.ru/
EN
3
LINK
/intcoop/euro/pcc/d_ru/default_en.htm
EN
6
LINK
https://wcd.coe.int/ViewDoc.jsp?id=1002429&BackColorInternet=F5CA75&BackColorIntranet=F5CA75&BackColorLogged=A9BACE
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2006-0270 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2006-0220 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
