Services of general interest: legal clarity the key
Economic and monetary affairs
2006-09-13 - 17:22
MEPs believe a clearer legal situation is needed for services of general interest. The Economic Affairs Committee on Tuesday took a step in that direction on Tuesday when it when it adopted - near-unanimously - a report explaining the need for better EU legislation and guidance and sketching out the shape it might take.
The report by Bernhard Rapkay (PES, DE) is an own-initiative report. It constitutes MEPs' response to the Commission's white paper on services of general interest published at Parliament's request in May 2004. But it also responds to a growing need for legal certainty felt by local, regional and national authorities as well as companies and users.
MEPs want the Commission to clarify a number of legal points, given the dynamic evolution of the services market and the liberalisation of certain services, the imminent adoption of the services directive and the impossibility, under current legal bases, of distinguishing clearly between services of general interest and services of general economic interest.
The committee believes two key points must be clarified: the impact of the Court of Justice's sector-based case-law and the application of competition law to services of general interest and services of general economic interest. One problem is the method for funding these two types of service - which in any case have yet to be clearly distinguished legally.
MEPs also want the Commission to submit a draft directive on social and health services. And they would like to see guidelines for certain areas (procedures for accessing existing networks, defining the price conditions for the supply of services, guaranteeing competition and opportunities for new entrepreneurs and rules on out-of-court settlements between service suppliers and users).
While MEPs want the Commission to introduce certain legislative proposals on services of general interest, they stress the principle of codecision, under which Parliament and the Council must both be involved in the adoption of any legislation. And at several points in the report they refer to the subsidiarity principle, stressing that it is up to Member States to define their own services of general interest and pointing to the existence of national traditions. Lastly, they emphasise that broad swathes of services of general interest must not be withdrawn from the scope of the rules of the internal market and competition through an attempt to define services of general interest at national level.
Procedure: own-initiative
Plenary vote: Strasbourg, September II
2006-09-11 Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs Chair Pervenche Bérès PES FR 20060908IPR10488
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
