Parliament's position on Turkey's candidacy for EU membership
Enlargement
2006-09-25 - 07:01
Turkey has a long history of relations with the European Community. Its first application to join the European Economic Community (EEC) was lodged in July 1959. This application did not bear fruit at the time but Turkey and the EEC signed an association agreement in 1963, which led to a customs union in 1995.
Turkey ' s current membership application to the Community was lodged in 1987. At the Helsinki European Council in December 1999, Turkey was officially recognised as a candidate country for the European Union, thus paving the way for membership talks. At its meeting of December 2004, after a long and difficult debate, the Council decided that negotiations should start on 3 October 2005.
20060919BKG10804
Parliament's role
Parliament's assent is required for any country wishing to join the EU (Article 49 of the EU Treaty), although this power is only exercised at the final stage, after the negotiations have been concluded. In addition, as one of the two arms of the EU budgetary authority Parliament plays a key role in the financial aspects of accession. For these reasons the EP's views have a significant impact on the candidate countries and Parliament has closely followed developments in Turkey over the years.
On 6 October 1999 Parliament reaffirmed "Turkey's eligibility to apply for membership of the European Union" even if it "is still far away from meeting the Copenhagen criteria". In their resolution, MEPs called for "formal abolition of the death penalty" and "a political solution to the Cyprus issue".
On 28 September 2005 Parliament adopted a new resolution which noted "that the Commission and the Council take the view that Turkey has formally fulfilled the last conditions for starting the accession negotiations".
Of the many resolutions on progress made by candidate countries which have been adopted by the European Parliament, several are devoted to Turkey's application. In addition, the EP has separately expressed its views on the human rights situation in Turkey, the role of women and the Kurdish question. The latest document on Parliament's position is the report by Camiel Eurlings (EPP-ED, NL) on Turkey's progress towards accession, which will be put to the vote in plenary on 27 September 2006 in Strasbourg. Follow this link for full details of Parliament's procedures regarding approval of accession treaties with new Member States
Key issues
Cyprus
Parliament has repeatedly stressed the importance of a settlement to the Cyprus problem based on the UN's plan. Following the failure of the referendum on the Annan plan for reunification of the island in 2004, MEPs reiterated, in their resolution of September 2005, their call for Turkey to withdraw its troops swiftly and to recognise the Republic of Cyprus, since "the opening of negotiations obviously implies the recognition of Cyprus by Turkey".
They have also expressed disagreement with a declaration by Ankara - which stated that the extension of the EU-Turkey customs union to the ten new Member States did not imply recognition of the legitimacy of the Cyprus government - by so far postponing their vote on the enlargement of the customs union. In the latest Eurlings report the EP calls once again on the Turkish authorities to normalise relations with Cyprus and to lift the embargo and the port and airport restrictions on Cypriot aircraft and ships.
Human rights
Parliament's resolutions on Turkey's accession continue to criticise the human rights situation in the country. MEPs are particularly concerned about the lack of religious freedom and freedom of expression in general, the inadequate protection of minorities and the use of torture. Overall the EP has in fact hardened its stance on this issue: while it acknowledges the limited progress made, this month's Eurlings report calls for "more effective implementing measures" to combat abuses by the authorities and deplores the inadequate reforms on other human rights questions.
The role of women
In a specific report adopted in 2004, the EP voiced concern at the position of women in Turkey. It stressed the importance of equality between men and women in the civil and penal codes and pushed for stricter application of this principle. Domestic violence, polygamy and forced marriage were also attacked. The present Eurlings report is particularly concerned about the continuance of honour crimes and it re-emphasises the right of Turkish women to have access to education.
Death penalty
The death penalty was an issue which appeared in the first resolution recognising Turkey's status as a membership candidate in 1999, with a reference to the case of Mr Öcalan. This affair was followed closely by the EP, which kept up the pressure on the Turkish authorities until they abolished the death penalty in 2002.
Kurds
Parliament has always called for recognition of the cultural rights of the Kurdish minority in Turkey. It has urged the authorities to lift the restrictions on political parties such as HADEP and to allow the Kurdish language to be used in the education system and the media. The current Eurlings report welcomes the fact that TV and radio programmes are now broadcast in the Kurdish language and calls for a political settlement to the problems of south-east Turkey.
Armenian genocide
In 2001 Parliament gave its backing to an initiative "the aim of which is to arrive at a common understanding of the past" by Turks and Armenians. In 2004 it issued a clear call for Turkey to acknowledge "the genocide perpetrated against the Armenians, as expressed in the European Parliament's earlier resolutions with regard to Turkey's candidate status (from 18 June 1987 to 1 April 2004)" and it has repeated this position ever since.
Goal of the negotiations
In its resolution of 15 December 2004 the European Parliament noted that the negotiation process with Turkey by its very nature "is an open-ended process the outcome of which cannot be guaranteed in advance ". It also repeats that it regards "the European Union's capacity to cope with enlargement as a prerequisite, as part of the Copenhagen criteria". In 2006 a report by Elmar Brok (EPP-ED, DE) on the Commission's strategy paper for enlargement also mentioned the EU's "absorption capacity", thereby triggering a lively debate about the real will of some MEPs to accept Turkey's full membership of the EU. The draft report by Mr Eurlings repeats the same points.
Next steps
The European Commission announced on 19 September that it was delaying publication of its annual report on Turkey's progress towards accession until 8 November - two weeks later than scheduled.
Parliament will vote on the latest Eurlings report on 27 September. Meanwhile a delegation of the EP Subcommittee on Human Rights was in Turkey from 18 to 22 September to meet national and local authorities as well as NGOs. The delegation raised the issues of torture, migration, freedom of expression and religion. 2006 Eurlings report on Turkey's progress towards accession Press release following the adoption by the Foreign Affairs Committee of the 2006 Eurlings report 2006 Brok report on the strategy paper on progress in the enlargement process Press release on plenary vote of Brok report 2005 EP resolution on the opening of negotiations with Turkey 2004 Eurlings report on the progress to date by Turkey on the accession European Commission's enlargement website
EN
2
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5347852
EN
4
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5287112
EN
6
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5258032&noticeType=null&language=en
EN
7
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5207122
EN
8
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/enlargement/index_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT RULES-EP 20060703 RULE-082 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060904IPR10273 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060309IPR06054 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
