Education: Mobility, lifelong learning and languages vital say MEPs
Education
2006-09-26 - 20:14
We can all grow in learning and knowledge
Education was on the agenda on Monday when MEPs debated ways in which education can be improved and expanded across the European Union. Education policy is for EU members to organise nationally, but the Parliament can play a role in providing a forum for discussion and ideas. Its role is to encourage, support and supplement initiatives in the field. Being debated were ways of increasing education mobility in Europe, lifelong learning and how a "European dimension" can be taught in schools.
The Erasmus university-exchange programme has helped over 1 million people study abroad, greatly encouraging the study of foreign languages and cultural contact between Europeans. The success of this has inspired Austrian Socialist MEP Christa Prets to introduce a report , with the backing of Parliament's Culture and Education committee, that supports moves for a "European Quality Charter for mobility" for education and training. According to Mrs Prets "mobility helps to promote active European citizenship, brings citizens closer and improves mutual understanding". It can also help boost Europe's economy.
The mobility charter envisages practical guidelines to help people study in a foreign country. They include information, general preparation and logistical support. MEPs were particularly insistent that the Charter included specific proposals to help women, the disabled and disadvantaged groups.
A long life of learning
A recommendation on ways to increase lifelong learning lies at the heart of a report by German Green MEP Helga Trüpel and her colleagues on the Culture and Education committee. It recommends skills that people could acquire to help them in life and the labour market. The skills include: good communication in their mother tongue, foreign languages, maths, science and technology. MEPs also stress the importance of civic values, based on the concepts of democracy, justice, equality, citizenship and civil rights.
Lifelong learning can increase adaptability and employability in the labour market. As Mrs Trüpel says "in a fast moving and changing Europe, the demands on every individual are continuously rising...not only dealing with modern challenges but also working in an increasingly globalised labour world requires being permanently ready to acquire new knowledge".
Allowing young people greater understanding of Europe and its history is a key aim of a non-binding report by the British Conservative MEP Christopher Beazley. A "European dimension" in subjects like history, geography and humanities would be vital says the report. In particular it advocates greater teaching of foreign languages - "the most visible and most developed example of the European dimension" it says.
Improvements by 2010?
The EU's Lisbon agenda (economic reform and knowledge based societies) has improving the quality and effectiveness of the EU education and training systems as a major component. A recent report by the European Commission on progress towards this goal said Europe's education and training systems must increase the efforts to boost participation in lifelong learning and to reduce the number of early school leavers. Reports like these above could suggest ways of achieving that goal.
20060926STO11004 Education mobility - lifelong learning Languages / qualifications Parliament's Culture and Education Committee
EN
1
PHOTO
20060926PHT10994.jpg
EN
4
LINK
/activities/expert/committees/presentation.do?committee=1246&language=EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060922IPR10878 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060922IPR10879 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
