Call for EU states to reveal their involvement with CIA secret prisons
Fundamental rights
2006-09-18 - 11:38
Following President Bush’s acknowledgement that the CIA has operated secret prisons for terrorism suspects, MEPs in the temporary committee investigating claims of such illegal activity in Europe called on Thursday for European governments to reveal their involvement. They also heard from Spanish Foreign Minister Miguel Angel Moratinos and representatives of three more alleged victims of extraordinary rendition.
"I am very pleased that Bush made this statement, which proves that we were right to set up this committee", said committee chair Carlos Coelho (EPP-ED, PT). "He explained to the world his decision to transfer detainees to Guantanamo, where they will face a court and be protected by the Geneva Convention, which is a step in the right direction."
Previously, there had been suspicions but not proof, said Jas Gawronski (EPP-ED, IT) but now President Bush himself had provided proof. "But don't try to link the usefulness of this committee to his acknowledgement (...) Bush didn't apologise, he just stated the facts and said he will keep the secret prisons open if new terrorists are caught.” The US President may have been influenced by forthcoming elections, but “in any case I appreciate that US has the guts to correct its own errors".
Rapporteur Claudio Fava (PES, IT) said "I am not glad about the statements, I am rather shocked he could lie for so long previously! (...) Since Bush spoke last week we have seen complete silence from the Commission and Council. Maybe we don't have the legal means to act but we can raise our voice and condemn it."
"Bush is admitting a criminal practice, and we have confirmed that such practice has lead to the radicalisation of terrorism," said Giusto Catania (GUE, IT). "The definitive silence of EU countries following his statement has only one explanation: that they were not surprised at all."
Sophie In 't Veld (ALDE, NL) said “I propose we ask Member States to send a written declaration on what they know about secret prisons and transfers," and, if they had any information obtained through torture in those camps, "how do they feel about it?". She and Raul Romeva (Greens/EFA, ES) proposed applying article 7 of the EU treaty, which provides for sanctions when there is a serious and persistent breach of human rights by a Member State , to any country which is shown to have hosted a secret prison or helped with US renditions.
Moratinos: government not aware of any illegal CIA activity in Spain
Spanish Foreign Minister Miguel Angel Moratinos, the first minister to give evidence to the committee, said CIA activities in Spain had not broken the law: "I can categorically state that - subject to what might be revealed during investigations - the Spanish government is not aware of any illegal activities or existence of detention centres", he said and stressed: "Our government has not authorised any violation of the law". He extended his assurance to the Spanish CNI, saying that "no Spanish intelligence service has been involved directly or indirectly with the US on this matter.”
However, he added: "Our territory may have been used not to commit crimes as such but as a stopover on the way to commit crime in other territories," saying that 66 suspect flights had made stops in Spain.
Asked by MEPs for his personal reaction to President Bush’s statement, he said "One does not need courage to condemn unacceptable and illegal activities which do not respect fundamental freedoms (...) Bush does not say that such camps are on European territory. Let’s not get drawn into easy anti-Americanism here; the USA is a great country with a Supreme Court whose work has effectively forced Bush to make this statement".
More allegations of extraordinary rendition
Bernhard Docke, a lawyer representing Murat Kurnaz, who was held at the Guantanamo Bay prison from late 2001 until August 2006, said there was no proof to justify his detention. Mr Kurnaz, though born and raised in Germany, was a Turkish citizen, who traveled to Pakistan in the autumn of 2001 and was arrested by the authorities there. He was then handed over to US forces and transferred to Guantanamo Bay, apparently on suspicion of having sought to fight for the Taliban, said Mr Docke, who said his client had been tortured while at Guantanamo.
Mr Docke said the German authorities had failed to help, on the basis on Mr Kurnaz’s Turkish citizenship, with the Turkey’s response has been “belated and passive.” He was, however, finally release after Chanceller Angela Merkel raised his case during a visit to Washington this year, which, said Sarah Ludford (ALDE, UK) was proof of “what can be done when you have the political will to do it.”
Gül Pinar, a lawyer who represents the family of Mohammed Zammar, a German citizen, said they did not know where he was or even if he was alive. He had been arrested in Morocco in 2001, said Mrs Pinar, presumably under the US extraordinary renditions programme, and sent to Damascus by private plane, where it is thought he may still be imprisoned in Syria’s Far-Filastin prison. She said that while she could not prove it, she believed the German intelligence services had been involved. Sylvia-Yvonne Kaufmann (GUE/NGL, DE) said the committee should raise the case when they visit Berlin later in September.
The Committee also heard from Francesca Longhi, lawyer for Abou Elkassim Britel, an Italian citizen detained in Pakistan and, said Mrs Longhi transported to Morocco “under CIA aegis” aboard a private American plane in May 2002. Currently held in a Moroccan prison, Mr Britel has been subjected to “torture and illegal means of interrogation", his lawyer said during the hearing. "Our [Italian] government", she added, "did not choose to look into that”.
2006-09-11 Temporary Committee on the alleged use of European countries by the CIA for the transport and illegal detention of prisoners Chair Carlos Coelho EPP-ED PT 20060908IPR10498
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
