Human rights: Sri Lanka, North Korean refugees in Thailand, Zimbabwe
Human rights
2006-09-07 - 18:02
At the close of this week's plenary session, Parliament adopted three resolutions on the continuing violence in Sri Lanka, the plight of North Korean refugees in Thailand and the situation in Zimbabwe.
Sri Lanka
In its resolution on Sri Lanka, Parliament highlights the deteriorating situation in the country, the results of which have been "hundreds of deaths, 200,000 people displaced from their homes, 500,000 civilians in Jaffna deprived of essential food and water supplies and vital post-tsunami reconstruction disrupted".
MEPs deplore the resumption of large-scale violence and they level criticism at both sides in the conflict, the Tamil Tigers (LTTE) and government forces, saying that "elements on both sides of the divide in Sri Lanka are intent on conflict" and insisting that "they pull back from the brink".
Among other things, MEPs point to the bombing, apparently by the LTTE, of a bus in a land-mine attack on 15 June that killed 64 people as well as the shooting, apparently by government forces, of 17 Sri Lankans working for the NGO Action against Hunger .
The resolution stresses "the need for Government forces engaged in counter-insurgency and domestic security operations to exercise maximum restraint in order to minimise any risk of innocent civilian casualties". It also repeats the EP's "condemnation of the appalling abuse of children through the recruitment of child soldiers, which is a war crime, and calls on all rebel groups to stop this practice". The "intransigence of the LTTE leadership over the years" is also criticised.
MEPs regret the breakdown of peace negotiations and underscore the need for a human rights agreement between the parties. They call on "all parties to the conflict to guarantee the security of the Sri Lanka Monitoring Mission", which has recently felt obliged to withdraw some of its monitors following a demand by the LTTE that all EU nationals be excluded from the SLMM. The government and the LTTE are urged to "grant unhindered access for humanitarian aid workers, UN organisations and truce monitors".
While calling on the Sri Lankan government and other parties to "take robust action against terrorism", MEPs also urge them to address legitimate Tamil grievances, for example an "early revision of the Constitution of Sri Lanka…to define the state as a secular, democratic republic in which all religions are respected". They welcome the Sri Lankan president's "commitment to maximum devolution for the Tamil peoples" and call for this to be given substance.
Lastly, the resolution voices concern that "although the EU has allocated almost €125 million in post-tsunami humanitarian aid and reconstruction aid for Sri Lanka" enduring political gridlock is delaying the release of a further €50 million, thereby hindering vital reconstruction work.
North Korean asylum seekers in Thailand
In this resolution Parliament notes that in recent years "tens of thousands of North Koreans have fled from their home country because of repression and widespread hunger" and that some have risked their lives to reach other countries, including Thailand, which has become a transit destination for such refugees.
The Thai authorities are keen to enforce the law on illegal immigration and on 22 August arrested a group of 175 asylum seekers in Bangkok. These people were taken to court, fined and then jailed because they were unable to pay the fines.
The European Parliament's response is first to deplore the situation whereby thousands of North Koreans flee their country because of the conditions there. However, MEPs go on to urge the Thai authorities "not to repatriate the North Korean refugees, since they and their families will face dire consequences".
Indeed, they call on Thailand, in view of its "long tradition of hospitality towards refugees" and as a "responsible member of the international community" to seek a solution by sending the refugees to a third country of their choice after their 30-day jail sentence expires. Parliament also "calls on countries able to take the refugees to make this known at the earliest opportunity to ensure that they are not kept in detention".
Lastly, the Council and Commission are asked to bring up this question at the ASEM summit on 10 and 11 September.
Zimbabwe
Not for the first time, MEPs feel compelled to draw attention to the situation in Zimbabwe. In its resolution the EP "condemns the Mugabe dictatorship for its relentless oppression of the Zimbabwean people and expresses its profound disappointment at the refusal of regional actors such as the AU, the SADC and South Africa to take a more robust stance".
MEPs highlight the plight of "those forced out of their homes during the atrocious 'Operation Murumbatsvina' campaign" and what they say is "one of the world's worst HIV-AIDS epidemics, with over 3,200 people a week dying from the disease".
Parliament refuses to recognise the recently created 'Senate' in Zimbabwe as a mere 15 per cent of Zimbabweans voted in an election process guaranteed to favour Zanu-PF.
MEPs voice "consternation at the regime's covert attempts to take control of the Zimbabwe Red Cross Society" and the impact this could have on many vulnerable Zimbabweans who receive vital assistance from it.
Parliament regrets the split in the opposition MDC and calls on all those opposed to the regime to come together to bring about change for the better in the country.
The resolution recognises that the EU's targeted sanctions "have failed to have the desired impact" and asks the Council "to ensure that all Member States rigorously apply existing restrictive measures".
MEPs deplore the regime's lavish spending on military aircraft from China as well as on vehicles for senior army officers. In an appeal to China itself, MEPs urge it and other countries to desist from supplying weapons and other support to the Mugabe regime.
Parliament also "insists that all aid destined for Zimbabwe must be delivered through genuine non-governmental organisations". It asks the Commission to give assurances that none of the aid provided by the EU for seven major projects benefited the Mugabe regime.
The resolution also suggests that Zimbabwe be excluded from any involvement in the 2010 World Cup - which is to be held in South Africa - a point which generated some debate among MEPs, who in the end voted in favour of the idea.
The final texts of the resolutions adopted will be available in due course via the link below.
20060901IPR10256 Full text of resolutions
-//EP//TEXT TA 20060907 TOC NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
