Thursday in Plenary
Institutions
2006-09-12 - 13:14
MEPs call for protection of data on air passengers
International affairs dominated the last day of the Strasbourg plenary. MEPs adopted a resolution on the Middle-East, reiterating that "there is no military solution to the conflict". On the issue of the transfer of information on European air passengers to the US government, (which the European Court of Justice ruled must end by 30 September), MEPs supported a report that calls for the US to ensure offer adequate protection for this data. A report on human rights in China was also adopted.
Lebanon, Middle East - peace and stability needed in Europe's "neighbourhood"
That was the message that emerged from a heated debate on the issues on Wednesday, with a compromise resolution being voted upon on Thursday. It called for political will to tackle the "root causes" of the recent crises. In the text Parliament expressed "deep regret" at the civilian lives lost during the conflict and the continuing humanitarian catastrophe in Lebanon.
On international mediation in the region, the deployment of 7000 personal from EU members as part of a UN force was welcomed. The resolution called for a "democratic and sovereign Lebanon" to play a role, as well as that of the Arab League and the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly (EMPA). MEPs agreed to send a fact-finding mission to Lebanon, Palestine and Israel.
Passenger data - EU and US
In the global fight against terrorism, the United States government sees data about air passengers as a legitimate intelligence tool to help prevent further terrorist attacks. However, when this data involves information about foreign nationals, in this case EU citizens, the issue is certain to be controversial.
The European Court of Justice set a deadline of 30 September, 2007, to end the practice of passenger data on Europeans who travel to the US being transferred to the US government. This has led to a great deal of uncertainty about what will happen next. In this context MEPs supported a report by Dutch Liberal MEP Sophie in 't Veld calling for the US to offer adequate protection regarding the privacy of this data. The report calls for the Council of Ministers to negotiate an interim agreement with the US until November 2007 under Parliamentary scrutiny, and for a new one after that. MEPs are concerned that the US will negotiate bi-lateral agreements with countries- and want US customs officials to work on a case-by-case basis rather than by requesting information wholesale. In the debate the Ms in 't Veld called for joint action in the fight against terrorism.
EU- China
The abolition of the death penalty, forced labour camps and the illegal trade in organs were three things MEPs called for in adopting an own-initiative report on EU-Chinese relations by Dutch MEP Bas Belder of the Independence/Democracy Group. The report also calls for retaining the EU arms embargo against China and want the Chinese currency to be valued at a more flexible rate.
MEPs also discussed human rights conditions in Sri Lanka, Zimbabwe and the situation of North Korean asylum seekers, in particular in Thailand with three resolutions being adopted.
20060908STO10482 Report on Passenger's data- Press Info Resolution on Middle East - Press Info Report on China - Press Info
EN
1
PHOTO
20060908PHT10484.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060901IPR10254 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060901IPR10250 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060901IPR10251 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
