Working in the EU: has enlargement presented new opportunities?
Employment policy
2006-09-21 - 13:48
Looking for jobs abroad has become more popular
This year is "European year of workers mobility". However, two years after 10 new countries joined the Union, a recent report by the "European Citizen Action Service" (ECAS) has highlighted the continuation of certain barriers to workers mobility.
Entitled "Who's still afraid of EU enlargement" the report by former European Commissioner Mario Monti analyses the current situation and makes several recommendations to improve it. Mr Monti said that "Both old and new Member States have benefited from free movement within the EU."
When 10 new countries joined the EU in 2004, only Ireland, the UK and Sweden allowed unrestricted access for their workers. This has certainly proved popular, in the UK alone 427, 000 people had come to work there by August this year. Two years later Finland, Greece, Portugal, Spain and Italy followed suit. Belgium, Denmark, Luxembourg, France and the Netherlands are gradually easing restrictions while only Austria and Germany remain committed to keeping them for the maximum time allowed - until 2011.
The report says that "transitional arrangements" maintain the artificial separation between "old" and "new" Europe leading to mistrust. It also calls for increased labour inspection to prevent pay inequalities and discrimination (workers are entitled to the minimum wage in the country of destination). It also calls for "circular migration" so that workers use the knowledge and skills acquired abroad when they return back home. This could prevent a feared "brain drain". On the new EU members Romania and Bulgaria - likely to join in 2007 - it calls for policy not to be based on "predictions that may be proved wrong".
The view of MEPs
Irish MEP Mairead McGuinness of the European People's Party said that "since enlargement in 2004 we have seen an increase in migration from the 'new' Member States to some of the EU 15. In spite of the fact that free movement of labour is one of the key freedoms enjoyed by EU citizens it appears that it is not exercised as often as it could be". For the Socialist Group Libor Rouček, a Czech Member MEP said "the ECAS report confirms again the experience of those Member States which have opened their labour markets…that the fears of massive influx of the labour force are not justified."
Ona Juknevičienė, a Lithuanian Liberal member warned of the danger of migrant flows. "The majority of Lithuanian emigrants seek for the better jobs outside the country because they must support their families and old parents. These are the most needy groups of social society many of them under the poverty line. The problem of "brain drain" from Lithuania is also significant..."
Jean Lambert, a British Green MEP who helped organise the unveiling of the ECAS report in Strasbourg, commented that "the findings of the ECAS report add to the body of evidence confirming the positive impact of enlargement and workers mobility, which should dispel the unfounded fears still held by EU Member States. The concerns...have proved unfounded - there has been no flood of migrants, welfare or otherwise."
For the European United Left Portuguese Member Ilda Figueiredo said "I agree that the inspections (into possible exploitation) must be intensified to prevent exploitation and unequal treatment of immigrants".
And finally, share your experience. ECAS opened a "free movement" hotline on 1 August that will be open until 30 September to collect evidence from individuals and companies about their experiences".
20060914STO10659 ECAS report: Who's still afraid of EU Enlargement Parliament's Employment and Social Affairs Committee Eures: Information on jobs and learning in Europe ECAS hotline
EN
1
PHOTO
20060913PHT10649.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.ecas.org/news/667/default.aspx?id=173
EN
3
LINK
/activities/expert/committees/presentation.do?committee=1238&language=EN
EN
4
LINK
http://europa.eu.int/eures/index.jsp
EN
5
LINK
http://www.ecas.org/product/91/default.aspx?id=549
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
