Pakistani President hopes for more trade with the EU
External relations
2006-09-13 - 10:06
In a speech to the Foreign Affairs Committee on Tuesday, Pakistan’s president Pervez Musharraf told MEPs that they could help democratisation and development in his country by supporting greater access for it to the EU market. Mr Musharraf also warned that the Taliban have become more dangerous than Al-Qaida. However, he held out good hope of improving relations with neighbouring India.
Mr Musharraf stressed that his country "is not an extremist, intolerant society as perceived in the west" and that the vast majority of the Pakistani people are moderate and progressive people, who want peace. He warned that the Taliban were now a more dangerous threat to security than Al-Qaida, as the Taliban have their roots in the population, which Al-Qaida never had. Mr Musharraf said that his country had fought hard against Al-Qaida and had dislodged its terrorists from Pakistan’s cities and valleys. What the Pakistan government was now trying to do was to tie in the Pakhtuns in the North Western Frontier Province by providing administrative and military support, while undertaking a massive reconstruction effort.
With a growing economic and technological base, development booming and poverty reducing, Pakistan can play an essential role in the region, Mr Musharraf said. He also pointed to the political and economic reforms undertaken so far. The EU could help Pakistan's economic development and thus its fight against "Talibanisation" by investing and by enhancing trade with Pakistan.
As regards India, Pakistan’s president said that relations had never been as good and that he put his trust in Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh as an "honest and flexible" man. "We must now show boldness and grasp the opportunity to go for a solution", Mr Musharraf added.
MEPs Neena Gill (PES, UK) and Lilli Gruber (PES, IT) brought up issues such as gender discrimination, a lack of respect for human rights and serious flaws in Pakistan's democratisation process. José Salafranca (EPP-ED, ES), Annemie Neijts (ALDE, BE) and Angelika Beer (Greens/EFA, DE) questioned Mr Musharraf about Pakistan's development of nuclear weapons and its unwillingness to sign the Non-Proliferation Treaty.
Mr Musharraf will meet with EP President Borrell and the political group leaders on Wednesday.
2006-09-11 Committee on Foreign Affairs In the Chair Elmar BROK EPP-ED DE 20060908IPR10492
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
