Ellen Johnson Sirleaf: building a new Liberia
External relations
2006-09-26 - 14:30
The President of Liberia, Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, addressed a formal sitting of MEPs on Tuesday. She told them Liberians were committed to move from the crisis of the past to the opportunity of the present, building "a new Liberia from the ashes of an old turbulent past to a future of hope and promise."
President Josep Borrell said it was an honour to welcome the first woman elected as president of an African country. He said that she had previously been the first woman budget minister of her country in 1979. Unfortunately the following year, there had been coup, which market the beginning of 25 years of violence, including a 14 year civil war, systematic pillaging of resources and huge violations of human rights. "The long war could not have been more tragic: there were 250 000 victims among a population of three million, almost 10 per cent. A million people had to leave their homes, with some returning only now. There was a huge campaign of rape of women. Three quarters of the population was living on less that one dollar a day, and unemployment reached 85 per cent. Basically there wasn't an economy as we understand the term in the west. It must have been difficult for anyone to take reigns."
Mr Borrell added that Parliament was very pleased with the role of the community of West African States in ending the conflict. EU election observers, led by Max van den Berg (PES, NL) had reported that despite some problems, the presidential election had met international standards. "We welcome you as symbol of democracy, women's rights and fight against corruption and impunity (...) In April, I was able to tell the plenary, how pleased I was with arrest and extradition of Charles Taylor. This was great progress against impunity for criminals around the world. After so much suffering, we must offer our support."
The arms were now silent, and the events were followed with less interest from the media, said Mr Borrell. Liberian society needed to move to reconciliation and economic development. "On that road you will have EU support for Liberia can continue to be symbol of freedom that was its origins."
President Johnson Sirleaf began her address by pointing out that her government had come to office only eight months ago, and they had accepted that responsibility fully aware of the magnitude of the challenges the country faced after fourteen years of civil war and destruction. The damage and negative consequences has, she said, been enormous, deepening the state of poverty. GDP had declined by 90 per cent since the 1980s, exports by 95 per cent. The country's external debt of USD 3.7 billion was the equivalent of 800 per cent of GDP or 3,000 per cent of export earnings.
"When we took office there was no electricity and no water. Schools and clinics had crumbled, and roads were impassable. Institutions of governance had completely collapsed and corruption was rampant. HIV rates had soared. Few children were in school, and many were dying of curable diseases. Today, well over three quarters of our people live below the poverty line of one dollar per day. An overwhelming majority of people, mainly the youth, are either unemployed or employed in the informal sector.
Yet Liberians, she said, were a resilient people, and they were counting on her and her administration to create the conditions to realise their dreams.
"Their dreams are not complicated. They just want the simple things that most people take for granted: to live their lives in peace, get a good education, and be able to provide for their families. These things are not too much for Liberians to dream about. But time is pressing. As you all know, the risks of regression to war in post-conflict societies is high when the government and the international community are not able to make strong efforts at key moments, and sustain them over time. Liberia today is at one of those key moments. Our efforts, joined by those of our partners, over the next few months, the next year, and beyond, will determine the future course of the nation. If we wait too long to introduce the policy changes and reforms that are needed, or if our international partners wait to long to ramp up [their] support, then we may lose the best change Liberia has had in a generation to end the conflict permanently and build the foundations for growth and prosperity. We can't let that happen."
The Liberian President said the dividend of peace needed to be quickly consolidated, and the economic and financial haemorrhaging halted. The core principles were democracy, accountability, free enterprise, good governance, respect for human rights and equitable distribution of natural resources. Poverty reduction was the heart of the strategy, based on four "pillars" of reconstruction and development: enhancing security and peace in Liberia, revitalising the economy, improving democratic governance and revitalising the social and physical infrastructure. Restructuring the previously corrupt and dysfunctional security forces was underway, there was a strong economic focus on agriculture and natural resource industries, a strong anti-corruption framework was being developed, and education was being put at the heart of government efforts to improve the infrastructure. "We recognise," she said," that no nation can develop under conditions of a 70 per cent illiteracy rate." Health services and roads also needed rehabilitation. "In one of our most important achievements, in July we were able to tune on electricity and water to parts of Monrovia for the first time in fifteen years."
"Our mission is to make the Liberian government work again and be more responsive in delivering quality services to the Liberian people. The associated challenges are so daunting and the needs and expectations of our people so massive, that the government of Liberia cannot satisfactorily respond by itself. There is a critical need for forging and building strong strategic partnerships." Mrs Johnson Sirleaf expressed gratitude for the assistance Liberia had received from the EU and its Member States, and said she hoped an Economic Partnership Agreement with the EU could soon be agreed.
"We are off to a good start. For that we are grateful to the Liberian people, and to the international community including the EU and the European Commission, which is a key partner in this regard. But it is just a start." Planning for a Partnership conference was underway, along with development of a medium term poverty reduction and growth strategy. "But it is critical that in the next few months Liberians begin to see steady, tangible progress. I would like to ask all of our partners to work closely with us in the next few weeks so that we can make sure that the many activities that need to be implemented during the upcoming dry season are ready to go on time. We cannot afford to waste any time and in many projects we need to speed the process of disbursement and implementation. We specifically ask for your support of this objective through the European Commission."
The Liberian President said she wanted to ensure there was no gap in support as emergency programmes came to an end and longer-term programmes got started. It was essential to ensure the efforts of the government and its international partners were synchronised and harmonised. "We need to work together with both strong planning, and rapid and effective implementation (...) We will take advantage of this critical moment in Liberia's history to put the conflict to rest and speed the process of reconstruction and development."
"We are glad that our nation has been blessed. Liberia is not a poor country but a country that has been poorly managed. We are committed to change this; to pursue those goals that will move us from the crisis of the past to the opportunity of the present. We are committed, as a people, to build a new Liberia from the ashes of an old turbulent past to a future of hope and promise. We are committed to strategic partnerships based upon mutuality of respect and benefits."
President Borrell concluded the formal sitting by telling Mrs Johnson Sirleaf: "Your presence here and the words you have expressed will I am sure help Europe to take on board the problems you are facing and commit further to the development of Africa."
20060926IPR10990 EU relations with Liberia Profile of Her Excellency Ellen Johnson Sirleaf
EN
1
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/development/Geographical/RegionsCountries/Countries/Liberia.htm
EN
2
LINK
http://liberianembassy.org/biography.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
