Galileo programme - MEPs welcome progress but call for creative solutions
Research and innovation
2006-09-28 - 16:19
In adopting a joint resolution on the Galileo programme, MEPs call on the Commission to assess what modifications in legal and procedural regulations could be made in order to ensure the continuous progress of the project.
The House points out that this does not imply reducing the competences and responsibilities of institutions, but may mean the application of solutions that are more creative and more appropriate to the objectives of the programme.
MEPs acknowledge the new updated timetable and calls on the Commission to comply with it and to enforce compliance; together with the approval of the concession contract, asks to be informed about the additional costs resulting from the delay. MEPs call, furthermore, on the Commission to inform Parliament about any significant future alterations, but in a timely fashion, not with a delay of years.
The House welcomes the progress made in negotiations with the concessionaries. MEPs call on the parties concerned in the European space industry participating in the consortium to strive to reach agreement in a constructive manner, so that this common European project can play its part in fulfilling the Lisbon goals as soon as possible.
Parliament calls on the GNSS Supervisory Authority to deliver semi-annual progress reports to Parliament, with special regard to progress in tasks to be imposed upon the GNSS Supervisory Authority by directive from 1 January 2007. MEPs also call on the GNSS Supervisory Authority to invite the expert nominated by the European Parliament in continuous observer status.
Parliament calls on the Commission, considering the Community character of the project, to ensure that Parliament is informed before the signing of any contract of institutional participation by third countries. Finally, the House calls on the Council to ensure that no further delay in this project occurs.
20060922IPR10891 Motion for a resolution on taking stock of the GALILEO programme
-//EP//TEXT MOTION B6-2006-0511 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
