Thursday in Plenary: Freedom, security, justice, immigration, shark fins
Institutions
2006-10-02 - 10:45
The plight of immigrants was discussed
On Thursday MEPs adopted a resolution on immigration calling for a common EU approach and long term solutions and asking for more say in the area of the EU's "Freedom, security and justice" policy. They also adopted a report concerning shark fin removal on vessels, calling for tighter regulation and monitoring of existing rules forbidding the catching of sharks for their fins.
Illegal immigration - a common European approach needed
This summer alone, 30,000 illegal immigrants landed on the shores of the European Union countries. Many more are feared drowned in the attempt. This has brought the issue to the top of the political agenda and was debated by MEPs on Wednesday as part of the "freedom, justice security" debate. EU Justice ministers also met last week to discuss the issue.
A resolution on the issue followed on Thursday with MEPs calling for cooperation between countries - a "sharing of responsibilities and financial burdens...must be an integral part of EU immigration policy". The resolution also adds that any solution to the problem of immigration must deal with the "push" factors like poverty that drive people towards Europe.
On what to do with the immigrants who are already here, the resolution says that "mass regularisation" by providing work permits is not a long term solution and may encourage more migrants. MEPs recognised the need to adopt an equitable "EU return directive" guaranteeing return in dignity and safety of those who have no right to stay in Europe.
During the earlier debate on Wednesday Finland's Minister of interior Kari Rajamäki (representing the Council) said: "The EU needs to intensify its efforts to provide practical support for the Member States that bear the greatest burden due to the arrival of large numbers of illegal immigrants."
MEPs press for more Parliamentary influence in this area
Whether Europe has the tools to deal with this issue was raised in the debate. From the floor MEPs stressed the importance of moving away from unanimity in the Council of Minister on legal immigration issues and establishing co-decision powers in the near future - giving more power to the Parliament.
The Chair of Parliament's Civil Liberties Committee, French MEP Jean-Marie Cavada emphasised the necessity to implement the 'passerelle' clause. This would allow EU Ministers in the Council to take decisions by qualified majority, and not as at present by unanimity. This 'rearranging"' of the workings of the EU would allow the Parliament and the Court of Justice more power. Mr Cavada said that this would "reduce the democratic deficit, strengthen the rule of law and make decision-making more effective".
Also adopted on Thursday: Report on Shark fins
Shark fin soup - delicious but dangerous - to the shark. MEPs have supported a report that demands even tighter controls on the killing sharks for their fins. With some parts of the species facing extinction the need for action is great. The problem is that the fin is removed and the carcass thrown back into the sea. This practice has been legislated against in the EU since 2003 but the report called for greater monitoring of its implementation.
Shark's fin soup is in great demand in China, where it is considered a delicacy, counted as one of the pu foods (foods that are meant to endow the eater with the qualities of the animal being eaten).
20060929STO11177 European Parliament sets out its views on immigration: EP recommends keeping present regulations on shark fins: Texts adopted by Parliament
EN
1
PHOTO
20060929PHT11217.jpg
EN
4
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN#
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060922IPR10897 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060922IPR10903 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
