Wednesday in Plenary: Turkey, Lebanese PM, public services, Darfur
Institutions
2006-09-29 - 13:19
"Europe can play a unique role" - Lebanese PM Siniora
MEPs adopted a report on Turkey, criticising the apparent slowing down of reform and called for improved
relations with Cyprus and Armenia. The EP endorsed a report that calls for the Commission to provide greater legal clarity in the way that the EU's public services are provided. MEPs also discussed the situation in Darfur and leaders of Parliament's Political Groups met with Lebanese Prime Minister Fouad Siniora.
Turkey: MEPs critical of slowdown in reform
The report on Turkey drafted by Dutch Christian Democrat Camiel Eurlings dwells on two important principles: namely that negotiation on EU membership does not automatically lead to membership, and that the EU's capacity to "absorb" (be able to function properly) Turkey is a vital consideration.
On specifics it called for Ankara to recognise Cyprus - an EU member - and lift its embargo on her shipping and aircraft. It also called for the Turkish government to do more to facilitate academic research and cultural understanding into the massacres of Armenians in 1915. Turkey refuses to accept that these amounted to "genocide." The Eurlings report as adopted however did not suggest acceptance of this as a precondition of EU membership. MEPs also called for changes to article 301 of the Turkish penal code which currently restricts freedom of expression.
The report welcomed some recent initiatives by Turkey in combating torture, fighting corruption and improving the plight of women. For a full account of the debate see the link below.
Prime Minister of Lebanon: hopes of reconstruction and peace
During a meeting with leaders of Parliament's political groups Lebanese Prime Minister Fouad Siniora condemned Israel for what he called a "systematic campaign of destruction". He spoke of the civilian lives lost, infrastructure and an economy destroyed.
He expressed his gratitude for the EU's solidarity and financial and military support. He said that "Europe can play a unique role" in the volatile region and called for the international community to tackle the "root causes" of the conflict. He also warned MEPs that problems in the Middle East impact on Europe. "No-one can ignore the fact that those escaping oppression, desperation, and poverty usually end up at your doorstep..."
The leaders of political groups expressed their solidarity and wished his people success in rebuilding an independent and democratic Lebanon, while reminding him that all sides have to make concessions, work together and the rights of all peoples have to be respected. For a full report of this exchange see the link below.
Present at the meeting was Parliament's President Josep Borrell who called for "sustainable peace" in the region during his recent visit to Beirut. During discussions President Borrell noted that Parliament was one of the first institutions to call for an immediate ceasefire during the war.
Future of Public Services in Europe
The report on public services approved by MEPs calls on the European Commission to clarify the position of the EU's internal market and competition rules in relation to these services. At its heart lies the question the extent to which some public services are open to competition. The report rejects withdrawing whole areas of services from competition and internal market rules and calls for guidelines, principles and legal initiatives from the Commission to achieve legal certainty.
Drafted by German Social Democrat Bernhard Rapkay in response to a White Paper from the Commission - its adoption marks a compromise between the main political groups in Parliament. It states that it is for public authorities in EU countries to decide which public services should be supplied "in-house" or be contracted out. In response the Commission has said it will outline proposals before the end of the year.
Situation in Darfur - statement by Commission and Council
The grim situation in Darfur was outlined - over 300,000 dead and 2 million displaced with a further 3 million dependent on international aid and the May peace agreement is not being observed. The EU is already engaged in the region with humanitarian aid of €340 million and support to the mission of the African Union of €242 million.
MEPs underlined the positive role of the African Union and its Africa Mission in Sudan (AMIS), but noted that it does not have resources to avert the crisis. According to Members, the possible involvement of the Arab League could be positive. Solutions proposed by MEPs included the deployment of UN forces and greater and firmer diplomatic and humanitarian efforts in the region. The enforcement of a no-fly zone was also raised as one way of stopping the bombing of civilians. A few MEPs even suggested considering the possibility of NATO humanitarian intervention because so much is at stake.
MEPs passed a resolution today (Thursday) on Darfur condemning "the continuing violations of the ceasefire by all parties, and in particular the violence directed against the civilian population and the targeting of humanitarian assistance". It also called on the international community to do all it could to solve the crises. See link below.
20060928STO11155 Turkey: More Info / Press Info Public Services: More Info / Press Info Lebanese PM in Parliament: More Info / Press Info Resolution on the Middle East: Parliament Resolution on the situation in Darfur
EN
1
PHOTO
20060928PHT11159.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060922IPR10896 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060922IPR10880 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060922IPR10920 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2006-0348 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060922IPR10900 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
