MEPs urge Sudanese to accept UN peacekeeping force
External relations
2006-09-28 - 14:21
In adopting a resolution on the situation in Darfur, the European Parliament urges the Government of Sudan to accept a United Nations peacekeeping force in Darfur, under Chapter VII of the UN Charter. MEPs underlines that Sudan has failed in its 'responsibility to protect' its own people and is therefore obliged to accept a UN force in line with UNSC resolution 1706.
The House calls on the UN Security Council to bring pressure to bear on the Sudanese authorities to accept the deployment of the already authorised UN Mission to Darfur, with a clear Chapter VII mandate and enhanced capacities given to such a mission through UN Security Council Resolution 1706.
Parliament condemns the continuing violations of the ceasefire by all parties, and in particular the violence directed against the civilian population and the targeting of humanitarian assistance,
The House demands that the Sudanese authorities not only pose no obstacles to the deployment and activities of the UN Mission in Darfur, but also create the conditions necessary for the effective functioning of this mission. MEPs stress that any failings by the Sudanese authorities in this regard will be sanctioned.
MEPs calls on China and Russia to play a positive role at the UN in efforts to ensure that a UN peacekeeping force can be deployed and to put to good use their role in the region to facilitate the deployment of that mission and prevent any bloodshed.
The House calls, in this regard, on China to build on the joint statement made by China and the EU on 11 September in which 'leaders emphasised that transition from an AU to a UN operation would be conducive to the peace in Darfur'. MEPs urge the Chinese Government to act on this statement by using its influence with Sudan to persuade the Government of Sudan to accept a UN peacekeeping force. MEPs calls on the Arab League to cease its complicit approach to Sudan's continued intransigence over the need for a UN peacekeeping force.
Parliament calls on the EU to call for the urgent enforcement of the no-fly zone over Darfur established by UNSC Resolution 1591 and urges the international community to liaise with Chad to discuss enforcing the no fly-zone from eastern Chad.
MEPs call on the EU and other international actors to work specifically with the UN and the AU to ensure that peacekeeping forces in Darfur have the capability to react rapidly to ceasefire violations or provocations by any party. Parliament also calls on the EU, the US and other international actors to impose sanctions on any side, including the government, that violates the ceasefire or attacks civilians, peacekeepers or those involved in humanitarian operations and to take all necessary action to help end impunity by enforcing the Security Council sanctions regime. The House calls on the Government of Sudan and the international community to fully cooperate with the International Criminal Court in order to end impunity. Parliament also calls on all permanent members of the UN Security Council to assume their global responsibility and not to hinder any measures intended to foster peace, security and stability in the Darfur region of Sudan, but rather to support and promote all appropriate steps towards a sustainable resolution of the conflict.
The House calls upon all parties, in particular the Government of Sudan, to ensure the full, safe and unhindered access of relief personnel to all those in need in Darfur as well as the delivery of humanitarian assistance, in particular to internally displaced persons and refugees. Finally, MEPs call for a significant increase in the humanitarian aid provided by the international community to the nearly 3 million people who are totally dependent on international aid for food, shelter and medical care.
20060922IPR10900 Joint motion for a resolution on the situation in Darfur
-//EP//TEXT MOTION P6-RC-2006-0512 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
