Irish MEPs meet farmers at Ploughing Championships
Agriculture
Ireland
2006-10-03 - 14:45
Irish MEPs discuss agriculture policy during the World Ploughing Championships
Between 27 and 30 September 2006, the 75th National and 53rd World Ploughing Championships were held in Ireland. Up to 60,000 people per day attended the events, during which 327 competitors from 28 countries competed for the title. For the duration of the Ploughing Championships, the European Parliament Office in Ireland co-hosted an exhibition tent with the European Commission. Members of staff supplied information to the visiting public and answered a wide variety of questions.
On Friday 29 September, Irish MEPs gathered in the European Union's exhibition tent to discuss the future of the EU's agricultural and rural development policies with farmers. The lively discussion which took place was later followed by a wine reception. Representatives of Irish Farming and Forestry organisations attended the event, together with members of the public.
During the event, Fine Gael MEP, Mairéad McGuinness (EPP-ED) made the point that Irish farmers are now proud of their produce. She called on them to concentrate their efforts on the production of 'clean food'. She did however question Europe's ability to feed itself in ten years' time.
Some of the farmers present were critical of the impact of the EU's Agricultural Policy. Fianna Fáil MEP, Liam Aylward (UEN) responded to these concerns by pointing out that MEPs are taking their responsibilities towards farmers seriously. He went on to explain that although the European Parliament has particularly strong powers in areas such as environment and food safety, its role has been expanding with regard to the CAP.
A discussion took place about the question of importing Brazilian beef into the EU. Sinn Féin MEP, Bairbre De Brún (GUE/NGL) , emphasised the need for farmers to be able to compete on a level playing field.
In response to a question from local County Councillor Declan MacPartlin (Wexford), Sinn Féin MEP, Mary Lou McDonald (GUE/NGL) referred to the role of the EU in pushing the equality agenda and stated that she shouldn't be surprised if the impetus for disability and mental health legislation comes from Europe as well. She did however emphasise that she did not support a political system that seeks to place all power at the centre.
Fine Gael MEP, Avril Doyle (EPP-ED) spoke positively about the European Constitution, pointing out that 70% of that text concentrates on bringing the existing treaties together into one document, while 30% looks at how decisions are taken in the EU. She also warned farmers that "by 2013, we'd better be able to manage without payments from Europe".
On Saturday 30 September, independent MEP, Kathy Sinnott attended the Ploughing Championships and spoke to members of the public about the importance of protecting farm subsidies and ensuring justice for those 'damaged' by the Early Retirement Scheme.
20060927IPR11105 National and World Ploughing Championships 2006 Irish MEPs by region European Parliament Office in Ireland
EN
1
PHOTO
20061002PHT11293.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.npa.ie/
EN
3
LINK
/members/public/geoSearch/zoneList.do?country=IE&language=EN
EN
4
LINK
http://www.europarl.ie
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
