Trichet tells MEPs further monetary tightening warranted if forecasts are right
Economic and monetary affairs
2006-10-11 - 14:46
European Central Bank President Jean-Claude Trichet told MEPs on Tuesday that if present trends continue “it will remain warranted to further withdraw monetary accommodation.” During his regular ‘monetary dialogue’ with the Economics Committee, he also suggested a global solution was needed for the oversight of hedge funds.
Mr Trichet gave an upbeat assessment of the immediate prospects for the euro area, saying conditions were in place for the “economy to grow at solid rates around potential” in the rest of 2006 and 2007. If the recent fall in oil prices were to be sustained, this could “lead to somewhat stronger demand and output growth than embodied in the Governing Council’s baseline scenario.”
On inflation, the headline rate was projected to remain above 2 per cent on average for 2006 and 2007. “Stronger than currently expected wage developments post substantial upward risks to price stability. Against this background, it is crucial that the social partners continue to meet their responsibilities,” he said. Following several years of “robust monetary growth, the liquidity situation (...) continues to be ample by all plausible measures.” With the risks “clearly on the upside”, if the Bank’s assumptions were confirmed, “it will remain warranted to further withdraw monetary accommodation.”
Interest rates, pay rises, unemployment
Asked by Eoin Ryan (UEN, IE) whether the markets were right to assume base rates would not rise above 3.5 per cent in the foreseeable future, Mr Trichet said, “I would not like to say anything to change the expectations of the market till the end of the year and will not say anything on next year apart from that we will do all that is needed to ensure price stability and keep inflation expectations solidly anchored.” He added that the Bank would never commit itself ahead of each monthly decision but was “totally and inflexibly attached to our mandate.”
Robert Goebbels (PES, LU) said Mr Trichet was always calling for wage restraint and wondered if there were circumstances in which staff could expect to get greater purchasing power. The ECB President stressed that if productivity were increasing rapidly, wages could go up without risking inflation, which would cancel out any increase in purchasing power. Mr Goebbels wanted to know if the calls for restraint applied to top level management with share options as well as employees. Mr Trichet said the Bank did not differentiate – it called for everyone to behave wisely, management included.
Kurt Lauk (EPP-ED, DE) wanted to know the ECB President’s views on how to lower unemployment. Mr Trichet replied that structural reforms would considerably elevate the level of job creation: “Those who have already undertaken reforms have much lower levels of unemployment. There is a very large possibility to improve the situation in the euro area.”
Oversight needed for hedge funds?
A number of MEPs, including Ieke van den Burg (PES, NL), Wolf Klinz (ALDE, DE) and committee chair Pervenche Berès (PES, FR), asked about hedge funds, and whether the rapidly expanding investment businesses needed more direct oversight or regulation to counter possible systemic risks to financial stability. Mr Trichet stressed the positive side of the development of hedge funds and derivatives markets in spreading financial risk more widely than in the past, but said he was not complacent about potential dangers: “None of us are fully satisfied with the present situation of relying on major financial institutions to ensure their counterparts [outside regulatory oversight] are fit and proper and reliable. We need to improve the situation.”
He added that a global answer was needed – there was no point in any one jurisdiction acting alone, he said, as funds would just move to unregulated areas, and the systemic risks would remain the same. “We are relatively close to a global consensus, it just needs to mature,” he said, though he added this did not mean a specific package was to emerge soon. In the meantime, he called for institutions under supervision to be vigilant regarding their non-supervised partners.
2006-10-09 Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs Chair Pervenche Berès PES FR
Monetary Dialogue with the European Central Bank
20061009IPR11475 See the full text of Mr Trichet's opening statement to MEPs via this link
EN
1
LINK
http://www.ecb.eu/press/key/date/2006/html/sp061010.en.html
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
