Freedom, security and justice - MEPs and MPs call for more cooperation
Justice and home affairs
2006-10-11 - 17:49
Oversight: Jean-Marie Cavada, Chair of Civil Liberties Committee
The need for better cooperation across Europe to tackle the new challenges posed by illegal immigration and terrorism must not come at the expense of fundamental human rights. That was the message from MEPs, MPs and experts when they met at an interparliamentary meeting this week in the European Parliament to discus freedom, security and justice. Data protection, border control, immigration, terrorism and judicial cooperation were among the issues discussed.
The extent to which personal data on airline passengers and information on international bank transfers is made available to the US authorities was a source of lively debate. Since the 9/11 attacks the US has been increasingly active in using legal powers to obtain data which it considers may be useful in the fight against terrorism.
Sophie in't Veld, a Dutch Liberal MEP who drafted a report on passenger data, warned that "there is no adequate protection of personal data of EU citizens when information is handed out to third countries". She also called for the Parliament to be given more powers of oversight in this area.
Illegal immigration - border management
This summer tens of thousands of illegal immigrants landed in Spain and Italy - taking the issue to the top of the political agenda. How the EU protects it borders and what it does with the immigrants is now a pressing question.
In 2005 the Union set up "Frontex" - a border agency to spread information and launch operations to stem illegal immigration. Ilkka Laitinen, Director of the agency, told MEPs that its effectiveness would depend on the "political will" of EU members.
Manfred Weber, a German Christian Democrat MEP who is going to draft a report for Parliament on a proposed new directive on immigration, suggested including a "return ban" to forbid illegal immigrants who are returned to their country of origin from re-entering Europe for five years. A representative of the International Organisation for Migration, Bernd Hemingway, stressed that any proposed directive "must secure that returning of illegal immigrants is conducted in a dignified and human manner".
Fight terrorism - protect people's rights
Gijs De Vries - the EU's Counter-Terrorism Coordinator said "the war against terror must be waged according to human rights principles and international conventions. This is the only way to win hearts and minds on our side".
Rounding up the debate, Jean-Marie Cavada, a French Liberal member who chairs Parliament's Civil Liberties committee, called for greater cooperation at an EU level saying that "our citizens are more European than the institutions".
The European Commissioner for freedom, justice and security, Franco Frattini, deplored the delays in EU decision-making and complex mechanisms, and called for more use of qualified majority voting and co-decision with Parliament in order to progress. He also said the "root causes" of illegal immigration and terrorism must be addressed.
The meeting was jointly organised by the European Parliament and the Parliament of Finland, holder of the EU's rotating 6 month Presidency.
For a full account of the exchanges at the meeting, please click on the first link below.
20061006STO11421 Public hearing Immigration Programme of the hearing Parliament's Civil Liberties Committee
EN
1
PHOTO
20061005PHT11417.jpg
EN
4
LINK
/hearings/20061002/libe/programme_en.pdf
EN
5
LINK
/activities/expert/committees/presentation.do?committee=1248&language=EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061002IPR11236 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061002IPR11235 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
