Charges of Italian involvement in CIA kidnapping - prosecutor sets out his case to MEPs
Fundamental rights
2006-10-10 - 14:45
Milan prosecutor Armando Spataro set out to MEPs on Monday his grounds for charging 26 CIA agents and a Carabinieri marshal with kidnapping – and the head of the Italian military intelligence organisation SISMI with complicity in kidnapping – in relation to the February 2003 abduction of Egyptian cleric Abu Omar in Milan.
Speaking to the Temporary Committee looking into allegations of illegal CIA activities in Europe, Mr Spataro said that it had been hard to imagine that the CIA operation in Milan was organised “without any complicity on the part of the Italian authorities.”
Who was involved?
He first outlined the case against Luciano Pironi, a Carabinieri marshal who had, he said, been involved in planning and executing the operation. “His mobile phone was shown to be present in the time and place of the kidnapping,” said the prosecutor. His “frequent contacts” with CIA station chief Robert Lady were further evidence of involvement. When questioned by prosecutors, he had “confessed that he took part in the kidnapping,” asking Abu Omar for his identity papers to lure him to a van in where agents pulled him inside and drove off. He had told the prosecutor that Mr Lady had assured him “governmental cover” meant he would not be investigated.
Mr Spataro’s office was subsequently able to secure key evidence in the case by phone-tapping the phones of former SISMI General Gustavo Pignero and of his successor Marco Mancini. In June 2006, said Mr Spataro, Mr Mancini expressed his concern that the public prosecutor might be able to identify people who (on his own orders) had carried out checks on Abu Omar – checks meant to facilitate the kidnapping. The prosecutor said Mr Mancini admitted having organised a meeting of SISMI heads from northern Italy, in which it was agreed to carry out checks on Abu Omar. The decision to do so, Mr Spataro told MEPs, was “ordered from above.”
On this point, Mr Spataro cited Mr Mancini’s admission that it was Nicolo Pollari – the head of SISMI, who, in his appearance before the TDIP in March of this year, denied any involvement in the kidnapping – who provided him with a list of names, “including that of Abu Omar” and gave him “indications that Abu Omar should be observed in the run-up to the kidnapping”. Mr Spataro, though emphatic about SISMI complicity in the planning of the operation, had not found any proof of SISMI involvement in the kidnapping itself.
MEPs reaction
According to Wolfgang Kreissl-Dörfler (PES, DE), Mr. Spataro’s investigation “ shows that there have been serious violations of national law, international law, but also of European law and of the European Convention of Human Rights”. Rapporteur Claudio Fava (PES, IT) said: “We are facing a serious case of complicity” on the part of the intelligence services of a Member State. Nicolo Pollari, he added, “lied in front of this committee”.
Jas Gawronski (EPP-ED, IT) asked Mr Spataro whether Abu Omar could have been an “accomplice” in his own kidnapping. He cited a document from the questioning of Mr. Pironi, in which, he said, the Carabinieri argued that “this was a fake kidnapping and that the idea was to recruit Abu Omar” as a collaborator for SISMI and the CIA.
“There might have been an aim of recruitment,” replied Mr Spataro, “but that doesn’t mean that the kidnapping was organised” – or staged – with Abu Omar’s complicity. When Bogusław Rogalski (IND/DEM, PL) raised the issue again, Mr Spataro was direct: “The theory of a fake kidnapping is a lie, it is absolutely false” he said.
Asked by Sarah Ludford (ALDE, UK) whether he had “any indications that the Italian government had authorised the kidnapping”, Mr Spataro answered that “at this point”, he had “no evidence of that kind. […] The head of SISMI is the highest level we’ve reached”.
2006-10-09 Temporary Committee on the alleged use of European countries by the CIA for the transport and illegal detention of prisoners Chair Carlos COELHO EPP-ED PT 20061010IPR11511
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
