REACH: firm stand by Environment Committee at second reading
Environment
2006-10-10 - 17:35
In its second reading vote on REACH on Tuesday, the Environment Committee decided by a large majority to take a tougher line than the Council. MEPs called for the most hazardous substances to be substituted wherever possible and also stressed the duty of care principle and the need to promote alternatives to animal testing.
The committee adopted its report on REACH (the regulation on the registration, evaluation and authorisation of chemicals) by 42 votes to 12 with 6 abstentions. Rapporteur Guido Sacconi (PES, IT) said the vote confirmed four of Parliament's key priorities, which should stiffen its resolve in negotiations with Council. These priorities are the substitution of the most dangerous substances, the duty of care, the compulsory safety assessment for chemical products in amounts of less than 10 tonnes and the promotion of alternatives to animal testing.
Substitution of most hazardous substances
Reaffirming the position adopted by Parliament at first reading in November 2005, the Environment Committee argued that substances which cause cancer, reproduction problems or persistent problems in the human body should not be authorised unless three conditions are met: if "suitable alternative substances or technologies do not exist", if "it is demonstrated that the social or economic advantages outweigh the risks" of these substances to human health or the environment, or if the risk is "adequately controlled". Moreover, the authorisation given for the use of a substance should be limited to a five year period.
Duty of care
The Environment Committee says the REACH regulation should be implemented "in accordance with the duty of care" and having due regard for the obligations entered into by the EU and its Member States under international trade agreements, in particular within the WTO. This means that manufacturers, importers and downstream users of chemicals must make "every effort that may reasonably be required" to prevent, limit or remedy any adverse effects on the environment or human health and must provide adequate information about any risks and where appropriate provide technical assistance.
Alternatives to animal testing
According to the Environment Committee, the REACH regulation should promote tests that do not use animals. In addition, the Commission and the Member States and companies should allocate more resources to devising, validating and adopting tests not carried out using animals. However, MEPs do not want any of the fees paid to the new agency to be used for this purpose. Lastly, the European Centre for the Validation of Alternative Methods should be consulted on testing proposals that include animal tests.
Aid for small firms, agency, European label
To make it easier to apply the regulation, the committee calls on the EU to provide aid and support for small and medium-sized firms. It also urges the Member States to adopt special assistance measures to enable these companies to carry out the tests needed to collect the information required under the regulation and to put in place a comprehensive support network in cooperation with the Commission.
In addition, MEPs wish to beef up the role and involvement of Parliament in the governing bodies of the agency, which will be based in Helsinki: two Members of the EP should sit on the Management Board; the list of candidates for the board, drawn up by the Commission, should be sent to Parliament, which would then have three months to deliver its opinion; the nominee for Executive Director of the agency should undergo a hearing before being appointed by Parliament; members of the board, the director and the agency's experts should each year make a declaration of their financial interests, so as to guarantee the agency's independence.
Lastly, the Environment Committee wants the European Commission to put forward a legislative proposal on the creation of a European quality mark for articles which comply with the requirements of the regulation throughout their production process.
20061009IPR11474
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
