Debate on REACH ahead of committee vote
Environment
2006-10-05 - 12:01
The Environment Committee debated on Wednesday the 359 amendments tabled ahead of its second-reading vote on REACH, the planned regulation on the registration, evaluation and authorisation of chemicals. The vote takes place on 10 October. Differing views remain on key issues, including the authorisation procedure and the substitution of the most dangerous substances, the duty of care and a ban on animal testing.
Just days ahead of the vote, the author of the committee's report, Guido Sacconi (PES, IT), said it was possible "to accept the common position as a basis for negotiation while making the necessary corrections" to improve the Council text. He stressed that "the will to reach an agreement is there". The Council's common position, sent to Parliament on 7 September, takes on board 180 of the EP's 430 first-reading amendments, including the main features of those on registration and evaluation.
On the controversial subject of authorisations, in particular for the most dangerous substances, the Council position is not far from that adopted by Parliament in November 2005, according to Mr Sacconi. He said he could accept most of the amendments 208 to 265 tabled by committee members.
As regards the chemical safety report required of manufacturers, he preferred to limit this to the most dangerous substances. As to the duty of care, Mr Sacconi awaits the opinion of Parliament's Legal Service on the definition and meaning of this concept. A ban on animal testing is another of his priorities.
Mr Sacconi also referred to the chapters he regarded as having low priority at this stage of the negotiations, on which he would accept the common position: the scope of the regulation, registration and public information. Regarding the new European Chemicals Agency, he would accept the amendments tabled by Ria Oomen-Ruijten (EPP-ED, NL).
On behalf of her group, Ms Oomen-Ruijten said it was important to reach agreement before Tuesday's committee vote as "the plenary could react differently to the Environment Committee, especially on the question of substitution". Chris Davies (ALDE, UK) wanted an agreement to be reached but not just at any price and he believed "the EP would not necessarily be the loser if it went to conciliation". Carl Schlyter (Greens/EFA, SE) reminded the committee that his group wanted nanotechnologies to be covered by the regulation. Mr Sacconi asked him "to keep his cool on this issue and not overload REACH with further obligations".
The Finnish presidency has stated that at this stage it is not in a position to start negotiations with the EP, despite the exploratory discussions which have already been held between the three institutions in recent weeks. The Member States await the outcome of Parliament's committee vote next week before deciding on a negotiating mandate for the presidency.
Noting the entrenched positions on both sides on the questions of authorisation and substitution, the Commission representative emphasised that there was little room for manoeuvre vis-à-vis the Council's position, which the Commission has accepted.
Timetable
The second-reading vote by the Environment Committee is due to start on Tuesday 10 October at 9.30am. Mr Sacconi will hold a press conference the same day at 11.30am.
The plenary vote is currently scheduled for the Strasbourg session in late October.
2006-10-04 Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety Chair Karl-Heinz FLORENZ EPP-ED DE
Procedure: Codecision, second reading
Committee vote: 10 October
Plenary vote: October II, Strasbourg
20061002IPR11247 Draft report by G. Sacconi on REACH and the amendments tabled
EN
1
LINK
/meetdocs/2004_2009/organes/envi/envi_20061003_1500.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
