Call to remove unjustifiable barriers to competition in the professions
Economic and monetary affairs
2006-10-12 - 13:55
Parliament has given a welcome to dialogue between the Commission, Member States and professional bodies aimed at dismantling unjustified or harmful barriers to competition in professional services. With 534 votes in favour, 62 against and 9 abstentions, Parliament adopted an own-initiative report, drawn up by Jan Christian Ehler (EPP-ED, DE) in reaction to the Commission’s latest communication on the issue.
It says effective and transparent self-regulation can be appropriate, but that Member States should ensure it does not damage consumer interests. MEPs support the adoption of codes of conduct by professional service providers.
Parliament acknowledges the right to issue regulations based on traditional, geographic and demographic specificities, but emphasises that such rules should restrict competition as little as possible, and that substantive reform of the existing system is needed to help attain the Lisbon targets.
MEPs say that the mandatory fixed or minimum fees and a ban on negotiating fees based on results might be detrimental to the quality of service to the public and to competition. They therefore call on Member States to overcome these constraints through measures which are less restrictive.
MEPs want restrictions on advertising by professionals to be largely dispensed with, limited only to duly justified exceptional cases.
Parliament urges the Commission to examine more carefully the expected impact of the full removal of unnecessary obstacles to competition, including on sectors that have limited resources or that are restricted to certain regions.
Finally the report raises the issue of subdividing regulatory protection by category of consumer group, suggesting this may need further analysis.
20061011IPR11556 Follow-up to the report on competition in professional services
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5354432
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
