CIA renditions: MEPs obtain more details in London
Fundamental rights
2006-10-09 - 13:16
MEPs from the temporary committee looking into allegations of illegal CIA activity in Europe say their visit to London elicited important new information on a number of specific cases. They expressed regret, however, that the British government had not been more forthcoming in its responses.
Speaking on Friday after a two-day visit to London by a delegation from the temporary committee, the leader of the delegation, Sarah Ludford (ALDE, UK) said: "Our visit was valuable in helping obtain important new information on specific cases of extraordinary rendition. The meetings have highlighted the need to investigate allegations concerning the involvement of UK intelligence services personnel in rendition operations against British victims and the possible holding of terrorist suspects in an air base in Germany."
"We are encouraged by the effective work already done by the Westminster parliament, through the Foreign Affairs Committee and Joint Committee on Human Rights as well as through the All-Party Parliamentary Group on Extraordinary Rendition, and by the fact that the Intelligence and Security Committee has launched an enquiry". Noting the committee's unsuccessful request to meet the Foreign Secretary and representatives of the intelligence services, Baroness Ludford said of the meeting with the Minister for Europe: "We were grateful to have the opportunity to meet Geoff Hoon. However, we felt that his answers were not as forthcoming or informative as would be justified by the weight of the allegations raised in the various parliamentary fora".
During their visit MEPs also had the opportunity to meet a British citizen who was a victim of extraordinary rendition, and the lawyers and relatives of three other victims who are still in Guantanamo. They met MPs and peers involved with the issue, as well as investigative journalists and NGOs. The cross-party delegation was composed of seven members of the temporary committee.
Rapporteur Claudio Fava (PES, IT) said: "It was especially meaningful for us to meet the British citizen Martin Mubanga owing to the dramatic circumstances under which he was interrogated, rendered to Guantanamo and held there for 33 months, during which period the UK authorities failed to give him the appropriate legal assistance. I regret that the British government did not want to comment on that issue during our visit".
2006-10-02 Temporary Committee on the alleged use of European countries by the CIA for the transport and illegal detention of prisoners Delegation chair Sarah LUDFORD ALDE UK 20061002IPR11285
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
