September written questions: MEPs raise questions on child welfare
Institutions
2006-10-13 - 10:10
Children's access to the internet was one question
Of the 592 replies that MEPs received to questions in September, a significant number covered child issues such as education, delinquency, child labour, adoption, asylum and the influence of the internet. Human rights violations of minors in Bolivia, Colombia and Nepal were also addressed. Written questions from MEPs to the European Commission and Council are a way to highlight issues or abuses and clarify aspects of EU law. Below are a sample of the questions and answers for September.
Adoption of children
British Socialist Catherine Stihler asked about the protection of children when they are adopted between different countries. In particular she asked about protection of these rights in EU-countries like Latvia, Lithuania, the Czech Republic, Hungary and Belgium (which have high rates of institutional care for young children). The Commission answered that throughout the accession process (when 4 of the 5 joined the EU in May 2004), it promoted the reform of child protection and closely monitored progress on children’s rights in all the acceding and candidate countries.
Children seeking asylum in the EU
Given the Commission's commitment to pay special attention to children in the establishment of an area of freedom security and justice across the EU, British Green Jean Lambert wanted to know if the Commission has any data on the number of child asylum‑seekers that are detained in Europe.
The Commission answered that the "Reception Conditions Directive" stresses the importance of taking into account the best interests of the child, and that in order to have better information at an EU level of the number of unaccompanied minors who request asylum, EU members should collect data on "applicants for international protection who are considered by the responsible national authority to be unaccompanied minors".
Children and the internet
Taking into account the free access of children and adolescents to the internet and to "aggressive, pornographic and sometimes humiliating sites". Georgios Karatzaferis, a Greek member of the Independence / Democracy Group asked the Commission if the existing legislation punishes the owners of such site.
The Commission stressed that protecting minors from harmful content is of paramount importance. As regards the production, dissemination and downloading of child abuse images on the Internet, the Council of Europe's 2001 Convention of Cyber Crime commits the signing states to adopt legislative and other measures to criminalize those actions. However, the legislation concerning content in media and the internet varies across Europe.
Education in your own language
Sarah Ludford for the Liberal ALDE group asked the European Commission about the protection of education in Kurdish for children of that origin in Turkey. She cited Ankara's signature to the "Convention on the Rights of the Child" as a reference point. The Commission replied that since 2004 the teaching of Kurdish is allowed under Turkish law. However, it suffered setbacks in 2005 when the organisers of all existing courses decided to close down, due to a lack of financial resources and demand.
Juvenile delinquency
Given concerns over juvenile delinquency in Europe, Greek Conservative Georgios Papastamkos asked the Commission if there are recent statistics concerning the rate of criminal activity among young people as a whole in all EU counties. The Commission replied that although many members have good quality national statistics, statistics on the different types of juvenile crime are not comparable between countries. However, community statistics on crime and criminal justice are part of a five-year action plan that was sent to the Parliament in August. "Measuring juvenile crime and juvenile justice" is a specific point under the action plan.
All the questions mentioned relate to children and adolescents. However, MEPs ask questions about all kind of topics. Click on the links below to find out more.
20061009STO11473 Written questions MEPs and their 5001 questions...but who has the answers?
EN
1
PHOTO
20061009PHT11499.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/QP-WEB/application/home.do?language=EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060829STO10141 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
