Driving licences, green energy, new EU members on agenda in Committee week
Institutions
2006-11-20 - 14:53
After last week's plenary session MEPs in Strasbourg, MEPs return to Brussels to hold committee meetings. These form the "engine room" of the law-making responsibilities of the Parliament. Among the things on the agenda this week are measures on driving licences and road safety, renewable forms of energy, the EU aspirations of Romania and Bulgaria, human rights and the situation in Iraq.
Reducing the 110 different types of driving licence in the EU and setting upper limits on the amount of alcohol that drivers can drink - these are two of the measures that parliament's transport committee will be discussing this week.
On green issues, the industry committee will be looking at the European Commission's proposals for a European energy policy. Some of the ideas include developing renewable sources of energy, investing in cleaner energy and seeking to diversify the number of places the Union imports its energy from.
On health issues, the situation of Multiple Sclerosis treatment in the EU will be discussed by the Petitions committee - support-groups representing sufferers of the condition will also take part in the discussion. Finland, current holders of the EU Presidency, will also participate.
On relations with countries outside the EU - the foreign affairs committee will be voting on reports on the forthcoming membership of the Union by Romania and Bulgaria. They should become the 26th and 27th members on 1 January. Both countries already have "observer MEPs" in the Parliament.
Human rights, Iraq, EU budget, Public hearings
Members of the Russian media will be present for a debate hosted by Parliament's human rights committee about the situation in Russia. The meeting is a tribute to recently murdered journalist Anna Politkovskaïa .
MEPs and their counterparts of the Council of Ministers also meet to iron out remaining differences over the 2007 EU budget - whilst hearings will be held on how money was spent in 2005.
Moving out of Europe, the Iraqi deputy Prime Minister will be briefing MEPs on what is a critical period for his country. The week also sees the EU-Africa, Caribbean and Pacific Assembly meet to discuss trade, tourism and arms control in Barbados whilst Parliament's President Josep Borrell travels to Nigeria and Mali.
Public hearings on international crime, the International Criminal Court, coordination of security systems and the EU's trade with Russia are among those being held this week.
On the Parliament's website this week are stories on how to simplify laws in the EU, measures to stop the trafficking of human beings, combating drugs in the EU and a look at the marine environment. The "press" part of the website will report all the committee meetings this week as they happen. For more information, click on the link below:
20061120STO00010 Week ahead
EN
1
PHOTO
20050930PHT00934.jpg
EN
2
LINK
Link:http://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/expert/event_by_week/47-2006/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
