Baltic Sea strategy for the Northern Dimension
External relations
2006-11-16 - 14:45
Parliament adopted an own-initiative report on a Baltic Sea strategy for the Northern Dimension. The House aspires, by means of this resolution, to make the most of the opportunities offered by the dynamic economies of the Baltic Sea region and systematically create a brand for the region as one of the most attractive and competitive areas in the world
Parliament wants to help to improve the ecological status of the Baltic Sea, which is currently one of the most polluted sea areas in the world; reduce pollution andeutrophication and prevent further releases of oil and other toxic and harmful substances.
The report stresses the need to reduce the region's dependency on Russian energy and encourages the Member States in the region to examine the possibility of a common energy market. Parliament calls on the Commission, the Member States and the partners to promote joint projects on energy efficiency and renewable energy resources, in the light of the region's potential as a source of bio-energy, and to encourage the usage of biomass, solar, wind and hydro energy and support the work of the Baltic Sea Region Energy Co-operation.
The report also. suggests that the Trans-European Network Nordic Triangle be enlarged to cover the whole region and inclusion of the road and railway routes of the Barents Corridor and the Bothnian Corridor within the TEN system. The House calls for the realisation of the Rail Baltica project which would mean a high-speed train connection linking up the whole region. MEPs call for the realisation of the Via Baltica highway by 2013 as a priority project linking the Baltic Sea region with Member States in central and western Europe and stresses the importance of European funding for the realisation of the project.
Kaliningrad
The House notes the status of the Kaliningrad Oblast enclave surrounded by the European Union and calls for genuine cooperation between the regional authorities, the Russian Federation and the European Union. The report urges the Russian Federation and the European Union to examine the possibility of developing the Kaliningrad Oblast into a more open and less militarised pilot region with improved access to the internal market. Parliament stresses the need for full implementation of freedom of navigation in the Baltic Sea, including the Vistula Lagoon and Kaliningradzkij Zaliv, and free passage through the Pilava Strait/Baltijskij Proliv.
The report points out that the Northern Dimension Partnership in Public Health and Social Wellbeing (NDPHS) should become more practical in combating major diseases as well as enhancing and promoting health and socially rewarding lifestyles. MEPs call on the Russian Federation and the EU to examine the possibilities of practically engaging the Kaliningrad Oblast in NDPHS activities.
Parliament stresses that the Kaliningrad Oblast is still an enclave plagued with many social, economic and ecological problems, such as the significant ecological risk posed by the presence of the military bases and weapons in the region, the substantial health risk and the high levels of organised crime and drug addiction.
Eastern border
MEPs are concerned that the region's Eastern border is serving as a conduit for a significant level of organised crime, with trafficking in humans and drugs giving cause for particular concern. The House urges a strengthened Europol involvement and reinforced cooperation at both EU and intergovernmental levels on these issues. Parliament stresses the need to redouble efforts to improve the efficiency of border controls on the Eastern border, in particular as regards upgrading the existing infrastructure and promoting legal border crossing, and calls for sufficient funds to be earmarked from the European External Borders Fund.
20061113IPR12544 A Baltic Sea Strategy for the Northern Dimension
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5362832
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
