European Air Traffic Management
Industry
2006-11-14 - 15:51
Parliament adopted a consultation report by on the Joint Undertaking for the European air traffic management system (SESAR). The aim of SESAR is to set up a joint undertaking to create a new-generation European air traffic management system. SESAR is the technological element of the European single sky.
In non-binding amendment s , MEPs clarify the foreseen timetable and the three separate phases in terms of time period and content. Further proposed amendments deal with issues like safeguards for financial participation by the private sector, intellectual property rights, potential conflicts of interest, the statutes of the joint undertaking and their review, the procedure for the accession of new members and voting rights on the administrative board, and finally, the involvement of the European Parliament. The modernisation of air traffic management in Europe is necessary since projections for the development of air traffic in Europe show that it should more than double in the next 20 years, or even triple in some regions, particularly central Europe. The present air traffic control (ATC) systems are based on technologies that are 20 years old, if not older and are approaching its limits. The ATC infrastructure is fragmented and only interoperable in part, so it cannot meet the challenges of the coming years: greater safety, increased traffic, energy efficiency and environmental constraints. There is a pressing need for innovation. The European Commission has accordingly launched the European plan for modernising air traffic control (SESAR), in cooperation with the European Organisation for the Safety of Air Navigation (Eurocontrol) and, in principle, with financial support from the private sector. This configuration forms a public-private partnership (PPP) with a tripartite financial structure. The challenge is to develop technologies, methods of organisation and industrial components that are capable of ensuring the safety and fluidity of air transport in the next 20 years in Europe and in the world. The project is organised in three stages: The definition phase (2005-2007) sets out the ATM Master Plan, defining the technologies to be developed and methods of organisation. Funding of 60 million euros is provided by the European budget and Eurocontrol (50/50). The development phase (2008-2013), in which systems will be designed and their critical components produced, is estimated at about 300 million euros a year (1/3 European budget, 1/3 Eurocontrol, 1/3 private sector). The deployment phase (2014-2020) will, according to the Commission, be financed by the private sector and installed on a wide scale in Europe and the associated countries.
20061113IPR12524 Establishment of a Joint Undertaking to develop the new generation European air traffic management system (SESAR)
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5293452
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
