International solutions for international crimes
Judicial cooperation
2006-11-22 - 17:30
20-21 November hearing highlighted situation of international crime
The prosecution of the perpetrators of some of the most appalling crimes imaginable - genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and torture - was a question considered by MEPs and experts at a hearing this week. The aim of the joint hearing by Parliament's Civil Liberties and Justice Committee and the Human Rights sub-committee was to add impetus to national, European and international efforts to tackle the most serious international crimes.
Sadly, the genocide in Rwanda and, before that, ethnic cleansing in the Balkans show the catalogue of crimes that are committed. In these two cases there was at least some attempt at legal redress with criminal tribunals being set up to try those deemed to be responsible. Similar examples have been found in Sierra Leone and Cambodia.
The hearing brought together prosecutors, judges, NGOs, professors and lawyers. Putting the perpetrators on trial can be a major part of the process of reconciliation and healing - without it there continues a feeling that they "got away with it". As Sarah Ludford, the British MEP who opened the meeting said, "it is essential that those that perpetrate the most serious crimes of international concern do not enjoy impunity by leaving the jurisdiction in which they have committed their crimes ".
Universal jurisdiction
One of the main ways to prosecute people for these crimes is through universal jurisdiction. This principle allows a Court to hold a trial in a country even if the victims or defendant are not from that country. If would be like Saddam Hussein standing trial in Ireland. This reduces the places suspects can flee to.
The hearing was told that the International Convention against torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment and the "grave breaches" clauses of the Geneva Convention permit universal jurisdiction. The use of this legal principle has steadily been on the rise - several former Nazi war criminals have been tried in the UK for example - as it becomes more integrated into national criminal systems.
However, some barriers exist to its use: the first is practical - such trials are resource intensive, secondly prosecutors may be unfamiliar with the history and politics of foreign regions, also witnesses may be dispersed over countries and continents and finally many foreign governments fear the trial of their nationals as it could be "embarrassing" as secret leaks out.
Some steps to improve situation
The European Council's decision to create a "Network of contact points in respect of persons responsible for genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes" in 2002 marked a first step in increasing cooperation and the exchange of information in prosecuting international crimes.
The hearing was told that Western European states and the EU as a whole are uniquely situated to serve as examples to the wider international community of how universal jurisdiction can be strengthened as an effective, practical and realistic means of combating impunity for the worst international crimes. Also, there is a need to better use existing laws and ensure that international law doesn't lead to conflicting jurisdictions.
20061122STO00182 Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs Subcommittee on Human Rights International Criminal Court
EN
1
PHOTO
20061122PHT00186.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/committees/presentation.do?committee=1248&language=EN
EN
3
LINK
/activities/expert/committees/presentation.do?committee=1302&language=EN
EN
4
LINK
http://www.icc-cpi.int/home.html&l=en
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
