Services Directive - the last lap
Free movement of services
2006-11-15 - 09:34
"We have found a 3rd way": Evelyne Gebhardt
It has taken more than two years to go through the European Parliament. Finally it appears the end is in sight. The Services Directive will be voted on by MEPs tomorrow. It is one of the most important pieces of EU law in recent years - why and what is at stake? First, there is the economic issue: EU competitiveness must be improved. Then there are the political issues - around which a consensus, initially seen as impossible, has emerged due largely to the role played by the EP.
The Services Directive was first presented by the European Commission in January 2004. The aim was to eliminate obstacles to the free establishment of service providers in EU member states and the free provision of services. The decision guaranteeing the free circulation of services in the European Union is inscribed in the Treaty of Rome which founded the then European Economic Community (EEC) in 1957. The six founder members envisaged the creation of an internal market comprising the free movement of people, goods, capital and services. However, 50 years later, the free circulation of services (for example in the construction industry, tourism or the real estate sector) has not become reality.
With the Services Directive a company could build and run a hotel or shop in another EU country without dealing with lots of authorities at national, regional and local level. In addition, companies will be able to offer their services on a temporary or occasional basis, for example services linked to tourism like mountain guides, hiring sailboats, motorboats or courses by ski instructors.
Agreement on the objectives, but disagreement on the means
The new directive should be seen against the background of the EU's "Lisbon Strategy" aimed at stimulating economic growth and employment. It would allow the EU to catch up in those areas where it can best profit from the internal market. More growth, more employment and more choice for consumers - that's the aim.
No-one disputes the aim of creating a real internal market in services, but differences on how to achieve this have been apparent from the moment the directive was unveiled. Originally and popularly coined the "Bolkestein" directive after the European Commissioner who presented it, it has been contested by numerous MEPs. It has also been criticised in certain European countries like France where it provoked considerable controversy. Ultimately it became inextricably linked with the debate over the European Constitution - which French voters rejected in a referendum.
Beyond differences on the details of the directive stands a profound political question for the EU: How to balance the need to open its vast service sector to competition whilst still preserving the "European Social Model" with its high levels of social security protection. The political divisions this question opened cut across national boundaries.
Is compromise possible?
Inside the European Parliament, the text was considered by no less than 10 committees. It was the committee for Internal Market and Consumer Protection that was designated the "lead" committee with German Socialist Evelyne Gebhardt nominated as the rapporteur. At the first reading stage in Parliament, after an initial debate that was full of controversy, the largest political groups in the Parliament reached a compromise on the key points of the directive.
End of the Road
This week's vote is based essentially on the compromise reached in the Parliament in February and the one signed by member states in July, which is limited to a few minor modifications of the text agreed by MEPs.
Among the key points to mention, is the removal of one of the most controversial points - the principle of the country of origin. According to this principle, the provider of services would have had to comply with legislation in his home country - even while temporarily carrying out services in another country.
With the solution that has been found, suppliers have the right to offer services in another EU country than the one in which they are established. At the same time, however, EU members can apply measures that are "non-discriminatory, proportional and necessary" to justify public order, public health and the environment. Services of general interest, public education for example, are not concerned by the directive - unlike services of general economic interest like water and gas supply. Existing labour law in EU countries won't be affected by the new legislation.
Although there's little differences between the text adopted by the Parliament in its first reading and the Council's position, several doubts have been raised notably by the rapporteur, about the meaning of certain modifications made by the Council. A Commission declaration before the Plenary session is expected to respond to these concerns.
The debate and vote in Plenary are scheduled for Wednesday. The agreed text will then be sent to the Council. If the Parliament does not modify the text, this long awaited directive will finally be adopted, probably before the end of this year.
20061114STO12683 Services Directive: The End of the Deadlock Free movement of services: MEPs take a big step forward Services directive: directions for use Parliament's Internal Market and Consumer Protection Committee All parliamentary documents related to the directive
EN
1
PHOTO
20061114PHT12697.jpg
EN
5
LINK
/activities/expert/committees/presentation.do;jsessionid=EDE666F14F0B12031F0A806B3CA6EEFA.node2?committee=1241&language=EN
EN
6
LINK
/comparl/imco/services_directive/default_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060418STO07420 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060220STO05373 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20050819FCS00997 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
