October Plenary session 23-26 October
Institutions
2006-11-13 - 17:10
The plight of female immigrants, the fight against breast cancer and the rights of workers when they are posted to work abroad were just three issues considered when MEPs met in Strasbourg in Plenary session in October. Also on the agenda was the budget for 2007, the outcome of a recent EU summit, ways to improve the workings of the European Central Bank and the Services Directive.
The President of Hungary addressed the Chamber as MEPs marked the 50th anniversary of the Hungarian uprising whilst the "peace process" in Spain was also discussed. The twinning of towns across the European Union, lifelong learning and funding for European films also featured, as did discussions on the EU's border-free Schengen system.
Choose the topic or day below that most interests you.
20061106FCS12345
Monday in Plenary: Schengen, female immigration, Services Directive
Information sharing in the Schengen zone was debated The first day of the October Plenary session was marked by debates on the Schengen Information system (SIS) and the role of immigrant women in the EU. The SIS allows information exchange in the EU's border-free Schengen area - extending it to new EU members is a key issue. MEPs later heard that human rights violations are common among immigrant woman in the EU. Parliament's internal market committee also approved the second reading of the Services Directive, which will be voted on in November
Schengen Information System MEPs debated a package of measures setting rules for the new version of the information system, which will include the 10 new EU members in the electronic exchange of data. The rapporteur, Carlos Coelho of the European People's Party, supports the proposal of the Commission. "This is a good result for Europe, we will have more security and more protection of data" he said. The issue will be put to the vote on Wednesday. The role and place of immigrant women in the EU According to the rapporteur, Rodi Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou (Greek member of the European People's Party), the problems concerning immigrant women are: discrimination in the workplace, in education (as regards recognition of diplomas and professional skills), violation of human rights (violence and sexual abuse), religious stereotypes, forced weddings, trafficking of human beings and mutilation of genital organs. This report has just been adopted. Others debates included the Protection of the environment and the civil protection mechanism. Services Directive On Monday evening, Parliament's Internal Market Committee approved without amendment the second reading version of the Services Directive put forward by the Council, which itself largely followed the first reading position adopted by Parliament in February. The directive should now be put to the vote at the November plenary session in Strasbourg. Today, Tuesday in Plenary In the afternoon, Parliament will focus on the EU budget for 2007. President Borrell and a Minister representing the Finnish Presidency will formally sign the conciliation agreement text on the European capitals of culture. The current capital of culture is Patras in Greece, next year it will be Luxembourg and then Liverpool in 2008 with Linz and Vilnius in 2009
Schengen Services Directive
Tuesday: female immigration, '56 uprising, LIFE+, MEDIA
Woman immigrants often suffer discrimination on race and gender Tuesday's plenary opened with leading MEPs marking the 50th anniversary of the Hungarian uprising. Today MEPs hear from Hungary's President ahead of a resolution on the uprising. The plight of immigrant women was also the subject of a report, as was one on the environmental "LIFE+" programme - with members pushing for greater European coordination. Support for Europe's TV and film industry and help for cultural cooperation were also on the agenda.
Women's immigration: action against double discrimination With 54% of all immigrants into the EU being women, a report approved Tuesday by MEPs was timely. The report highlighted the reasons women migrate - either for better jobs, as refugees, seeking asylum or wanting to be reunited with family members. It says that they often suffer "double discrimination" due to sexism and racism. Some of the proposed measures include: priority access to language and education, protection from enslavement, access to medical care, legal aid and education for children. The report was drafted by Greek People's Party member Rodi Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou. Hungary '56 - half a century on The evocative images of Budapest 1956 came to Parliament's hemicycle chamber Tuesday with tributes to those who took part in the uprising. President Borrell recounted hearing of it as a boy and said it was a formative experience for him. Hans-Gert Poettering of the European People's Party said those who took part were "defending the values and dignity" of Europe and that having Hungarian MEPs showed how far Europe had come. Martin Schulz of the Socialist group drew parallels between the 1956 Budapest uprising and the 1957 Rome Treaty founding the European Community. Both embodied the "spirit of freedom and cooperation between peoples", he said. Former anti-Soviet dissident Bronisław Geremek - now a Liberal MEP, described the "silence and impotence" of other European countries in 1956 as a "lesson for us now". Daniel Cohn-Bendit for the Greens warned that "democracy can never be guaranteed; only if we fight can we retain it". Hungarian President László Sólyom will address the hemicycle today at noon - while a resolution on Thursday is likely to salute the "self sacrifice" of the heroes of '56. Breathe cleaner air with LIFE+ The purpose of the environmental LIFE+ programme is to combat climate change, improve the environment and promote the use of sustainable resources. The programme will ensure €1.9 billion over the next seven years for these, and other, types of projects. EU environment ministers originally wanted 80% of the Life budget decentralised to them. However, MEPs rejected this - fearing that the benefits of a coordinated European response could be lost as countries distributed the funding as they desired. During the Monday evening debate which proceeded yesterday's vote, Marie Anne Isler-Beguin, the French Green MEP who drafted the report, said it LIFE+ will influence EU policies "in the cleaning of the air and ground, and stopping the degradation of biodiversity". A conciliation meeting between the Parliament and the Council of Ministers is now the next step. Help for Europe's TV, Film industry, cultural cooperation Two European cultural initiatives were also supported by MEPs. The "MEDIA" programme aims to support the Europe's TV and cinema industries. "Trainspotting" and "Bend it like Beckham" are among the films that have benefited from the scheme. Currently 90% of non-national European films have been supported by the MEDIA programme. "Culture 2007-2013" seeks to promote the mobility of workers active in the field of culture, to encourage the cross-border circulation of works of art and of "culturally significant objectives". Both were approved at the second reading.
Immigrant women LIFE+ Media, Culture Programmes
Wednesday: Lahti summit, press freedom, peace process in Spain
The President of Hungary László Sólyom On Wednesday MEPs debated the results of the informal EU summit at Lahti and passed a resolution in support of press freedom. They also called for an "independent and efficient" investigation of Russian journalist Anna Politkovskaya’s murder. They voted on resolutions on the Schengen Information System II, breast cancer, culture programmes and the “peace process” in Spain. The President of Hungary László Sólyom addressed MEPs to mark the 50th anniversary of the 1956 Hungarian uprising.
Parliament's President Josep Borrell introduced Mr Sólyom as someone who has always tried to keep the positive "legacy of the1956 revolution alive“. President Sólyom told the house of "the historic importance of the 1956 Hungarian revolution and its freedom fight". He called it a significant keystone for the Prague Spring of 1968 and finally the events of 1989 when the iron curtain and the Berlin Wall fell. He also thanked Austria, Germany and Poland for acts of generosity to Hungarian refugees at the time. Results of the European Union summit of Lahti MEPs debated last weekend's informal meeting of EU leaders at Lahti in Finland. Energy security and the EU's dependence on Russia's oil and gas were top of the agenda. The summit included a dinner with Russian President Vladimir Putin. Many MEPs supported President Borrell's comments at Lahti that the EU could not “exchange human rights for energy resources”. They also backed the creation of a new European Institute for Technology (EIT) - in the hope it will boost innovation in the EU. Immigration policy for the EU and justice and citizenship issues also featured. In light of the dinner with President Putin the recent murder of journalist Anna Politkovskaya was much discussed. Resolution on press freedom MEPs adopted a joint resolution on relations between EU and Russia after the recent assassination of the journalist Anna Politkovskaya. The resolution condemns the murder and raises concern “over the increasing intimidation, harassment and murder of independent journalists and other persons critical of the current government”. It says freedom of the press is an “essential element in the democratic development of a country” and one of the main requirements for the renewing the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement between the EU and Russia in 2007. Peace process in Spain After some impassioned debate, MEPs narrowly adopted (by 10 votes) a joint resolution by the Socialist, Liberal, Greens and the European United Left groups on "the peace process in Spain". It expresses solidarity with the victims of terrorism and supports the fight against terrorism and the peace initiative in the Basque Country undertaken by the Spanish democratic institutions. It also welcomed the decision to fight terrorism by the force of democracy. An alternative resolution by the European People's Party and the Union for Europe of the Nations was rejected. Screening across EU to fight breast cancer MEPs called for breast cancer screening to be extended to cover all 25 EU members to fight a disease that kills 88,000 women a year. The resolution also calls for research into breast cancer prevention and treatment. A 2003 resolution called on EU countries to try and reduce the mortality rate by 25% within 5 years. This resolution calls for a progress report on that goal. October marks international breast cancer awareness month. Schengen Information System II (SIS II) The European Parliament backed practical steps that will allow countries that joined the EU in 2004 to join the Schengen border free area as soon as possible. However, they blocked a last minute request by the EU ministers that would have allowed national intelligence services to have access to the information stored in SIS II. Town Twinning, lifelong learning, youth in action The Parliament adopted three further culture and education programmes: “Citizens for Europe” covers the twinning of towns with those in other countries, projects between people in different countries and the events. Mobility for students and teachers in school, university, vocational training and adult education is the main aim of the "Lifelong Learning" programme over the next six years. "Youth in Action" is a programme designed to promote "active citizenship" and mutual understanding among young people across Europe. Sulfonates in furniture, pictures... Perfluorooctane sulfonates: Not exactly a commonly known substance but in fact they are all around us in everyday materials like furniture, tissues and paintings. Scientific research has shown that they add to the greenhouse effect and pose a threat to human health as they can accumulate in the body. MEPs adopted a report that attempts to tighten the European Commission's plans to cut the use of these sulfonates. The report was drafted by Swedish green Carl Schlyter and calls for a limitation of their use as far as possible, with some exceptions
Hungarian President Lahti outcome Press freedom Peace process in Spain Breast cancer Schengen Culture programme Sulphonates
Thursday: EU budget '07, the Euro, workers rights
MEPs debated the stability of the Euro with the head of Europe's Central Bank The last day of Plenary saw the announcement that the leader of Belarus's opposition, Alexander Milinkevich, is to be awarded Parliament's Sakharov prize for freedom of thought. MEPs also discussed the EU budget for 2007 - they want more money for the European Social Fund and migration. The stability of the Euro and more €500 notes were debated with the head of the European Central Bank. Members also approved a report which highlights a lack of social protection for workers posted abroad.
Alexander Milinkevich was awarded the Sakharov prize by the leaders of Parliament's Political groups - the Conference of Presidents. The presentation will be on 13 December in Plenary. Parliament backs "coherent and prudent" budget for 2007 Parliament approved amendments to the EU’s draft budget for 2007 which is still in its "first reading stage". It wants to reverse budget cuts the Council of Ministers are proposing on agriculture and administration, while increasing allocations for the European Social Fund and management of migration. Parliament supported cutting allocations for foreign and security policy by 50% and reallocating them to other aspects of the EU's activities outside its borders. MEPs are concerned about cuts to the budget that the Council of Ministers had called for in July. They therefore raised several budget lines by a total of €8 billion, bringing the draft budget to €122 billion. This is about 1.04% of the combined Gross National Income of the 27 (as they will be when Romania and Bulgaria join next year) EU members. James Elles, the British conservative who acted as Parliament's rapporteur for the 2007 Budget said that in terms of value for money this was a "coherent and prudent” budget. Next month, delegations from the Parliament and the Council meet to try and find agreement ahead of the second reading in the Council and the Parliament. Parliament’s second reading is scheduled for 14 December. MEPs praise central bank but concerns remain MEPs approved a report that praised the performance of the European Central Bank (ECB) in achieving its main objectives of maintaining purchasing power (price stability) and interest rate policy in the 12 member Euro zone. However, members recommended caution when raising interest rates as it could endanger economic performance. The report was in response to the 2005 annual report into the bank. The report followed a debate between MEPs and the chairman of the ECB Jean-Claude Trichet. MEPs wanted to know why there had been a 21% increase in the number of €500 banknotes in circulation. (The bank issues the notes and the 500 has been a favourite of drug smugglers and money launderers). Members also want minutes of the banks governing council published and stressed that nationality should not be a factor in appointing people to the board. They also called for full coordination between the ECB, Europe's central banks and finance ministers in exchange rate policy. Posting of workers directive Workers posted to other countries are not being afforded the legal protection they deserve. That was the conclusion of a report approved Thursday. The 1996 "Posting of Workers" directive covers social protection and workers rights when they work abroad. The report says that some EU members are either not enforcing the directive or that it is being interpreted very differently. It calls on the European Commission to look into the matter. The report was drawn up by German Green member Elisabeth Schroedter. Other issues discussed and voted on Thursday include:
Resolution on Hungarian uprising
Toxic Waste Shipments to Africa
preparation of Climate Change Conference
Human Rights: Tibet, Guatemala, Uzbekistan,
South Ossetia, Transnistria
EU-Syria Agreement The next plenary session will take place 13 to 16 November.
Sakharov Budget Budget explained European Central Bank Texts adopted Post briefing
EN
1
PHOTO
20061024PHT12122.jpg
EN
4
PHOTO
20061024PHT12126.jpg
EN
8
PHOTO
20061026PHT12265.jpg
EN
17
PHOTO
20061026PHT12254.jpg
EN
20
LINK
/parliament/public/staticDisplay.do?id=46&pageRank=5&language=EN
EN
22
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061005BRI11415 ITEM-013-EN NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061020IPR11863 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060908IPR10496 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060908IPR10496 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061020IPR11882 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061020IPR11904 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061020IPR11901 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061020IPR11905 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061020IPR11900 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061020IPR11875 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061020IPR11865 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061020IPR11882 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061020IPR11883 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061026STO12284 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061020IPR11896 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061021IPR11913 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061024BRI12109 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
