Tuesday Plenary: Georgian President, EC priorities for 2007, Mortgages, Mercury
Institutions
2006-11-15 - 22:24
All smiles: Georgian President Mikheil Saakashvili addressed MEPs
Tuesday's Plenary saw Georgian President Mikheil Saakashvili address MEPs and tell them that EU entry is "a distant goal". European Commission President Barroso later presented to the House his 2007 priorities - with economic growth and climate change being key. Parliament will put his programme to the vote in December. MEPs also debated a report giving consumers more choice in the mortgages market. They also want to restrict the sale of mercury - but want exceptions for antiques and barometers.
EU membership a "distant goal" Georgian President tells MEPs
In his introductory remarks Parliament's President Josep Borrell praised the hopes of the 2003 "Rose revolution" and called for Russia to stop exerting pressure on its neighbour.
President Saakashvili recalled how he met his wife while in Strasbourg (where the Parliament is based) while studying human rights. As well as finding love he also learned after his experiences growing up in the USSR that the "state protects, not persecutes - what a revelation!"
He thanked Parliament and the EU for their support and for a resolution on 26 October rejecting breakaway tendencies in parts of Georgia. He said the willingness of the EU to accept former Soviet states had "strengthened peace and democracy". On Georgia's EU aspirations he said they were a "distant goal" but the principles of the Union provided an inspiration for reform.
Mr Saakashvili told MEPs of his reform strategy: promote democracy, fight corruption, increase revenue and protect Georgia's territorial integrity. He called recent Russian economic curbs on Georgia an "economic blockade" and called for "diplomacy and discussion".
EC President Barroso lays out 2007 programme to MEPs
President Barroso called the programme a "good birthday present" as the EU celebrates 50 next year. MEPs debated programme which centres on 4 themes: prosperity, solidarity, security and "giving EU a stronger voice in the world": It will be discussed in detail by MEPs in Parliament's Committees and the Political Groups next week. A resolution on it will be voted on during December's plenary session.
Mr Barroso's proposals include: the modernisation of EU economy to create jobs and growth to deal with globalisation: Steps to deal with migration - with proposals on economic immigrants and sanctions for businesses that illegally employ immigrants. Measures to tackle climate change and energy policy will also be given greater prominence. Proposals on a strategy aimed at promoting healthy lifestyles will also be published.
The EU's negotiations would continue with its neighbours and Russia, China and the Ukraine. Finally, the increased simplification of EU rules and improved ways of communicating with citizens will be explored.
Mortgage credits
A report on EU mortgage credit was adopted as a response to the Commission’s Green Paper. A mortgage is for homeowners often the largest amount of money they ever borrow. This area is expected to grow over the next 15 years.
MEPs hope that greater integration of EU mortgage markets could improve competition, efficiency and consumer choice and reduce costs. Parliament also called for harmonisation of provisions for pre-contractual information and for abolishing tax obstacles.
Mercury restricted but barometers and antiques remain
Τhe Parliament adopted a first reading report restricting the placing on the market of certain non-electrical measuring devices containing mercury. Mercury, usually designed for medical but also household use, poses a serious risk to health, as it (and its compounds) are highly toxic to humans, ecosystems and wildlife.
Medical thermometers, manometers and sphygmomanometers (used for measuring blood pressure) would be affected by the ban. Measuring devices that are more than 50 years old and barometers are not covered.
MEPs also ask the Commission to take short-term measures to ensure that all products containing mercury and currently circulating in society are collected separately and treated safely.
According to the MEPs, the Commission should also carry out a review of the availability of safer alternative solutions that are technically and economically feasible.
The Council must now reach a common position before the text returns to Parliament again for second reading.
Wednesday in the Plenary
Morning: The Services Directive will be debated in the morning.
At noon the Emir of Qatar will address MEPs.
Afternoon: MEPs debate the situation in Gaza following the recent escalation of violence. Parliament will also vote on a resolution.
Later on Wednesday afternoon, Parliament will debate a series of reports including the future of the European Security Strategy. MEPs then turn their attention to women in international politics.
20061115STO12727 EP Live Mikheil Saakashvili Commission 2007 work programme Mercury Mortgage market
EN
1
PHOTO
20061115PHT12769.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/eplive/public/freetext_page_webstreaming/default/default_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113IPR12538 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113IPR12539 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113IPR12525 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113IPR12526 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
