Death of Niall Andrews, former Irish MEP for 20 years (1984-2004)
Institutions
Ireland
2006-10-18 - 09:57
Niall Andrews who died during the night of 16 October 2006
During the night of 16 October, Mr Niall Andrews MEP (UEN) passed away. Niall Andrews, who represented Dublin as an MEP, was born in 1938 and first entered the Dáil (Irish Parliament) in 1977 on the same day as current UEN MEP, Liam Aylward (Ireland East).
Mr Andrews then represented the Dublin South constituency in the Dáil for ten years and was appointed Junior Minister in the Department of the Environment during that time. He was first elected to the European Parliament in 1984 and was successfully re-elected on three successive occasions.
During his time at the European Parliament, he was an active member and Vice-Chairman of the Joint Assembly of the Agreement between the ACP countries and the EU. He was a full member of the Committee on Development and Cooperation, the Committee on Citizens' Freedoms & Rights, Justice & Home Affairs, and of the Committee on Budgets. He was also a member of the Parliament's delegations to South America and to South Africa.
Irish members of the UEN group in the European Parliament today paid tribute to their former colleague.
Eoin Ryan MEP (Dublin) said: "Niall Andrews would never shy away from pursuing political causes on the international stage, whether it was in Nicaragua, in El Salvador, in Africa, in the Middle East or whether it related to helping the Birmingham Six, the Guildford Four or Brian Keenan. He pursued these political causes because he believed in them. He championed human rights causes and the need to help the less well off at all times. He had a great pride in the people of Dublin and he was always honoured that they elected him to both Dáil Éireann on four occasions and to the European Parliament for a further four Parliamentary terms. On a personal level, I have lost a very close friend and a colleague."
Brian Crowley MEP (South), co-President of the UEN group and leader of the Fianna Fáil delegation in the European Parliament said: "Niall Andrews was born into a family with deep roots in the Fianna Fail party and he represented the Fianna Fáil party with great distinction at all times both on the national and international stage. He was a very active member of the development committee within the European Parliament, and, in fact, was the first Irish politician who highlighted the need for the EU to take a leadership role on Africa and Third World issues. I had the honour and privilege to serve with Niall for ten years in the European Parliament, and, as an advocate on behalf of those with no voice, he inspired others to follow where he led."
Liam Aylward MEP (East) said: "I know that the Andrews family are steeped in the traditions of the Fianna Fáil party and the death of Niall today is a great loss to the Fianna Fáil party and to Irish politics."
Seán Ó Neachtain MEP (North-West) said: "I worked with Niall closely within the European Parliament. I know that he was deeply respected by his colleagues in the European Parliament from all political parties. They know that he was a politician with deep political convictions which he pursued with great honesty and determination. He was a great Irishman and a great European."
20061017IPR11742 Niall Andrews - MEP from 1984 - 2004 All current Irish MEPs by region European Parliament Office in Ireland
EN
1
PHOTO
20061017PHT11734.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/members/archive/alphaOrder/view.do?id=1441&language=en
EN
3
LINK
/members/public/geoSearch/zoneList.do?country=IE&language=EN
EN
4
LINK
http://www.europarl.ie/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
