Future of Europe: PM Ahern calls on the EU to look forward
Future of Europe/European integration
2006-11-29 - 17:44
The House debated the future of Europe, with a speech from Taoiseach Bertie Ahern. This is the second of a series of debates on the future of Europe with members of the European Council organised by the European Parliament. The previous one involved Guy Verhofstadt - Prime Minister of Belgium. On 4 and 5 December, in the European Parliament, MEPs and national parliamentarians will hold a joint conference on the future of Europe.
The Irish Prime Minister said: "Since I last addressed you in 2004, the constructive influence of the European Parliament in advancing the concerns of Europe’s citizens has continued to grow. Your vision is needed as we face the difficult challenges ahead. I wish every success to you, President, for the remainder of your term of office, as well as to your successor. Explaining Europe to the public remains probably our greatest challenge, at both European and national level." "The phrase “Future of Europe”, like so many phrases, has become part of our jargon. But let us recall for a moment the significance of what those words “Future of Europe” really mean – for ourselves and for the wider world. For our own people in Europe, as we approach the 50th anniversary of the Treaty of Rome, it means consolidating and developing our extraordinary Union - a Union which has been so successful that many now take its success for granted. In a world which knows so much uncertainty, oppression, deprivation and violence, the Union is a bed-rock of prosperity, stability and deep-rooted democracy. The very essence of the European Union, this powerful blend of pragmatism, patience and vision was captured by Robert Schuman when he observed that: “Europe will not be made all at once, or according to one single plan: rather it will be formed by taking concrete measures which bring about real solidarity.” "Today Europe faces as great an array of challenges as ever including globalisation, technological change, migration, energy security and terrorism. These challenges have not been dreamed up in Brussels or Strasbourg. They have risen up the Union’s agenda because they are very real and directly relevant to our citizens. The challenges must not only be met but also addressed in a way which reassures our citizens and responds to their anxieties and aspirations. The Union, in approaching these issues, is rightly pursuing two broad parallel tracks. In respect of both tracks, the role of the European Parliament will be crucial. On the one hand, we are continuing to reflect on the question of the Constitutional Treaty and will return to it next June on the basis of a report by Chancellor Merkel. On the other hand, we are seeking to address the concerns of our citizens in practical ways under the existing Treaties. Both of these tracks are essential. We cannot put practical progress on hold. Neither can we wish away the need to provide the Union with a coherent, streamlined basis for addressing the challenges of a new century. The Constitutional Treaty is designed to provide a much needed basis for practical progress; and the practical progress we strive for will contribute to a positive context for reaching agreement on the urgent institutional questions. I would like to address these two issues in turn. A good starting point for trying to evaluate what lies ahead is often to reflect briefly on why and how we got to be where we are today. History is important because it can help us to make wise choices about the future. Since the Irish Presidency had the privilege of bringing the IGC negotiations to conclusion, I have particular awareness of the process which made agreement possible. First, it’s important to remember that the Constitutional Treaty was agreed because it was necessary. The need for its substantive provisions has grown rather than diminished. We need its more coherent external policy to meet our growing international responsibilities. We need its subtle, balanced and effective provisions in the area of Justice and Home Affairs to strengthen our fight against crime. We need its more open, comprehensible, democratic and effective procedures, including its significantly enhanced role for the European Parliament. We need its principles and its values. Second, the process which led to agreement on the Constitutional Treaty was long, complex and difficult. The Convention was unprecedented in its openness and achievement. The European Parliament was highly influential at the Convention which also benefited greatly from the direct involvement of national parliamentarians. The subsequent IGC involved intensive bilateral and collective negotiations in which the views of each Member State, as well as of the Commission and Parliament, were taken very carefully into account. Third, participants were in the end able to accept the outcome of the negotiations because they saw it as a balanced overall package. The institutional provisions in particular were closely inter-related and formed a single whole. As I said at the outset, it is essential that Europe also pursues the second track which we have set for ourselves – namely addressing, as best we can under the existing Treaties, the priorities of our citizens. I believe it is important to maintain broadly the distinctiveness of the two tracks. We should be wary of the selective advance application of elements which form part of the balance in the Constitutional Treaty. Let us not be unduly pessimistic about what we have achieved so far in terms of practical progress. The European economy is gaining in strength. More people are in work. An enlargement of historic proportions, which not long ago seemed unimaginable, has taken root and has greatly enriched our Union. But we are not here, at either European or national level, to congratulate ourselves. The successful football club is not the one that focuses on the trophy room. It is the one that focuses on the matches ahead. One only has to look at the agenda of any of your parliamentary sessions to appreciate the range and depth of the challenges we face. Time requires me to address what seem to me to be the strategic underlying challenges. Allow me to address briefly five of those challenges. First, there is the competitiveness challenge. This has many important European dimensions - better regulation, a strong and appropriate competition policy, research and development, the removal of barriers in the internal market; perhaps above all innovation in relation to which the proposed European Institute for Technology can make an important contribution. Our objective should be to make Europe attractive for investment. I have repeatedly stressed to my colleagues on the European Council and to the Commission that Europe is increasingly in competition not within itself but with other parts of the world, notably in Asia. The reality of this competition must give urgency as well as direction to the development and implementation of policies at European level. Our second strategic objective should be to ensure that achieving competitiveness does not threaten the European social model, that competitiveness and social inclusion are partners not rivals. This is the key principle underpinning our own national system of social partnership. Our experience of extensive and intensive social dialogue has delivered 18 consecutive years of economic growth, improved living standards and greater social inclusion. In our approach at European level, including where appropriate through legislation, we should reflect the principle that economic and social policies can and should be mutually reinforcing. We must above all ensure that solidarity and opportunity are at the heart of the Union and must drive Europe’s future. The test of Europe’s credibility today is whether it can deliver policies which build up solidarity within the EU and secure opportunities for all our people. Respect for diversity can play a particularly important part in connecting the Union with its citizens. Ní fhéadfadh aon rud meas na hEorpa ar charachtar indibhidiúil a cuid Ballstát a léiriú níos fearr ná an stádas feabhsaithe a bheas ag an nGaeilge ó 1 Eanáir. Tá Éire an-bhuíoch den Pharlaimint as bhur gcuid tacaíochta i dtabhairt na socruithe nua isteach. [Translation: Nothing could better illustrate Europe’s respect for the individual character of its Member States than the enhanced status to be enjoyed by the Irish language from 1 January. Ireland is very grateful to the Parliament for your support in introducing the new arrangements.] Allow me, in conclusion, to say that we should not lose sight of the fact that at the heart of our Union, when it was founded half a century ago, was the determination to bring permanent peace “among peoples long divided by bloody conflicts”, as the first Treaty put it. The Union has been resoundingly successful in that aim within our borders. The Union is also an increasingly important factor for stability beyond our borders. I would like to pay particular tribute to the fact that the European Union has played a crucial role in relation to our own peace process in Northern Ireland. The Union has provided not just generous financial support but also a context and an example In the second half of the 21st century, another generation of Europeans will be living with the consequences of the decisions we take. I hope that, when they cast an eye back to our generation of Europeans, they will be able to conclude that we had the imagination, courage and intelligence to consolidate our unique Union and to provide a solid, comprehensive and consensual basis for taking forward its achievements." Political group speakers The leader of the EPP-ED group, Hans-Gert POETTERING (DE), saw next year's declaration to mark the 50th anniversary of the Treaty of Rome as a good opportunity to send the "important psychological message" that "the European institutions are committed to leading Europe forward". As far as the EPP part of his group was concerned, it was crucial that the European Parliament be "an effective, strong institutional part of the conference" which will tackle the question of the future of Europe. The EPP did not want "to go back to square one" and hold new negotiations on the constitution, he said. The substance of the existing text must be used "and that includes the 'values' part - the Charter" because "without a foundation of values the European Union has no future". Ultimately, the EU must "be strengthened, made more democratic and more transparent". Martin SCHULZ (DE), for the Socialist Group, praised Mr Ahern and other heads of state and government who had spoken in favour of the European project. Not all of them "have had the courage" to do this, he said. He endorsed all that the Irish prime minister had said, though added there was one thing missing - ratification of the constitutional treaty by his country. He pointed out that "a majority of Member States are in favour of ratification" and added "we should be bold enough to say that minority has to move on that". On behalf of the ALDE group, Graham WATSON (UK) said "there is at least as much a communication crisis in Europe as a constitutional crisis". "We risk slowly but inexorably losing the trust of our citizens by our collective failure to respond to their concerns", he said. Referring to the rejection of the constitution by the Netherlands and France, he said "We need the prime ministers of those two countries to come here and explain how they see the way forward". As to Ireland, it could play a key role in helping the EU return to "the balance and the substance" of the constitutional treaty. Ultimately, though, it was best to "think less about changes to the constitution and more about building the collective courage to go out and persuade people why it is necessary". Austrian MEP Johannes VOGGENHUBER spoke on behalf of the Greens/EFA group. He said some questions had still not been answered. "What were the reasons for the No votes in France and the Netherlands? What were the disappointed expectations of the citizens?" A recent Eurobarometer survey indicated that 65% of the French did want a constitution but one "with more social powers for the Union". However, said Mr Voggenhuber, "I've never heard any government leaders reflect on that". So the reason policies fail, he concluded, is that "there is a crisis of democracy and trust in Europe". Gabriele ZIMMER (DE), for the GUE/NGL group, saw one key issue as being "how to manage the richness of the EU - its diverse cultural identities" and how "to forge a common identity from that". Another was the desire of the people for "a more social Europe", something she said had been "scandalously neglected so far". Indeed, "many people see the European Union as endangering their jobs, jeopardising their social welfare", she added. Brian CROWLEY (IE) for the UEN group said: "You successfully ran the Irish Presidency of the European Union which both oversaw the Enlargement of the European Union and you secured agreement for the provisions of the draft constitutional treaty. You are in a very strong position indeed to talk about how Europe can move forward from the difficulties that is facing at present. We all know that Europe is at an impasse. But the status quo cannot live on. The provisions of the Nice treaty only provides the legislative machinery for a union of 27 members and no more. To overcome the constitutional problems in Europe is going to require strong leadership and a real commitment from EU Governments to bring about the much needed changes to modernise how the institutions of Europe operate. We need simplified decision making processes in Europe so that we can tackle head on the economic and political problems facing Europe which include the need to implement the Lisbon agenda, reduce the gap between rich and poor and promote regional equality. The problems we face because of the non ratification of the EU constitutional treaty in France and the Netherlands are not and will not go away. A political solution must be found so that the EU can modernise how it does it's business. This is the core challenge facing us all. With strong leaders like Bertie Ahern in power in Europe , this is a challenge that Europe can face with confidence and with a sense of determination." Kathy SINNOTT (IND/DEM IE) said: "I welcome you to have an honest discussion here today about the future of Europe, but as I was once told when asking for directions, I would not start from here. Your government has cultivated Ireland’s image in Europe as a success story, the once poor nation made good, but I think this House deserves to know what lies behind this so-called success. As the Irish know, Ireland is now open for business – but closed for people. We spend freely to lure the market but cut every corner in social spending. You also seem to believe that the mental health and suicide problem which grows with our economic success, are a mere inconvenience and not a tragedy which our country has never really addressed. Why, Taoiseach, has your government destroyed our sugar industry for an EU scheme when Irish agriculture is struggling for survival and when we need biofuels like ethanol. Finally, Taoiseach, why have you come here propositioning us with the dead Constitution that the Irish do not want. We already have a truly great Constitution for which Irish men and women laid down their lives, a Constitution which gives us a genuine foundation for real and respectful cooperation with our European neighbours. Ireland is a great country with amazing people. They certainly deserve better and I think you will finally discover this when you put the Constitution, or whatever you decide to call it, to a referendum." Jim ALLISTER (UK, non-attached) said: "The last time Mr Ahern was here at the end of his Presidency of the Council, he was celebrating having overseen agreement between the Heads of Governments on the EU Constitution. He readily basked in the adulation of europhile fanatics in this House. By now, November 2006, he and they assured us, the EU Constitution would be in full operation but, as often, they reckoned without the most important component of democratic politics: the views of the people. As the Constitution floundered on the rocks of rejection in France and Holland, Mr Ahern - though an avowed euro enthusiast - my government in the United Kingdom, lost their nerve and hurriedly abandoned the prospect of the people of the British Isles being given the chance to give their verdict by postponing the referenda because they were fearful of the result. Now he returns to tell us again of the marvels of European integration and that the rejected Constitution must be revived. It seems to me that it is a stale message about a moribund Constitution from one who may well soon be judged by his own electorate to be a stale politician." PM Ahern response to the debate Responding to the debate, Mr Ahern stated: "With respect, I never quite understand when people are arguing the issue on Europe why we always forget all the positives. That applies to members of the European Council - I would accept that criticism - and I think it applies to Members of the European Parliament. However, look at what has been achieved because of the strength of Europe. Look at the equality agenda. Look at the health and safety agenda. Look at the welfare agenda. Look at the mobility of workers. Would any of these been here if this institution had not been here? Not a hope in hell! Europe has achieved this. So to talk against your own achievements is never a good idea, in my view. Europe has achieved all these things and the chance of our harmonising, getting stronger environmental laws, more cooperation and helping less developed countries - all these are European policies that never would have happened otherwise. Europe has pulled Ireland and other countries up and it has applied pressure, it has fined and prosecuted people. However, the fact is that the citizens have gained from every one of those issues. I would say to my good colleague, Mrs Sinnott, that the reason we have progressive disabilities legislation, the reason that we are putting huge resources into disability, the reason we have an Environmental Protection Agency, the reason we have far greater health policy, the reason we are able to support these things, is not because there is any difference between the 1937 Constitution - which treasures all the people and children of Ireland equally - and what we have today. It is because we have been able to make progress because Europe has progressed. I think these are great issues. I am delighted to see Mr Allister here. His party has moved forward progressively. It has moved away from the past, even if not all of its members have, including himself. However, we are moving on, we are making progress. I will deal with my electorate and I wish you well in your February election, too." Irish and British speakers Avril DOYLE (EPP-ED, IE) said: "As leader of the Fine Gael delegation in the largest and most influential group in the European Parliament, the EPP-ED, I join in the welcome to you today as Prime Minister of our esteemed Republic. Notwithstanding, the politically hyped and inaccurate reports to the contrary. "We are Irish. And as such we are European. This is not a political statement. It is a historical fact. The original Irish were primarily a Celtic people. Our ancestors, the Celts, lived, thrived and established settlements throughout the European continent, from shores of the Mediterranean to the peaks of the Alps, from the plains of Romania to the Atlantic coast. Like many recent new arrivals in our country, we migrated here from the mainland, seeking asylum from war, disease and over population. seeking economic opportunity Over the subsequent centuries, Vikings, Saxons, Anglo-Normans, Jews, English, Scots, Spaniards, French Huguenots and many other races came, saw and inter-married with the Celts. The modern day Irish you see around you are the result of this genetic soup of different European races. Our cultural life is now richer and more diverse than ever thanks to our maturing relationship with Europe. Would Riverdance have ever been created without the Eurovision Song Contest? Would the Green army have captured the soul of the Nation without our famous victories in Stuttgart and Genoa? It is only by interacting daily with other nations on an equal footing that one realises what it is that makes us Irish. "I admire Ireland’s membership of and contribution to the Union. I look around me and I see a confident pluralistic society far removed from the introspective sectarian island in which our parents and grandparents were raised. Europe has helped us to define our place in the wider world. If we are to become more genuinely Irish, we must become more genuinely European. Don’t throw away all the progress made over the past 30 years. Let us not become the wreckers of our rich and colourful European heritage." Proinsias DE ROSSA (PES, IE) said: "I welcome your commitment to the substance of the Constitution text. However, Member States and Council right now are denying Europeans the accountable democratic and socially engaged Europe they want. Why Taoiseach are you and other Member States blocking key social directives on ferry crews, on working time, on migration and on temporary work agencies and I ask you will you now help to unblock all of these as a means of rebuilding Europeans confidence in Europe. The Constitution must not be filleted. A mini-treaty will give us a mini-Europe when what we need is a strong democratic Europe capable of coping with the global challenges we all face together. The most democratic way forward I believe is to negotiate legally-binding protocols to address the concerns raised by the pro-European French and Dutch electorates. Such an approach would reassure those pro-Europeans who voted no would not oblige those who have already ratified to reopen the issue and would make it more likely that those yet to ratify such as Ireland can do so." Mary Lou MACDONALD (GUE/NGL IE) said: "I am very pleased that the Taoiseach is addressing today's plenary session. The European Union is in a phase of transition, continued expansion, new cultures, new ideas and new challenges. The important question for us is how to meet these challenges. Is it through a race to the bottom as evidenced in Ireland during the Irish ferries dispute last year and repeated many, many times since, or is it by ensuring that we are to the fore in demanding the highest standards of rights, reform of bureaucratic EU structures and a political programme that truly puts the people across the European Union first. I believe that we must promote a Europe which seeks to protect our most vulnerable, particularly the 65 million across the Union who are living in poverty. Taoiseach in Ireland, we must do the same and this means the success of our peace process, ending partition, building strong public services and promoting equality in every aspect of life. I believe that all of these challenges can be risen to and met but only if there is real political will, a will to radically alter the EU's current and future priorities. This is not a matter of presentational nuance, it is a matter of substance and I would ask you Taoiseach and other EU leaders to truly listen to people across the EU and to respond to their needs. This can be best done by defending workers' rights, protecting public services and halting the drive towards a militarised and a fortressed European Union." Seán Ó NEACHTAIN (UEN, IE) speaking in Irish said: "I am delighted that the Taoiseach has spoken some Irish here today in his speech on the future of Europe. This is very symbolic considering that the Irish language is due to shortly become an official working language within the European Union institutions. The Taoiseach deserves to be given a lot of credit for ensuring that the European Council, comprised of a range of different European Governments supported his proposal to promote the Irish language to a far greater extent within Europe. In fact, this week alone has seen the European Parliament hearings for the two prospective nominees to the European Commission from Romania and Bulgaria. I fully support the decision of José Barroso, the President of the European Commission to give the Commissioner designate Lenard Orban from Romania the job to promote multi-lingualism within the European Union. We all know that Europe is at an impasse in the context of how it is going to reform the workings of the EU institutions and make them become more efficient. President Merkel has already said that she intends to put the issue of the constitutional difficulties facing Europe at the top of the political agenda of her German Presidency. Other EU Governments must work carefully with President Merkel in an effort to find a political formula for the European Union to extricate itself from the political logjam that it finds itself in - due to the reason that the draft constitutional treaty was defeated in both the Netherlands and in France." Timothy KIRKHOPE (EPP-ED, UK) said: "I would like to start on a note of harmony in saying that I have read with great interest his recent statements on the so-called ‘passerelle’ clause in matters relating to justice and home affairs and I entirely agree with him that we should not proceed down this road. Criminal justice policy, the fight against terrorism and action to defeat trafficking and illegal emigration, are matters which rightly belong to the nation state, yet we have not even explored all the options to improve intergovernmental cooperation in these and other justice fields and I believe that we should. As for the Constitution, the debate now seems to be entering realms of fantasy. The French and Dutch people delivered the fatal blow, and yet we hear this week that the Finnish Presidency has been quietly stocktaking with Member States to see whether it can somehow be resuscitated. Mr Sarkozy calls for a so-called mini-Constitution. The Commission rejects it. The German Government says it wants the Constitution kept intact and then resurrected. The outgoing Dutch Government made clear it would not have a second referendum. The British Government, true to form, appears to be split. The Foreign Secretary says it was a grandiose scheme which had failed. The junior Europe Minister says we need to address the substance of the Constitution. Well, has the penny dropped yet? Europe needs to move on. It needs to move on to stop alienating the electorate in a dangerous way.'" Marian HARKIN (ALDE, IE) said: "I am happy to say that, broadly speaking, I agree with your analysis. I do believe that we need to change the context, highlight the positives and retain the balance and essential substance of the Constitution. The impasse in the Constitution was precipitated by the 'no' vote in France and the Netherlands, but in my opinion, this was not a 'no, no, no' to everything European. It was a wake-up call which said, 'The future of Europe concerns us as ordinary citizens and we too have a role to play'. Democracy, like life, can be a messy business and, while leaders must lead, they must also listen. We have had our period of reflection and I now believe we need a period of consolidation, where the EU is seen to deliver for it citizens on the Lisbon Agenda, on protection of workers, on support for European business, on environmental sustainability and on the ability of the EU to compete as a player on the global stage. In essence, the EU has to manage the challenge of globalisation for all its citizens. If the EU can deliver on this - and that is a major task - then I believe it has a solid future." Andrew DUFF (ALDE, UK) stated that as " the Taoiseach properly said that the achievement of the 2004 package was extremely tricky and complex. Surely it would be sensible therefore to ringfence the preamble and the first and second parts from renegotiation and to focus all the effort on modernising and improving part III. Surely we cannot achieve the greater competitiveness the strengthened social partnership the improvements to a common energy policy and so forth without a substantive improvement to part III." Richard CORBETT (PES, UK) said: " Taoiseach, may I in the language of some of my ancestors say Fáilte go dtí Parlaimint na hEorpa - welcome to the European Parliament - which symbolises the motto of the European Union, 'unity with diversity'. You have here representatives of every political party in Europe, from Left to Right, from capital cities to regions, from parties in government to parties in opposition and the Parliament that voted by 500 votes to 137 to endorse this Constitutional Treaty as the best way forward for the future of Europe. That is why I am particularly glad to hear you today, to say that we must find the solution to these issues, because the problems that Constitutional Treaty was intended to solve have not disappeared overnight. They have not gone away. We must find a solution acceptable to all 27 countries, including the two that voted 'no'." Irish PM response to the debate Responding to the debate, PM Ahern stated "I think that the Constitution is a very balanced and fair document. I think it is an equitable document. Of course it is made up of compromises. When you are trying to get 25 countries – as it was then – to agree, there have to be compromises in the text. It was not just a quick question of any one person saying ‘this is the position’. Things change. As I went around Europe there were many issues that were totally different in different countries, that caught the public imagination, that created a lot of difficulties in the media, and then people had to change or deliberate on what wording they could agree on, so it is not perfect insofar as it is just written with no ambiguities whatever, but it has been negotiated. There are those who believe that perhaps it was written in isolation – I think there were some comments about that. I understand that after a few years, but I would remind Members of Parliament that the Convention had a very active group from Parliament. They worked very hard. They were the representatives of the people, they were elected by the people, they were answerable to the people and I think the governments are too. You cannot have a Constitution that is negotiated by 500 million people. You have to have their representatives doing it, and I think they did a good job on it. So sometimes that is the issue about legitimacy and democracy. I noted the points about fighting for the issues of human rights and values, and that this is what people are about, and not crime and drugs. The people I meet are far more concerned with both issues. They want to see that the rule of law, the rule of courts, the legal system protects everybody equally. However, they also want to see that those who are involved in criminality across borders and those who are engaged in criminal activity are dealt with. So if you are a supporter of human rights, then you are obviously a supporter of the Constitution, because the Charter for Fundamental Rights is the first time in Europe that we have put all these things into the Constitution so I think you should definitely be a strong advocate of the Constitution. I think what is necessary for us now is not to try to renegotiate everything. With the German Presidency coming up, the Chancellor has clearly stated that she will set up a small group of officials to deal with a small group of officials in every country to identify where there are differences or difficulties. In my view, that should count 90% of the Constitution out. The focus and the concentration and effort will then be on the remaining 10%. My colleague from Ireland, Mr De Rossa, made a very fair point, one I have made several times, and it happened in the case of Ireland and Nice. The issue then is to try to get protocols to deal with the issues, that is the sensible thing: not throwing away parts of the Constitution that have been agreed upon by Parliament, by the Council, by 18 countries across Europe, but to try to find and accommodate the difficulties and analyse what the difficulties are in those countries which have voted ‘no’, or perhaps others which have reservations. That is not an impossible task. It has been done already in the countries where the Constitution was lost. As stated earlier on, there were opinion polls looking into what those issues were and trying to deal with those issues. I think that is possible. If those issues are looked at in the IGC or the Council, it should be possible. I do not think it should take a long time. I would just ask Parliament, and hope – as I will try to do in Council – to keep supporting the Constitution with the balanced view that we have to deal with a small number of outstanding issues as regards some countries and perhaps as regards countries that have declared their positions recently because of changes in governments. We should try to deal with that. If we can do that, then with the reason and purpose and the whole desire to have a European Constitution – if that is what it is called; that is not something I get too excited about – we can move forward collectively to do that. I really believe it is possible."
20061129IPR00709 Agenda of plenary 29 and 30 November Briefing for Brussels plenary session 29 and 30 November Future of Europe: from reflection to action - Inter-parliamentary conference 4-5 December 2006
EN
1
LINK
/omk/sipade3?PROG=AGENDA&L=EN&QUERY=ALL-SIT&NAV=S&REF=2006-11
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061122BRI00176 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061127IPR00341 EN NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
