Egyptian journalist wins journalism prize for article on immigration
Culture
2006-10-17 - 19:45
Egyptian journalist Samia Nkrumah
Last month Egyptian journalist Samia Nkrumah won the 2006 "Napoli-European Parliament" international prize for journalism. This prize, celebrating its 13th year, was awarded by a jury of the Napoli Award foundation, the European Parliament and several European and international newspapers. It forms part of the "Napoli Prize", a 52 year old competition which awards Italian and international narrative literature, poetry and literary criticism.
This year, the subject chosen was "Immigration and friendship among populations" and Samia Nkrumah's prize winning article was entitled "The changing face of Italy". In the article she approaches the problem of immigration of different immigrant communities in Italy.
From Ghana to Europe
Samia Nkrumah, born in 1960 in Accra, capital of Ghana, is the daughter of Kwame Nkrumah, the man who triumphantly led Ghana to independence in 1957 before being deposed in 1966, and of an Egyptian mother of Christian Coptic religion. This background has allowed Ms Nkrumah an appreciation of different cultures. She graduated from London University's School of Oriental and African Studies, where she obtained a Masters on Middle East studies. Nowadays, she is the representative of the African movement in Italy, and works with the University of Arkansas and the Rome Study Centre, among others.
Articles findings
The article was published by the Egyptian weekly magazine, "Al-Ahram" and says " Italians are generally tolerant of their country's ethnic and religious minorities" even if this is not reflected by the Italian law, which for Ms Nkrumah, "does not contribute to a better and deeper integration of the newcomers." Her article highlighted the following, " Romanians represent the largest legal immigrant population at 239,781. In second and third place are Moroccans and Albanians at 227,055 and 224,001 respectively. From Sub-Saharan Africa, immigrants from Senegal, followed by Nigeria and Ghana represent the highest legally resident immigrant populations".
"I believe that the jury have chosen my article for the spirit that I have written it in, for the tolerance that shows and the never-ending research to understand others. I never try to give judgments; first I prefer to understand the circumstances, the facts…” she said.
The European Parliament and immigration
According to Ms Nkrumah, Europeans are generally in favour of integrating immigrants into their societies, and in this Parliament can play a role. “The European Parliament, with its direct representation of the European population, has to comply with the public feeling of welcome and tolerance.” Ms Nkrumah goes on to say "today, the phenomenon of immigration, although with a different intensity, represents a very important subject for all of Europe...I am sure that most of the leading politicians have a wish to get an in depth understanding of this new situation, starting with a constructive dialogue."
How does she think we should help immigrants? "Certainly a common asylum policy, but also facing the issue of treatment of immigrants, and also tackling the problem of the illegal immigration…that needs a real common policy," she said. “The European Parliament has a solid structure (a relatively long term between elections)...compared to the fragility and the discontinuity of the national governments…we have to exploit this advantage in order to have a constructive and successful action.”
The 2007 award will have a special resonance as it will mark the 50th anniversary of the Treaty of Rome (1957), which founded the European Community.
20061016STO11664 Samia Nkrumah's article MEPs and national MPs debate legal and illegal immigration "Premio Napoli" award system Know more on Africa
EN
1
PHOTO
20061016PHT11710.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://weekly.ahram.org.eg/2005/751/fo4.htm
EN
4
LINK
http://premionapoli.altervista.org/
EN
5
LINK
http://www.inafrica.it/maldafrica/paesi/ghana.html
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061002IPR11235 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
