November Strasbourg Plenary: Services directive clears last hurdle
Institutions
2006-11-22 - 09:06
The Plenary session of mid-November was dominated by the Services directive - which was finally approved by MEPs at its second reading. The directive has been one of the most hotly debated in recent years. At its heart lay the question of to what extent Europe's vast service sector - 70% of all wealth and jobs - could be opened up to cross-border competition without labour costs being undercut.
In their two readings of the text MEPs amended the legislation to take out a range of "vital" services such as healthcare - and remove the controversial "country of origin principle". This would have allowed companies to operate in other EU countries under the rules of their home market.
Away from the Services directive, the Plenary session saw debates on the recent power blackout in Europe, the euro, mortgages, women in politics and ways of improving the way the EU's institutions communicate with people.
MEPs also supported measures to ban the general use of mercury - a highly toxic chemical that can be absorbed through the skin and damage the kidneys - although some exceptions will remain.
In Parliament's Culture Committee a new directive on TV in the digital age was discussed. MEPs backed amendments that would reduce the number of product placements while limiting the number of ad breaks during programmes.
Finally, the politics of the Caucasus and the Middle-East came to the heart of the Plenary chamber with MEPs hearing addresses from Georgian President Mikheil Saakashvili and the Emir of Qatar.
After over a week of Committee meetings and some political group consultations, MEPs will hold a two day Plenary session in Brussels on 29-30 November.
For the full story of the 13-16 November Plenary - read on!
20061121FCS00169
Monday: power blackouts, Euro area report, TV guidelines
A recent blackout across Europe has put the focus on EU energy policy The 4 November power outage, which plunged millions of Europeans into darkness was one of the key issues discussed in the opening session of the November Strasbourg plenary on Monday. Separately, the House agreed to postpone the debate and vote on the establishment of the "European Globalisation Adjustment Fund" - the aim of which was to help those made redundant by the effects of globalisation get back into work - to allow more discussions with ministers.
Commenting on the electricity black-out, Europe's Energy Commissioner Andris Piebalgs called for greater investment in electricity transmission systems and more importantly that such lines should not be overcharged. He also put forward proposals to set up a European grouping of transmission system operators that will look at solutions for the EU's energy needs, in particular network security standards. 1st ever report on Euro area Also on the agenda Monday was the first report on the Euro area. MEPs want more openness on European Central Bank decision-making and stressed the urgency of implementing the Lisbon Strategy on economic reform. Equally MEPs called for the Commission's annual report to contain more practical proposals for improving the management of the 12 member Euro area. TV: MEPs adopt new approach to product placement Outside the plenary chamber, members of the Culture Committee backed a directive on audiovisual media with several amendments aimed at limiting product placement, new rules on advertising and measures against intolerance in TV adverts. The amendments would forbid product placement in news, documentaries, children programmes and advisory programmes. However, it will be allowed to continue in films on TV, sports programmes and certain instances where the goods were supplied for free. On advertising, the Committee wants only one ad break every 30 minutes for children's and news programmes and every 45 minutes for TV films, concerts, plays and operas. The aim of updating the 1997 TV without frontiers directive is to take account of changes in technology like the switch from analogue to digital broadcasting. The reach of the legislation has been extended to include new media like WebTV and video on demand. The report will be voted on by the December Plenary. Improving performance of the Euro TV in a digital age Postbriefing
Tuesday: Georgian President, EC priorities for 2007, Mortgages, Mercury
All smiles: Georgian President Mikheil Saakashvili addressed MEPs Tuesday's Plenary saw Georgian President Mikheil Saakashvili address MEPs and tell them that EU entry is "a distant goal". European Commission President Barroso later presented to the House his 2007 priorities - with economic growth and climate change being key. Parliament will put his programme to the vote in December. MEPs also debated a report giving consumers more choice in the mortgages market. They also want to restrict the sale of mercury - but want exceptions for antiques and barometers.
EU membership a "distant goal" Georgian President tells MEPs In his introductory remarks Parliament's President Josep Borrell praised the hopes of the 2003 "Rose revolution" and called for Russia to stop exerting pressure on its neighbour. President Saakashvili recalled how he met his wife while in Strasbourg (where the Parliament is based) while studying human rights. As well as finding love he also learned after his experiences growing up in the USSR that the "state protects, not persecutes - what a revelation!" He thanked Parliament and the EU for their support and for a resolution on 26 October rejecting breakaway tendencies in parts of Georgia. He said the willingness of the EU to accept former Soviet states had "strengthened peace and democracy". On Georgia's EU aspirations he said they were a "distant goal" but the principles of the Union provided an inspiration for reform. Mr Saakashvili told MEPs of his reform strategy: promote democracy, fight corruption, increase revenue and protect Georgia's territorial integrity. He called recent Russian economic curbs on Georgia an "economic blockade" and called for "diplomacy and discussion". EC President Barroso lays out 2007 programme to MEPs President Barroso called the programme a "good birthday present" as the EU celebrates 50 next year. MEPs debated programme which centres on 4 themes: prosperity, solidarity, security and "giving EU a stronger voice in the world": It will be discussed in detail by MEPs in Parliament's Committees and the Political Groups next week. A resolution on it will be voted on during December's plenary session. Mr Barroso's proposals include: the modernisation of EU economy to create jobs and growth to deal with globalisation: Steps to deal with migration - with proposals on economic immigrants and sanctions for businesses that illegally employ immigrants. Measures to tackle climate change and energy policy will also be given greater prominence. Proposals on a strategy aimed at promoting healthy lifestyles will also be published. The EU's negotiations would continue with its neighbours and Russia, China and the Ukraine. Finally, the increased simplification of EU rules and improved ways of communicating with citizens will be explored. Mortgage credits A report on EU mortgage credit was adopted as a response to the Commission’s Green Paper. A mortgage is for homeowners often the largest amount of money they ever borrow. This area is expected to grow over the next 15 years. MEPs hope that greater integration of EU mortgage markets could improve competition, efficiency and consumer choice and reduce costs. Parliament also called for harmonisation of provisions for pre-contractual information and for abolishing tax obstacles. Mercury restricted but barometers and antiques remain Τhe Parliament adopted a first reading report restricting the placing on the market of certain non-electrical measuring devices containing mercury. Mercury, usually designed for medical but also household use, poses a serious risk to health, as it (and its compounds) are highly toxic to humans, ecosystems and wildlife. Medical thermometers, manometers and sphygmomanometers (used for measuring blood pressure) would be affected by the ban. Measuring devices that are more than 50 years old and barometers are not covered. MEPs also ask the Commission to take short-term measures to ensure that all products containing mercury and currently circulating in society are collected separately and treated safely. According to the MEPs, the Commission should also carry out a review of the availability of safer alternative solutions that are technically and economically feasible. The Council must now reach a common position before the text returns to Parliament again for second reading. Georgia's President in full Commission's 2007 work programme Mercury Mortgage market
Wednesday: Services directive, the Emir of Qatar, foreign languages
The Services directive will help remove obstacles to working around Europe One of the most important and debated projects in European affairs over the last 2 years came to a conclusion on Wednesday: the Services directive was finally approved by a large majority, although the original text had been significantly rewritten. The day also saw the Emir of Qatar address MEPs - the first ever ruler of a Gulf state to do so. A report on "multilinguism" was adopted - the aim of which is to get Europeans speaking more foreign languages.
Adoption of the service directive After over 2 years of discussion, MEPs approved a draft of the Services directive which aims to reduce obstacles to providing services across national borders in the EU. Balancing the need for open competition with social protection plus safeguards on certain essential sectors and labour laws was the essence of the Parliament's work. In February this year, when MEPs gave the text a first reading, a compromise was forged between the largest political groups in the Parliament. This meant the controversial “country of origin” principle was replaced and several areas such as healthcare and audiovisual services were removed. The Council of Ministers - when considering the directive - based its position on that of Parliament, opening the way for agreement between the institutions. The "country of origin" principle would have allowed workers from one country to work in another - but they would have to abide by the labour law in their country of origin. This would have had a large impact on wages, working hours and conditions. The MEP who drafted the report - German Socialist Evelyne Gebhardt - summed this up telling the House that the text was a balance "between on one side the interests of workers and consumers and on the other side the economy”. She stressed that the rights of workers were preserved thanks to the removal of the country of origin principle, thus avoiding competition between social systems of different countries. She also stressed that the directive concerned commercial services, not health or social services. The adopted directive should make it much easier for service providers to set up shop and conduct business in another EU member. Discriminatory bureaucratic restrictions will also be banned. It will also be simpler than in the past to provide services temporarily in another EU country. Consumers will have more choice when they choose a service provider, and costs should fall. The 25 members of the European Union now 3 years to implement the directive. Visit of the Emir of Qatar Speaking to MEPs about the situation in the Middle East, the Emir - Sheik Hamad Bin Khalifa al-Thani - said that it is "the undoubted interest of Europe to support this comprehensive reform in the countries of the Middle-East". He said that he believes that a just solution to the Palestinian question should be based on the implementation of all international resolutions by both the Israeli and Palestinian side. He continued: "I am confident that the Parliament, which is well aware of the dangers that the Iraqi situation poses on the regional stability in the Middle-East, will double its efforts to help Iraq to overcome this dangerous dilemma it is going through." The Emir referred to the strength of the relations between the European Union saying that "the State of Qatar has been eager to develop its relations with the European countries". In introductory remarks, Parliament's President Josep Borrell welcomed the Emir saying that relations to Islamic world are very important for the Parliament. He told the Emir: "You have been the pioneer from the region working towards democracy." Take advantage of different languages in Europe says report Increasing people's knowledge and use of foreign languages is at the forefront of a new strategy on multilingualism for the EU. Its aim is to foster the knowledge of languages and to take cultural and socio-economic advantage of the linguistic diversity at the EU. A report on a European Commission proposal in this area was agreed upon by MEPs. The report stated the desirability of Europeans learning 2 two foreign languages as well as their own. MEPs also underlined that that the rights of the 46 millions EU citizens who speak less used languages should be improved. Parliaments Press Service on the Services directive Last lap of Services directive Emir of Qatar Parliament's press release on foreign languages
Thursday: Security, Wills, Gaza, Women in politics, communication
European security and defence was discussed by MEPs Thursday in plenary was characterized by a huge variety of subjects. MEPs adopted a resolution on the situation in Gaza, called for a more active European Security Policy and expressed the desire for greater participation by women in politics. The House also reviewed the situation regarding people's Wills and supported a new EU Communication Policy aimed at bringing the EU closer to its citizens.
Gaza: MEPs condemn violence Parliament adopted a joint resolution on the situation in Gaza, expressing their serious indignation at the Israeli military operation carried out in Beit Hanun and in Gaza. MEPs:
condemned the Israeli army's use of disproportionate force.
expressed their deepest condolences with the families of the victims of the recent bombing in Beit Hanun.
called on the Palestinian militants to bring an end to the firing of rockets against Israeli territory and specifically condemned the attack on Sderot and the killing of innocent Israeli civilians.
invite the Quartet (UN, EU, USA and Russia) to act urgently to resume the negotiations with and between the parties concerned.
called on all parts of the Roadmap to be implemented.
called on Israel to lift its economic blockade of Gaza. Getting more women involved in politics Measures to balance family and professional life and more efforts by political parties are the key to increasing women's involvement in politics according to a report supported by MEPs. It would like to see greater female representation in international and national decision making. However, the report is against quotas for women candidates but calls of political parties to include the "aspirations of women in their programmes". The number of women MEPs in the European Parliament is 30%, behind Scandinavia with 40% and ahead of Europe generally with 16.9%. The report was drafted by Portuguese Socialist MEP Ana Maria Gomes. European security to reflect a changing world The EU needs to adapt a security strategy that reflects recent changes in world affairs - that was one conclusion of a report voted on by MEPs on Thursday. The report says that "the geopolitical challenges have evolved considerably since the adoption of the European Security Strategy in 2003, making its revision necessary in 2008 at the latest". It notes that "the EU is on the way to developing into a defence and security union" but wants an extension of EU influence through a common defence market (meaning that 25 different EU members don't buy 25 different types of military equipment), a civil protection force and a standing naval force in the Mediterranean. The report was written by European People's Party member Karl Von Wogau. Ensuring their Will is done When a family member of friend dies the grief is strong enough. However, dealing with confusion over the terms of the will or the rightful succession can be a nightmare for many families - especially if they live in different countries where the law differs. Figures compiled in 2002 estimated 50,000 - 100,000 "cross-border" cases a year. A report adopted by MEPs listed several recommendations for improving the situation: Firstly, clarify which Court in which country has the proper authority, introduce a "European certificate of inheritance" valid in all 25 EU members and finally set up a European network of national register to make finding data on wills easier. The report was by Giuseppe Gargani, an Italian European People's Party Member. It asks the European Commission to draw up a draft legislative text. Making Europe more present in daily life How can the European Union communicate with the people in a more engaging manner? In the wake of the "No" votes to the European Constitution in France and the Netherlands - the need for the Union to communicate better with people has become a priority. On Thursday MEPs approved a report drafted by European Commission in the subject. The report stresses that to reach citizens it is important to show the relevance of EU decisions in their daily lives, and to give them more information about what’s going on in European policy through TV, newspapers and magazines. A better use of new communication technologies is also among the proposals, but the report warns about the "technological gap" opening up between rich and poor or young and old citizens. The European Parliament rejected a Commission suggestion to establishing code of conduct for all EU institutions when communicating with citizens. MEPs also stressed that the use of "EU jargon" should be avoided. Cooperation in the Baltic Sea After the EU took on 10 new members in 2004, the Baltic Sea is now bordered by eight EU countries with Russia being the non-EU member with a coast on the Baltic. Clearly, this has refocused attention on the sea. Ahead of the upcoming EU-Russia summit at the end of the month, MEPs adopted a report by Finnish MEP Alexander Stubb of the European People's Party. Its aims are to support the EU's "Northern Dimension" policy, raise awareness of the Baltic Sea as a brand and a concept and help to improve the ecological status of the Baltic Sea. European Security and defence policy Women and international politics Wills Gaza resolution Communication policy Baltic Sea Strategy
EN
1
PHOTO
20061114PHT12699.jpg
EN
5
PHOTO
20061115PHT12769.jpg
EN
10
PHOTO
20061116PHT12812.jpg
EN
15
PHOTO
20061120PHT00033.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113IPR12515 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113IPR12607 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113IPR12538 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113IPR12539 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113IPR12525 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113IPR12526 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113IPR12540 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061114STO12683 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113IPR12541 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113IPR12527 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113IPR12545 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113IPR12546 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113IPR12549 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113IPR12542 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113IPR12551 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113IPR12544 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
