Opening of the November plenary session in Strasbourg - postponement of the European globalisation fund debate and vote
Institutions
2006-11-13 - 19:05
The session was opened by Parliament's President Josep Borrell. The House also agreed to postpone the debate and vote on the establishment of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund, (rapporteur: Roselyne Bachelot-Narquin (EPP-ED, FR)),
scheduled for this week, to allow more time to reach a first reading agreement with the Council, which only announced its position on Friday.
At the request of the Council the House agreed to use the urgent procedure to vote on the fisheries partnership agreement between the European Community and Mauritania.
Highlights of the week
The centrepiece of the Strasbourg November plenary is Parliament's second-reading of the Services Directive . Following the Council's decision to follow to a wide extent Parliament's position in first reading, MEPs are likely to approve the common position with little or no change. Nevertheless, Parliament is expected to receive a written declaration from the Commission to provide answers to what the rapporteur Evelyne GEBHARDT (PES, DE) regards as key questions: the legal scope and nature of the guidelines to be presented by the Commission to the Member States, the possibility of future harmonisation of legislation governing the provision of services, the neutrality of the Services Directive vis-à-vis labour legislation and the influence of the directive on the provision of social services. Other highlights include formal addresses by the President Mikheil Saakashvili of Georgia and by the Emir of Qatar - Sheikh Hamad Bin Khalifa Al-Thani . The House will also debate the dangers of mercury . The Environment Committee will recommend at first reading that Parliament approve a draft directive outlawing the sale of certain measuring devices containing mercury. However, in its amendments, the committee calls for exemptions for traditional barometers and instruments held in museum collections or put up for sale in the antiques market. Hubert WEBER , the President of the Court of Auditors, the independent EU institution which monitors EU spending, will present the Court's annual report for 2005 on the management of the EU budget to MEPs . This plenary debate comes after the publication of the annual report already presented to the Budgetary Control Committee. The House will also debate the Commission's work programme for 2007 . The vote will take place in December. Monday 13 November The session starts off with the 2006 annual report on the euro area. This is the first report of its kind. Parliament will also debate changes to payment systems under the CAP . The Agriculture Committee, will be recommending that Parliament reject the Commission proposal on laying down rules for voluntary modulation of direct payments, establishing common rules for direct support schemes under the common agricultural policy and establishing certain support schemes for farmers. Away from the plenary, the Culture and Media Committee will vote on the revision of the Television Without Frontiers Directive . Tuesday 14 November Tuesday starts off with Hubert WEBER, the President of the Court of Auditors, the independent EU institution which monitors EU spending, presenting the Court's annual report for 2005 to MEPs on the management of the EU budget. For the twelfth year running, the Budgetary Control Committee heard the Court of Auditors give a negative Statement of Assurance (DAS) for three quarters of Community budget spending in 2005. MEPs will turn their attention to measuring devices containing mercury . The Environment Committee will recommend at first reading that Parliament approve a draft directive outlawing the sale of certain measuring devices containing mercury. However, MEPs want to introduce exemptions for antique instruments. John PURVIS (EPP-ED, UK) will be putting forward a report on mortgage credit which reacts to the Commission Green Paper on opening up the mortgage markets. The report says that any EU level action should aim principally at directly improving the situation for the public, notably by widening access to mortgages, for example to people with fixed term contracts. The House will also debate the issue of gambling and sports betting in the internal market. Arlene McCARTHY (PES, UK), Chair of the Internal Market Committee, will be asking the Commission questions on gambling and sports betting in the internal market. On 12 October, the Commission launched infringement procedures against Austria France Italy, following similar cases in Denmark, Finland, Germany, Hungary, Italy, the Netherlands and Sweden. At midday, and amid heightening tensions in the region, the House will hear from Georgian President Mikheil Saakashvili in a formal sitting. Tuesday afternoon is dedicated to debating the Commission's work programme for 2007 with all Commissioners present. MEPs will vote on a resolution on the work programme during the December plenary. Wednesday 15 November The key debate of the week takes place on Wednesday morning with MEPs debating the Services Directive . Apart from a few details, the Council text reflects the one adopted by Parliament at first reading. However, the Commission is still expected to give further clarifications. If the Parliament approves the common position, then the earliest the legislation can be implemented would be December 2009. At midday, th e Emir of Qatar, Sheikh Hamad Bin Khalifa Al-Thani will address the House in a formal sitting. At 3pm on Wednesday, the House will debate the situation in Gaza following the recent escalation of violence . Parliament will also vote on a resolution. Later on Wednesday afternoon, Parliament will debate a series of reports including the future of the European Security Strategy in the context of the ESDP. The House also turn its attention to women in international politics. Thursday 16 November Thursday starts off with a debate on the Ombudsman's 2005 annual report with Professor Nikiforos Diamandouros the current European Ombudsman. Parliament will then debate the Commission's White Paper on a European communication policy . The White Paper is one of the Commission's initiatives aimed at improving the EU's interaction with its citizens following the 'no' votes in referendums on the proposed EU constitution in France and the Netherlands. MEPs in the committee say that to reach citizens it was important to communicate better and to show the relevance of EU decisions on their daily life. Finally, as is customary, the session ends with three debates and votes on human rights around the world. On this occasion, the three topics are: Ethiopia, Bangladesh and Iran .
20061113IPR12602 Briefing - Strasbourg 13 - 16 November Agenda Strasbourg 13 - 16 November
EN
2
LINK
/omk/sipade3?PROG=AGENDA&L=EN&QUERY=ALL-SIT&NAV=S&REF=2006-11
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061106BRI12349 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
