Wednesday in Plenary: Services directive, the Emir of Qatar, foreign languages
Institutions
2006-11-16 - 17:00
The Services directive will help remove obstacles to working around Europe
One of the most important and debated projects in European affairs over the last 2 years came to a conclusion on Wednesday: the Services directive was finally approved by a large majority, although the original text had been significantly rewritten. The day also saw the Emir of Qatar address MEPs - the first ever ruler of a Gulf state to do so. A report on "multilinguism" was adopted - the aim of which is to get Europeans speaking more foreign languages.
Adoption of the service directive
After over 2 years of discussion, MEPs approved a draft of the Services directive which aims to reduce obstacles to providing services across national borders in the EU. Balancing the need for open competition with social protection plus safeguards on certain essential sectors and labour laws was the essence of the Parliament's work.
In February this year, when MEPs gave the text a first reading, a compromise was forged between the largest political groups in the Parliament. This meant the controversial “country of origin” principle was replaced and several areas such as healthcare and audiovisual services were removed. The Council of Ministers - when considering the directive - based its position on that of Parliament, opening the way for agreement between the institutions.
The "country of origin" principle would have allowed workers from one country to work in another - but they would have to abide by the labour law in their country of origin. This would have had a large impact on wages, working hours and conditions.
The MEP who drafted the report - German Socialist Evelyne Gebhardt - summed this up telling the House that the text was a balance "between on one side the interests of workers and consumers and on the other side the economy”. She stressed that the rights of workers were preserved thanks to the removal of the country of origin principle, thus avoiding competition between social systems of different countries. She also stressed that the directive concerned commercial services, not health or social services.
The adopted directive should make it much easier for service providers to set up shop and conduct business in another EU member. Discriminatory bureaucratic restrictions will also be banned. It will also be simpler than in the past to provide services temporarily in another EU country. Consumers will have more choice when they choose a service provider, and costs should fall. The 25 members of the European Union now 3 years to implement the directive.
Visit of the Emir of Qatar
Speaking to MEPs about the situation in the Middle East, the Emir - Sheik Hamad Bin Khalifa al-Thani - said that it is "the undoubted interest of Europe to support this comprehensive reform in the countries of the Middle-East". He said that he believes that a just solution to the Palestinian question should be based on the implementation of all international resolutions by both the Israeli and Palestinian side.
He continued: "I am confident that the Parliament, which is well aware of the dangers that the Iraqi situation poses on the regional stability in the Middle-East, will double its efforts to help Iraq to overcome this dangerous dilemma it is going through." The Emir referred to the strength of the relations between the European Union saying that "the State of Qatar has been eager to develop its relations with the European countries".
In introductory remarks, Parliament's President Josep Borrell welcomed the Emir saying that relations to Islamic world are very important for the Parliament. He told the Emir: "You have been the pioneer from the region working towards democracy."
Take advantage of different languages in Europe says report
Increasing people's knowledge and use of foreign languages is at the forefront of a new strategy on multilingualism for the EU. Its aim is to foster the knowledge of languages and to take cultural and socio-economic advantage of the linguistic diversity at the EU. A report on a European Commission proposal in this area was agreed upon by MEPs. The report stated the desirability of Europeans learning 2 two foreign languages as well as their own.
MEPs also underlined that that the rights of the 46 millions EU citizens who speak less used languages should be improved.
20061116STO12806 Parliament press release on Services directive Last lap of Services directive Parliament press release on the address of the Emir of Qatar Parliament Press release on foreign languages
EN
1
PHOTO
20061116PHT12812.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113IPR12540 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061114STO12683 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113IPR12541 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113IPR12527 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
