Situation in Gaza - MEPs express indignation at Israeli operation and call on militias to respect truce
External relations
2006-11-16 - 16:15
In adopting a joint resolution on the situation in Gaza, MEPs express their deep indignation at the Israeli military operation carried out in Beit Hanun and in Gaza, and condemn the Israeli army’s use of disproportionate action. MEPs call on the Palestinian militias to put an end to the firing of rockets into Israeli territory, which is indiscriminate and deliberately targets civilians, to respect the truce and to refrain from further escalation of the conflict.
The House expresses its deepest condolences and sympathy to the families of the victims of the recent bombing in Beit Hanun and to all other innocent casualties. Parliament calls on the Israeli government to halt its military operations in Gaza immediately, and reaffirms that there is no military solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The House expresses its deep concern about the possible grave consequences of the current crisis, including further military and terrorist attacks, undermining the fragile political situation in the region as a whole.
Parliament calls on the United States Administration to reassess its role in the Quartet and in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, with a view to supporting an end to the violence and a new and genuine dialogue between the parties.
The House invites the Quartet (UN, EU, USA and Russia) to act urgently for the resumption of negotiations with and between the parties concerned and full implementation of all parts of the Roadmap. Parliament declares once again, at this particular stage, that a solution to the Middle East conflict will only be possible through the negotiation of a firm and final peace agreement as set out in the Roadmap, without prior conditions, based on the existence of two democratic, sovereign and viable states, living peacefully side by side within secure and recognised international borders, and that the continuing loss of civilian lives is intolerable. The House calls on the Council urgently to convene the EU-Israel Association Council in order to express the position of the European Union after the Israeli military operations in Gaza, with regard, in particular, to full compliance with Article 2 of the Association Agreement. MEPs call on the Council to address itself, within the framework of the EU-Palestinian Association Agreement, to the new Palestinian government of national unity in order to confront the issue of violence and security.
The House supports the EU Presidency’s statement urging the Israeli government to cease all provocative activities in the Palestinian territories, including settlement building, the construction of the separation wall in the Palestinian territories, indiscriminate military operations and the demolition of Palestinian homes. MEPs call on the Commission and the Member States to supply extra medical aid to Palestinian hospitals, in particular in Gaza.
The House Calls on the Council and the Commission to continue to guarantee, together with the international community, essential humanitarian aid for the Palestinian population. Parliament demands that the TIM be reinforced and extended in terms of duration and resources. The House calls on the Israeli government urgently to resume the transfer of withheld Palestinian tax and customs revenues.
MEPs call on Israel to lift its economic blockade of Gaza, to facilitate trade between the Palestinian territories, Israel and the world as a whole, to promote economic development in Gaza for the benefit of both Palestinians and Israelis, and to permit the movement of people, in compliance with the Agreement on Movement and Access in Rafah (EU-BAM), in Karni and at other border crossings in Gaza.
MEPs reiterates their call for the immediate release of the Palestinian ministers and legislators in Israeli custody and of the abducted Israeli soldier. Parliament calls on the Council to make every effort to convene an international peace conference – along the lines of the 1991 Madrid Conference – in order to find a comprehensive, lasting and viable solution to the problems in the area, based on the relevant UN Security Council resolutions, and considers that a unilateral approach by any of the parties concerned must be rejected. Finally, The House considers the involvement of the Arab League to be essential in this context. MEPs consider the 2002 ‘Beirut Plan’, agreed by the member countries of the League of Arab States, and the Geneva Initiative to be important contributions to the negotiations, which should be duly taken into account.
20061113IPR12542 Joint motion for a resolution on the situation in the Gaza Strip
-//EP//TEXT MOTION P6-RC-2006-0588 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
