2005 budget discharge: questions about Commission accounts and recoveries
Budgetary control
2006-11-21 - 10:09
The Budgetary Control Committee took the first steps in the 2005 budget discharge procedure when it held a hearing of four Commissioners on Monday. MEPs' chief aim, as in the 2003 and 2004 discharges, is for Member States to be made more accountable for the shared management of the Community budget.
After first raising a number of technical points, the general rapporteur for the 2005 discharge, Salvador Garriga (EPP-ED, ES), asked how far the Commission's accounting methods had adapted to the accrual-based system introduced three years ago. The Court of Auditors says weaknesses have been identified in the accounting system but these have no particular impact on the reliability of the Commission's accounts. The Commissioner for financial programming, Dalia Grybauskaite, argued that the Commission's accounting standards were sound and that these problems only affected the provisional accounts.
Mr Garriga then spoke of a problem of "non-existent accounts" at the Commission. However, Commissioner Grybauskaite replied "There are no unidentified accounts at the Commission" but merely old accounts which are nearly empty, which were created twenty years ago and are currently being wound up. "There is no material problem on this front", confirmed the Court of Auditors.
Ideas for recovering Community funds
According to Mr Garriga, the recovery of funds unduly paid out under the EU budget should be seen from a multiannual perspective. "A good idea", answered Siim Kallas, the Audit and Anti-Fraud Commissioner. The Maltese member of the Court of Auditors, Josef Bonnici, agreed that the question of recoveries should be reviewed but he added "It is not certain that recoveries make a real difference to ironing out the errors which affect the budget. Nothing indicates that at this stage". However, Mr Bonnici did call for "more action" to recover funds. Commissioner Grybauskaite thought it might be useful to create new tools under the Financial Regulation.
Paulo Casaca (PES, PT) called for greater transparency on recoveries [of sums unduly received by beneficiaries] carried out by the Commission, saying "Mr Kallas speaks of transparency but does this also apply to recoveries? Should we not know who is being asked to reimburse the unduly paid funds?" Commissioner Kallas replied that he "would think about this" but that certain "legal issues" would first have to be settled [to allow publication of names]. The Danish leader of the IND/DEM group, Jens-Peter Bonde, also wanted "naming and shaming" when recoveries were made.
Bart Staes (Greens/EFA, BE) wondered what the Commission planned to do to deal with the recurrent problems identified in the Court of Auditors' annual report, such as maladministration of agricultural funds in Greece. "We are looking into this", replied Commissioner Kallas.
In its annual report published in October, the court once more stated that the standard of inspections of agricultural expenditure in Greece was low, with farmers' organisations themselves entering data into the farm payments system and being able to alter the data as they wished, apparently without leaving any trace. Logically, therefore, the information available to the court for its report is unreliable.
Regional Policy Commissioner Danuta Hübner and Employment and Social Affairs Commissioner Vladimir Spidla were also present at the meeting. The next hearing, with Commissioners Mariann Fischer Boel and Janez Potocnik, is on 27 and 28 November.
2006-11-20 Chair Szabolcs FAZAKAS PES HU
20061120IPR00041 L'ensemble de la documentation liée à la décharge 2005
EN
1
LINK
/comparl/cont/adopt/discharge/2005/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
