2007 budget: higher payments but no flexibility or cuts in posts at the Commission
Budget
2006-10-18 - 14:03
The Budgets Committee on Tuesday wound up its first-reading vote on the 2007 draft budget when it dealt with the headings 'The EU as a global partner' and 'Administration'. The committee is proposing to increase payment appropriations and has decided not to call for the flexibility instrument to be used for external action. MEPs also rejected the Council's proposal to cut the number of posts at the European Commission.
The committee voted for a payment appropriations figure of 1.04% of EU gross national income, or around €121.6 billion, which is €5.1 billion higher than the Council proposed at its first reading in July. This will be the key issue at the conciliation negotiations in late November. In July the Council decided on a draft budget for 2007 of €114.61 billion in payment appropriations, i.e. 0.98% of the GNI of the EU-27.
"Value for money"
The committee backed the “value for money” strategy proposed by James Elles (EPP-ED, UK), the general rapporteur. For a number of budget headings, accounting for around €400 million, the committee is suggesting that 30% of the proposed amounts be placed in the reserve.
The funds held in reserve will be released only when the European Commission has proved that the programmes in question are financially efficient. This strategy will also enable MEPs to emphasise their priorities and pave the way for the mid-term review of the budget scheduled for 2008-2009 which was agreed during the negotiations on the 2007-2013 financial perspective.
The higher payment appropriations would be for programmes regarded as priorities by Parliament, such as transeuropean networks, nuclear safety and Life+.
No flexibility for heading 4
As in the last financial framework, the heading used to fund EU action outside its borders - The EU as a global partner - is likely to be underfunded in 2007-2013. However, MEPs do not want the flexibility instrument to be used, by contrast with previous years. Instead they voted for appropriations to be redeployed between budget headings.
Nevertheless, the Budgets Committee is proposing higher figures than those proposed by Council and Commission for a number of headings. It is seeking increases in areas including financial assistance for Palestine (+ €15 million in commitment appropriations, making a total of €173 million) and for the countries "to the east of Jordan" (+€15 million). Lastly, €100 million is earmarked for reconstruction in Afghanistan and placed in a special heading created for this purpose.
The funding in heading 4 "comes from" the margin created by the proposal to reduce by 50% the headings for the CFSP (-€86.6 million). Parliament is still calling on the Council for an ongoing dialogue between the institutions on the main aspects and fundamental choices of the CFSP.
Heading 5: staff cuts for the Commission rejected
The Budgets Committee wishes to restore the level of funding put forward in the preliminary draft budget for heading 5, i.e. Administrative expenditure . MEPs thus oppose the Council's proposal to reduce the number of posts at the Commission over the next few years. However, the committee wishes to place €50 million in reserve in heading 5. The release of these funds would be subject to a number of conditions, including a "screening" exercise, or assessment, of the Commission's staff needs.
As regards the "pilot projects and the preparatory instruments" (those aimed at funding one-off measures which are not covered by Community programmes), members of the committee have at this stage adopted a list of projects, including Euroglobe (a pilot project for an itinerant Globe theatre designed to promote a European public forum for debate, culture and study), an anti-terrorism database and preparatory measures with China and India for the exchange of business executives working in academic or research areas.
Lastly, turning to the EU agencies, the Budgets Committee proposes setting their budget at the level agreed for 2006, plus an increase of no more than 2%. The increase for 2007 will go into the reserve pending receipt of a justification for the rapid increase in the agencies' budgets. A notable exception is the Frontex agency, whose budget would be increased by €14 million. This increase will provide funding for patrols on the EU's borders.
The first reading of the budget is on the agenda of the October II plenary session (debate 24 October, vote 26 October).
2006-10-05 Committee on Budgets Chair Janusz Lewandowski EPP-ED PL
Procedure: Budget, First reading
Plenary Vote: October II, Strasbourg
20061002IPR11250
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
