Post-Briefing - 13-16 November 2006 - Strasbourg
2006-11-20 - 16:07
Services Directive reaches final stage - European Parliament's position prevails
MEPs debate Commission 2007 work programme
Restrictions on the marketing of certain measuring devices containing mercury
Integration of EU mortgage market area should benefit the public directly
Improving the performance of the Euro area
Human trafficking - call for EU action plan
Formal address by the President of Georgia and the Emir of the State of Qatar
Gaza - MEPs express indignation at Israeli operation and call on militias to respect truce
Strategy for multilingualism welcomed
Communication between the EU and its citizens should be improved
Reform of direct payments under the CAP - proposal rejected
MEPs call for full compliance on the prohibition of biological weapons
European security and defence policy
Women in International politics
European Ombudsman's 2005 Annual Report 20061113BRI12514
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Opening of the November I plenary in Strasbourg
2006-11-20 - 16:07
The session was opened by Parliament's President Josep Borrell. The House agreed to postpone the debate and vote on the establishment of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund, (rapporteur: Roselyne Bachelot-Narquin (EPP-ED, FR) to allow more time to reach a first reading agreement with the Council, which only announced its position on Friday, 10 November. At the request of the Council, the House agreed to use the urgent procedure to vote on the fisheries partnership agreement between the European Community and Mauritania.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
MEPs debate Commission 2007 work programme
2006-11-20 - 16:07
In a wide-ranging debate on the Commission's work programme for 2007, the Parliament gave it a mixed welcome. The House will vote on a resolution during the December plenary session in Strasbourg. Broad policy guidelines
Commission President José Manuel BARROSO opened the debate with a reference to the recent power cuts in Europe. "When the lights went out last week, our interdependence was laid bare for all to see", he said. "The incident was illuminating", he said, and had rendered the debate about the need for more Europe "superfluous".
He then turned to the challenges facing Europe which require shared solutions, notably growth and jobs, climate change, energy security and international terrorism, saying "We can be proud of our response so far to this rapidly changing landscape".
The EU institutions had continued to work "to unleash the full potential of the single market", while also emphasising social solidarity with the Globalisation Adjustment Fund, a "useful shock absorber to the powerful motor of globalisation". Innovation was another priority and the European Institute of Technology was set to play a key role.
The EU had successfully steered Romania and Bulgaria towards EU membership - a further step in European unity. "Let there be no doubt: in centuries to come, historians will say that enlargement was the greatest instrument for peace, prosperity and stability of our generation", said the Commission president.
Turning to the coming year, Mr Barroso said 2007 would mark "a turning point" when a Europe of 27 would throw its weight behind "the delivery of solutions to our citizens' shared concerns".
The work programme contained a list of 21 strategic initiatives and a second list of priority initiatives. Under the heading of Better Regulation the Commission was now proposing an Impact Assessment Board, more simplification and a target to cut administrative burdens by 25% by 2012.
Key policy areas in next year's programme would include:
- energy, with the aim of building "an integrated EU energy policy" to safeguard security of supply as well as environmental objectives;
- climate change, including a revision of the EU Emissions Trading Scheme;
- measures to deal with the demographic squeeze by attracting more skilled economic migrants, partly by giving them a secure legal status;
- the single market¸ with a new emphasis on the defence industries and markets;
- security, with additional measures to combat terrorism, especially fighting terrorist propaganda and sharing expertise on, for example, explosives.
Mr Barroso added that "2007 will also mark a turning point in our search for an institutional settlement". Next spring's Berlin Declaration, to mark the 50th anniversary of the Treaty of Rome, should be "a short and sharp political declaration…making it clear where we want to go and what we want Europe to be for the next 50 years".
Concluding, the Commission president said "When this Commission took office, there was unfinished business to deal with". "These things have been dealt with, put behind us, or turned around". "Europe has proved its continuing vigour and relevance by reinventing itself for the 21st century. To show our commitment to concrete results and to work hard for a stronger European Union, this is a fitting birthday present - for Europe and all its citizens."
Political Group Speakers
Francoise GROSSETÊTE (FR), speaking for the EPP-ED group, said that the Commission's work programme represented simplification which was to be welcomed. She also welcomed the reduced number of priorities "there are now only 21 strategic priorities". On the other hand, there was no need for further EU agencies, the cost benefit of existing agencies should also be carried out. Mrs Grossetête also expressed the need for impact assessment studies. On the Commission's priorities, she stressed the importance of energy and the implementation of a European energy certificate "which some studies have shown could create one million jobs". She also welcomed the focus on climate change and the need for better communication.
Martin SCHULZ (DE), for the PES group, welcomed the Commission's 2007 work programme, but said it was a case of déjà vu as it was very similar to the 2006 version. Mr Schulz also welcomed the focus on climate change and the priority given to reduce roaming charges. The answer though was not unrelenting deregulation. Mr Schulz also questioned the weight of the multilingualism portfolio given to the Romanian Commissioner-designate. Mr Schulz would have preferred a wider portfolio to include the protection of minorities in the EU.
Silvana KOCH-MEHRIN (DE), for the ALDE group, said that the second half of one's life passes faster than the first, this would apply to the Commission and it would need to build up momentum and speed." The Commission's 2007 work programme did not achieve this. She welcomed, nevertheless, the priorities on reducing red-tape and bureaucracy and the desire to better communicate with citizens. Mrs Koch-Mehrin described the programme as "a jigsaw puzzle that did answer the key questions on the Constitutional Treaty and enlargement." The programme also did not mention development aid, despite the EU being the number one donor.
Pierre JONCKHEER (BE,), speaking for the Greens/EFA group, said that, given the current political circumstances, more unity was needed and if that required greater resources for the Commission, his group supported this. In particular, he welcomed the priority given to climate change, energy and transport and said that his group had set out ways to reduce energy use by 30 % by 2020. It was also necessary to prepare for Kyoto II.
For the GUE/NGL group, Gabriele ZIMMER (DE) said the Commission faced tough challenges, not least in helping to meet the Millennium Development Goals. Simple deregulation and letting market forces rule was not the solution. The Commission should introduce restrictions on the market in clearly identified areas.
For the UEN group, Irish Member Brian CROWLEY asked "When did it become a sin to be radical?" In a changing world, a faster response by Europe was needed. He also criticised the slow progress on the Lisbon Agenda, saying there was "still so much lacking" on this front, with much talk about innovation, research and development but little actually being done. There was even "regression" in some areas, such as taxation. He was opposed to any moves to harmonise taxation, believing instead that "tax competition is healthy". Lastly he hailed the common foreign and security policy as "one of the key successes of the EU", and referred in particular to Kosovo and Africa.
Danish MEP Jens-Peter BONDE, for the IND/DEM group, complained about what he saw as undemocratic procedures in the EU. The Commission, fortunately, did not "have voting rights" but the Court of Justice played too active a role, in his view. He would prefer the EU "not to be involved in some issues" and overall he favoured a "bottom-up approach rather than the centralised one" prevailing at present.
On behalf of the non-aligned Members, Belgian MEP Frank VANHECKE focused on wider issues. He complained that, while EU citizens in France and the Netherlands had "thrown out" the constitutional treaty, the Commission was saying the core of the treaty must be preserved. The public was also against accession negotiations with Turkey, he added. Lastly, he contested the idea of "economic immigration", saying it had been shown that it was not in fact economically beneficial.
Commission response to the debate
Responding to the debate, Commission president BARROSO stressed that one aim of the work programme was "better targeting". He denied that the "annuality principle" was being abandoned, saying that the 21 strategic objectives would give a good balance between flexibility and security, in other words the result would be better programming and continuity.
Regarding the portfolio earmarked for the Romanian Commissioner, he stressed that it would cover not just multilingualism but also "interculturalism" or the dialogue between cultures. It was thus a substantial policy area.
Turning to climate change, this issue he said was closely linked to energy policy. And there was now a convergence between concerns of environmentalists and those keen on greater competitiveness, a point embodied in the existence of the European Technology Institute.
Summing up, he said the aim must be "to prepare the EU for the globalisation era". We should "not regard it as the end of Europe but instead have the courage to reaffirm our values" because "with our own values of freedom and solidarity we can create a globalisation to suit us in the 21st century".
British speakers
- Growth - employment - competitiveness
Jean LAMBERT (Greens/EFA, UK) was pleased to hear the President talking about dealing with unscrupulous employers, assuming by that that he means those who keep people in near slavery conditions, pay them extremely badly and exploit them. She Lambert looked forward to seeing more explicitly mentioned in the Commission's programme with regard to quality of jobs and elimination of poorly-paid employment.
Ms Lambert stated that she will be looking to see whether the proposals coming forward equally look at the effects of existing European legislation on the future of services.
Finally, she welcomed something picking up on the sustainable development strategy this year on the issue of targeted training for professions, in helping to meet climate change requirements. "If you cannot fit your solar panels and you cannot repair your energy systems, you are not going to meet your climate change targets."
Roger HELMER (NA, UK), non-attached Member. referred to the report of the French Conseil d'Analyse Group, a high-powered economic committee of the French Government chaired by Prime Minister Dominique de Villepin. That report, he stated, says 'economic integration has stagnated and no longer promotes growth'. It also says that the euro's creation has not produced the knock-on benefits expected. Mr Helmer hopes the Commission will note the estimate of Commission Vice-President Gunter Verheugen who says that the costs of excessive regulation in the single market amounts to €600bn a year. In a recent UK study of more than 1000 CEOs a clear majority felt that the EU was doing more harm than good and that Britain should renegotiate its relationship with Europe to something more like a free trade deal. The position is very clear, he said. "Europe's share of world trade is shrinking fast. Membership is costing far more than any benefits it offers. EU regulation and the EU social model are doing huge economic damage. The EU is making us poorer and less democratic and less free and we have had enough of it."
Stephen HUGHES (PES, UK) stated that he found this work programme very disappointing. While, he said, the communication again hails flexicurity as a means of realising opportunities offered by European labour markets, in reality, it has been shown to have no positive meaning for working people. For millions flexicurity is a weasel word, a code word for exploitation, insecurity and uncertainty. What is needed, Mr Hughes said, is an EU legislative framework to tackle unfair and exploitative employment and quasi-employment relationship. All workers in all regions deserve access to decent work to give them and their families the chance of a decent life. In the meantime, social Europe is at a standstill. The last piece of EU legislation in the social field was adopted over three years ago. The Commission's lack of ambition reflects both its own imbalanced policy perspective, better regulation means no legislation in the social field but also reflects the poor prospects for any proposal in the Employment Council. Employment Ministers need to begin to play a positive role and they could start by doing something positive on working time and temporary agency work. Lisbon promised more and better quality jobs. What have they done to deliver that promise for working people? Precious little. Finally, Mr Hughes' message to both Commission and Council is this:. "Let us stop the rhetoric and start to deliver."
Elizabeth LYNNE (ALDE, UK) said that demographic change is one of the greatest challenges for European competitiveness. Her party, she said, want to make it a priority to bring people into the job market that are excluded, elderly and disabled people included. That is why the 2000 Employment Directive should be fully implemented. But, she said, more must be done, especially as 2007 is the European Year for Equal Opportunities.
However, Ms Lynne welcomed the Commission's commitment to cut down on unnecessary legislation. That is the reason, she said, that she requested the Commission to reaffirm their intention to withdraw the temporary workers agency directive and also to consider separating the issues of calculating what is considered as working time where someone is on call from that of the individual opt out from the working time directive.
If, Ms Lynne stated, we are really going to achieve growth and competitiveness, legislation should only be brought forward in the employment field if it cannot successfully be done at local or national level. In the field of health and safety, only if scientific and medical evidence prove the need for it, as is the case for an amendment to the 2000 Biological Agents Directive, to protect workers from needle stick injuries and contracting hepatitis or HIV. She asked the Commission when are they going to bring forward that amendment to the Biological Agents Directive in line with the own-initiative report that was passed by the European Parliament?
- Cohesion - Preservation of natural resources
John BOWIS (EPP-ED, UK) stated that, in terms of better legislation, he looked forward to the development of impact assessments, both environmental and health – development in such a way that they are seen to be, and really are, containing an element of independent assessment. He suggested the need for a panel of independent experts – not a new building or agency, but people on whom we can call to help to ensure that the impact assessments are effective.
Mr Bowis stated that healthy people and indeed a healthy environment are prerequisites to healthy economic growth, competitiveness and jobs. More work is needed to improve health promotion, collaboration between health services, including not only that on patient mobility, patient safety and the new areas of mental health, but also continuing areas such as flu preparedness.
The environment goes hand-in-hand with growth and jobs. Eco-innovation is a major component to win the fight against global warming. He called on the Commission to lead initiatives in the post-Kyoto process outside the European Union, developing the 'green diplomacy' concept.
Having recently been in Gaza and seen the devastation to people in the hospitals there, Mr Bowis urged that the new opportunities coming from the appointment of the new Prime Minister of the Palestinian Authority mean that the European Union should work closely with that authority and the Israelis to stop what is happening in Gaza and to promote real reconciliation and peace.
- Internal affairs
Malcolm HARBOUR (EPP-ED, UK) expressed his concern about the work programme and the priorities as presented.
Mr Harbour wanted to know how much resources the Commission is putting behind the implementation of its policies. We know that Commissioner's McCreevy's estimates that on the single market we have 90% of the legislation already in place. Delivering what we have is fundamental. Where does it tell me what resources the Commission is putting behind it? Where does it tell me the resources the Commission is putting behind a transposition plan for the Services Directive which we will approve tomorrow, a fundamental piece of work. If the Commission does not put the resources behind it, it will not be delivered.
Mr Harbour stated that he would like to ask Commissioner for Institutional Relations and communication strategy, Margot Wallström for the next package we should have these grouped together. "I want the priority for the single market, I want the actions next to it, I want the delivery resources next to that and I want the Commission's simplification plan next to that. I want the percentage of the resources that the Commission puts behind those together. That would be a logical and clear document and a clear communication."
Finally, on the Services Directive: "I am delighted that Mr Schulz is here, because I notice from a press release he put out today that the Services Directive is an enormous success for the Socialist Group. It is an enormous success for this Parliament and all of us working together. I hope people will have the humility to accept that, but I notice that he has finally joined our liberal club because this release states that he supports the flexibility necessary to enterprise and the promise of new job creation. Welcome to the market liberalisation club, Mr Schulz."
- Foreign Affairs
Andrew DUFF (ALDE, UK), stated that the Commission strategy for change across the policy spectrum must be framed inside a constitutional context. Policy reform will be given practical effect by its connection with the issues of the EU's competences, the instruments, the powers and procedures. As far as external affairs are concerned, for example, he said the Union needs its legal personality. Public opinion supports the EU as a global actor. We need success on completing the Doha Round for trade and development. We should be stalwart in persevering with enlargement, despite the problems that we experience at present, some of which at least are clearly foreseen and foreseeable.
The Commission and Parliament must be steadfast to support the deployment of so many European forces, not least at present in South Lebanon, as this exercise surely provides the greatest test for the development of our common foreign security and defence policy.
Referring to the importance of the Lisbon Agenda and commitment to the multilateral approach in trade policy and support to the WTO, Robert STURDY (EPP-ED, UK) deplored the suspension of the WTO round negotiations and seriously urged the Commission to come forward and fight for a reiteration of the feelings of getting the settlement on the Doha Round in 2007.
Mr Sturdy welcomed the EU communication on global Europe competing in the world but, however, stressed that bilateral, regional agreements should remain supplementary to the multilateral trade system. He questioned the Commission as to why progress has not been made with the USA on regulatory issues between the EU and the US by completing the transatlantic single market? We must, he said, make a commitment to that over the next decade. We cannot have a free trade agreement with the US since it would undermine multilateralism. Mr Sturdy expressed concern over the growing feeling of protectionism and trying to set goals that are outside the Lisbon Agenda. Increasingly Member States are using various methods to be protectionist.
Finally, he expressed serious concerns about EPAs, economic partnership negotiations, but supported the Commission in their proposal. It is imperative, he said that we move forward. "It is a real chance, and probably the last chance we are going to have, to really do something to help those poor countries." He hoped that an agreement would be reached in the coming year. Vote will take place in December plenary (11-14 December, Strasbourg)
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Free movement of services
Services Directive reaches final stage - EP position prevails
2006-11-20 - 16:07
The services directive which aims to facilitate the provision of cross-border services by removing obstacles to the free movement of services in the internal marked reached its final stage with the European Parliament approving the Council common position with minor changes. The final position adopted by Parliament broadly reflects the Parliament's first reading position achieving a balance between competition and social protection. Member States have a maximum of three years to implement the provisions of the major directive.
Evelyne GEBHARDT (PES, DE) rapporteur said in the debate preceding the vote: "Social and consumer rights are protected and the main principles of the Services Directive have not been undermined." Malcolm HARBOUR (EPP-ED, UK), shadow rapporteur, said: "This is an important day for European citizens, the Services Directive is about raising the standard of living of all citizens and about increasing economic growth and dynamism."
At a press conference after the vote on the services directive, EP President Josep BORRELL hailed the vote as a "big success for Parliament as legislator". Mr Borrell underlined the importance of the decision taken by Parliament, which had been able "to come up with a largely consensual and balanced piece of legislation".
Only three technical amendments on comitology tabled by the Internal Market Committee were adopted and these do not alter the substance of the directive.
Striking the balance between economic dynamism and workers' rights
MEPs voted in favour of this version of the draft directive primarily because they were the authors of the text. The directive now reflects fairly closely the consensus reached in February this year by the major political groups - at a time when many were predicting the imminent demise of what had originally been known as the "Bolkestein directive". In fact, the compromise agreed within Parliament paved the way for an agreement between the three institutions. The Commission supported the Parliament text and the Council accepted it almost unchanged in its common position in July 2006.
Parliament's goal was to find a way of opening up the internal market in services to cross-border competition without eroding the European social model. The directive is thus intended chiefly to boost growth and jobs but also to ensure that Member States do not lose control of the market in services of public interest and that workers' rights are protected. This balance seems to have been achieved.
Red tape cut but safeguards guaranteed
The new legislation should make it much easier for service providers to set up shop and conduct business in another Member State. For example, a company wishing to manage a hotel or leisure centre in another state will no longer have to deal with several different authorities at national, regional and local level but with a single authority through a "one-stop shop" which will deal with all the formalities.
Discriminatory bureaucratic restrictions will be banned. It will also be simpler than in the past to provide services temporarily in another EU country. The directive clearly outlaws certain practices used until now by some states to restrict the provision of services. For example, it will no longer be possible to require mountain guides to have a fixed residence in the territory of the country where they wish to do the job temporarily.
However, even if they are only providing the service temporarily, service providers must comply with the labour and social legislation of the Member State where they work. Any employees sent temporarily by a company to another state will have the same rights as their local counterparts. This applies to rules on safety and hygiene, working hours and conditions and the minimum wage. The directive is completely neutral as regards labour law, as the Commission confirmed in a special declaration ahead of the vote.
Parliament's first reading position largely adopted
The crucial "country of origin principle" has been dropped from the key article. In its place MEPs have put a clause with the title "freedom to provide services". Parliament also voted to limit the scope of the directive. It now covers fewer services than the original text. MEPs expanded the list of reasons allowing Member States to restrict the freedom of a service provider from another Member State to provide services on their territory. The text also now clearly says that the directive does not affect labour law in the Member States.
In the key article of the text adopted by Parliament, devoted to the freedom to provide services, neither the country of origin nor the host country are now specifically mentioned.
The rule of the freedom to provide services replaces the country of origin principle. It requires the Member States to respect the right of the service provider to supply services and to guarantee the provider "free access to and free exercise of a service activity within its territory". This guarantee is underpinned by a ban on a number of obstacles to the free movement of services. For example, in general it will no longer be possible to require a service provider to open an office in the country where he/she is temporarily providing a service nor to prevent him/her from setting up "certain infrastructure" in that country. The provider must not be forced to register with a professional body nor be banned from using his normal equipment at work. In addition, Member States must not apply "contractual arrangements between the provider and the recipient which prevent or restrict service provision by the self-employed".
Thus, on the one hand, the text bans the Member States from erecting obstacles to the free movement of services. But, at the same time, it stipulates grounds which would allow Member States to limit this freedom through national rules. These grounds are public policy, public security, environmental protection and public health.
Member States will also continue to apply their own rules on conditions of employment, including those laid down through collective bargaining agreements. Nevertheless the requirements imposed on cross-border service providers by the Member States using the above justifications must comply with the principles of the Treaty: non-discrimination (for example on grounds of nationality), necessity (public policy, public security or protection of health or the environment) and proportionality (the requirements must be appropriate for achieving the objective).
In certain provisions of the text adopted by Parliament, the reference is made to "overriding reasons relating to the public interest" which allow the Member State to limit, on its territory, the freedom to provide services both by the way of permanent or temporary establishment.
Lastly, the text adopted by the Parliament opens up the prospect of harmonisation of national legislation on the provision of services five years after the directive enters into force.
New elements on the freedom of establishment for providers
In a new element, the Council decided to include a provision whereby Member States may require additional insurance and financial guarantees from service providers – regardless of whether or not such a requirement exists in the State of establishment. A further addition includes a new measure, whereby authorisations are deemed to have been granted in the absence of a response from the competent authorities. Member States will, however, be allowed to extend the deadline for the reply when this is justified by the complexity of the issue and provided that the applicant is duly informed of the extension and the reasons thereof. The Common Position also includes rules on “tacit rejection” which can be used by a Member State in cases of overriding reasons relating to the public interest. In introducing these measures the Council believes that it has struck the right balance between the needs of the economic operator on the one hand and the needs of the Member State on the other.
Changes have also been made to the evaluation process regarding “services of general interest” (SGEI) and the obligation to notify them. These modifications make it clear that the evaluation process should not obstruct the performance of tasks assigned to services of general economic interest. The Council has done this in a bid to address Parliamentary concerns that the evaluation process should not effect the evaluation of SGEI.
Services covered by the directive (not exclusive)
The services covered by this Directive concern a wide variety of ever-changing activities, including business services such as management consultancy, certification and testing; facilities management, including office maintenance; advertising; recruitment services; and the services of commercial agents. The services covered are also services provided both to businesses and to consumers, such as legal or fiscal advice; real estate services such as estate agencies; construction, including the services of architects; distributive trades; the organisation of trade fairs; car rental; and travel agencies. Consumer services are also covered, such as those in the field of tourism, including tour guides; leisure services, sports centres and amusement parks; and, to the extent that they are not excluded from the scope of application of the Directive, household support services, such as help for the elderly. Those activities may involve services requiring the proximity of provider and recipient, services requiring travel by the recipient or the provider and services which may be provided at a distance, including via the Internet.
Services not covered
The Directive does not apply to the following activities:
(a) non-economic services of general interest; (b) financial services, such as banking, credit, insurance and re-insurance, occupational or personal pensions, securities, investment funds, payment and investment advice, including the services listed in Annex I to Directive 2006/48/EC; (c) electronic communications services and networks, and associated facilities and services (d) services in the field of transport, including port services, falling within the scope of Title V of the Treaty; (e) services of temporary work agencies; (f) healthcare services whether or not they are provided via healthcare facilities, and regardless of the ways in which they are organised and financed at national level or whether they are public or private; (g) audiovisual services, including cinematographic services, whatever their mode of production, distribution and transmission, and radio broadcasting; (h) gambling activities which involve wagering a stake with pecuniary value in games of chance, including lotteries, gambling in casinos and betting transactions; (i) activities which are connected with the exercise of official authority as set out in Article 45 of the Treaty; (j) social services relating to social housing, childcare and support of families and persons permanently or temporarily in need which are provided by the State, by providers mandated by the State or by charities recognised as such by the State; (k) private security services; (l) services provided by notaries and bailiffs, who are appointed by an official act of government.
The directive does not apply to the field of taxation.
Labour law and social security unaffected
The Council common position says: "This Directive does not affect labour law, that is any legal or contractual provision concerning employment conditions, working conditions, including health and safety at work and the relationship between employers and workers, which Member States apply in accordance with national law which respects Community law. Equally, this Directive does not affect the social security legislation of the Member States."
Entry into force and transposition by Member States
This Directive enters into force on the day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union. Member States must bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with this Directive at the latest three years after the entry into force of this Directive. This would then result in the earliest possible implementation date of December 2009.
It is clear from the current text that there will be at least three major tasks :
Screening, which requires us to review all laws and practices and removing unjustified barriers to trade. Constructing the Point of Single Contact – a website through which service providers can complete all necessary formalities in order to access markets. Preparing for communication and cooperation between Member States, known as Mutual assistance.
Debate preceding the vote - Wednesday 15 November 2006
In the debate in plenary on the Services Directive held earlier today prior to the vote, MEPs from the largest political groups broadly welcomed the Council's decision to follow Parliament's position on this major directive which opens up and removes obstacles to the provision of cross-border services.
The rapporteur Evelyne GEBHARDT (PES, DE) said that "we are now at the end of the debate, after more than two years of discussion". She singled out Malcolm HARBOUR (UK), the shadow rapporteur from the EPP-ED group, for his excellent co-operation. "The European Parliament was not divisive," she said. Ms Gebhardt stressed it was important to put people at the forefront of the debate on the economic questions. She said: "Social and consumer rights are protected and the main principles of the Services Directive have not been undermined". The directive sets out the principle of the freedom to provide services, and provides the need for Member States to establish a single point of contact.
Commissioner Charlie McCREEVY described the adoption of the services directive as "a milestone in the history of the European Parliament" because of the leading role the EP had played in finding a compromise.
The result was a piece of legislation which would "cut red tape and provide legal certainty for service providers and consumers". It was "crucial for fostering entrepreneurship and promoting jobs", while at the same allowing Member States to "invoke essential requirements in certain clearly defined areas".
The Commissioner then made a formal declaration clarifying a number of points, including the possible need for further harmonisation in future and the impact of the directive on labour law, on criminal law and on social services.
For the Council presidency, Finland's trade and industry minister Mauri PEKKARINEN said "we are making internal market history" and he commended Parliament on its contribution to achieving a "historic compromise". The directive was much changed from its original version but the essential goal remained intact and it would "open many doors".
Using similar words to Mr McCreevy's, he described it as "a milestone on the road to making the internal market work", the key point being that "it gives market operators legal certainty", although in fact, he stressed, "the directive marks not the end but the beginning of developing the internal market for services".
After listening to the Commission, Ms GEBHARDT welcomed the Commission's clarifications. However, she pointed out that there had been some difficulties in the legislative decision-making process. Parliament's legislative rights, she said, should be fully respected in the future including conciliation rights. The way this directive was agreed "should not be an example for the future", she said. On this occasion however, Ms Gebhardt said she was willing to accept that Parliament would not table significant amendments in second-reading as the Council had already taken on board around 90 per cent of Parliament's first reading position.
Political Group speakers
Speaking for the EPP-ED group, Malcolm HARBOUR (UK) said: "This is an important day for European citizens, the Services Directive is about raising the standard of living of all citizens and about increasing economic growth and dynamism". SMEs have expressed deep dissatisfaction with internal market rules and this has lead to the new Services Directive. Mr Harbour thanked the Federation of Small Businesses in the UK and stated: "If every SME in Europe would create one more job, the problem of unemployment in the EU would be solved".
Hannes SWOBODA (AT) for the PES group welcomed the broad co-operation in the Parliament and the agreement reached with the EPP-ED group. Many European citizens in all Member States, he said, had high hopes for the Services Directive. Nationalism and protectionism was not the answer.
Anneli JÄÄTTEENMÄKI (FI) speaking for the ALDE group also welcomed the excellent co-operation between the EP political groups. She said that the growth in the European economy would result primarily from growth in the services sector. She also stressed the importance of free movement of labour saying that it was equally as important as the new Services Directive, pointing out that only the UK, Ireland and Sweden had fully opened their labour market after the latest enlargement.
For the Greens/EFA, Heide RÜHLE (DE) said certain points of the directive were "not sufficiently clear", such as the definitions of different types of services. "These loopholes will have to be cleared up by the Court of Justice", she said. The directive was "not a success for the European Parliament but a failure and we will suffer from it for a long time".
On behalf of his group, Francis WURTZ (GUE/NGL, FR) described the agreement on the directive as a "capitulation". It excluded labour law and left too many "ambiguities and grey areas" which would have to be interpreted by the courts.
Jerzy BIELAN (UEN, PL) took the opposite view, complaining that the directive had not done enough to "do away with red tape". He said it was "appalling that there is such fear of workers from other countries".
Jens-Peter BONDE, speaking in the name of the IND/DEM group described the legislation as "a judges' directive" as the rules were "extremely unclear" in their present form. His own political party in Denmark, the June Movement, was in favour of a single market but not in favour of "wage competition downwards on Danish workers".
Non-aligned French MEP Marianne LE PEN described the directive as "a victory for ultraliberalism", saying that dishonest service providers would exploit its weaknesses. She was against the cross-border provision of services and would vote against the Gebhardt report.
British and Irish speakers
Arlene McCARTHY (PES, UK) expressed her immense pride at the work and commitment of both the rapporteur and the Members of the committee enabling Europe to finally give the go-ahead to open up the market in services.
Mrs McCarthy stated that the law has been controversial in cutting red tape and bureaucracy for business, but high quality standards and choice for consumers needs to be ensured while safeguarding employees' conditions and health and safety. Parliament listened to people's concerns and fears so that the freedom to provide services is not the freedom to undermine consumer or employee rights. Each Member State must now ensure free access to its territory and it must be equally clear that the right to maintain national rules, to protect public policy, public health, security or the environment must not mean that legitimate protection turns into negative protectionism. It must be justifiable, proportionate and non-discriminatory to other operators.
Looking to the future, Mrs McCarthy stated that the litmus test will be whether opening up the market for businesses can be done to give the benefits to consumers. We cannot, she said, shout about the benefits if we do not deliver.
As Chair of the Internal Market Committee, Mrs McCarthy stands ready to make good on the commitment to assist the Commission and the Council in making sure respect for the rights of consumers and employees and delivery for business across Europe.
Nigel FARAGE (IND-DEM, UK) questioned the result of joining the Common Market which led to the single market? The answer, he said, has been regulation, cost and missed opportunities overseas. Just last month, he said, there was a poll of a thousand British businesses and 60% of them said that they want the UK to renegotiate their relationship with the European Union to being that of a simple free trade agreement and no more than that. He stated that people in the City of London are becoming more and more sceptical about the value we are getting from it all. He continued: "It is clear that British business now recognises that the cost of directive upon directive upon directive produced by institutions like this is now having a negative effect. The single market is not fit for the 21st century global economy and I believe that it will be British business that leads us out of it."
Ian HUDGHTON (Greens/EFA, UK) recognised that this compromise is something of an improvement on the Commission's original proposal. He also recognised that it is necessary and desirable to remove the remaining barriers to the cross-border provision of commercial services. However, he believes that, in the process, provide legal certainty should be provided to providers of essential public services and, more importantly, to provide reassurance to the many citizens who depend strongly upon locally-provided social services.
Verbal assurances given in good faith, however, are not what will be used by judges in the event of court challenge in the future. It is the text of a directive that will be important. Therefore, Mr Hudghton has signed a number of amendments, such as Amendment 31, which would make it absolutely clear that it would be Member States who would define services of general interest in their territory.
Eoin RYAN (UEN, IE) welcomed the Services Directive stating that it is one of the most important pieces of legislation to be adopted in this Parliament and a step in the right direction. He congratulated Commissioner McCreevy, Mrs Gebhardt and Mr Harbour for all their work.
The directive, he said, will make Europe more competitive and thereby create jobs and give better value to its citizens. People, he said, are saying that we are pulling the wool over the eyes of our citizens. On the contrary: if we do not make changes in our economy, like we are doing today, then we really will be pulling the wool over the eyes of our citizens.
Whether we like it or not, Mr Ryan continued, it is a fact that we are living in a globalised world and Europe must become more competitive if it is going to compete on a global scale. About 50% of all world trade now is in emerging economies and if we want to compete with them and hold on to the European social model, we need a vibrant economy to invest in the sort of services that we feel are important for the citizens of Europe. This Directive is a step in the right direction; it is the sort of reform we must make at a European level if we want to hold on to the values that we believe are right for our citizens.
James ALLISTER (NA, UK) stated that the abandonment of the country of origin principle and the reduction in the services covered, particularly the omission of social services and non-economic services, makes this directive a more palatable proposition than when it was last debated. However, he retained some concerns, not least the rush to timetable harmonisation of national legislation on the provision of services, with its inevitable avalanche of regulation and the fear that insecure jobs will result from foreign service providers paying low minimum wages, thus creating worse conditions in host nations, particularly if they are allowed to have temporary status and then escape national host controls.
On one specific point, Mr Allister welcomed the fact that gambling activities will be outside the ambit of this directive. Their inclusion would have fed the growth of that destructive industry and added to the misery and social instability which it so often spawns.
Proinsias DE ROSSA (PES, IE) also congratulated Mrs Gebhardt on her enormous tenacity and political wisdom. Others have obviously played a key role but she, he said, has carried the greatest burden.
This outcome, he said, is a success, given all the circumstances for citizens as workers, consumers and service providers and demonstrates that it is possible for effective and fair outcomes to be achieved between 25 Member States, despite all the differences. Those, he said, who ignore that diversity continue to reject this compromise, particularly the kamikaze GUE/NGL Group, which ignores the fact that the principal demand it has been making – the deletion of the country of origin principle – has, in fact, been achieved.
The Council, he said, must now stop playing games with labour rights in Europe. Last week's farce on the Working Time Directive was shameful. "Give us a Working Time Directive that is workable and working and an effective Posting of Workers Directive. Unless the Council does that, it will continue to preside over citizens who fear for the quality of their working lives and the race to the bottom, and those fears are eating at the heart of Europe."
Simon COVENEY (EPP-ED, IE) stated that the process to reach agreement on the Services Directive has not been an easy one. While no political group in Parliament has got exactly what they want, we have, he said, managed to reach a workable compromise acceptable to the vast majority of Members. Most importantly, this Parliament is sending a strong signal today to the Commission and the Council to move forward and make this directive a reality as soon as is practically possible.
The implementation of the Services Directive will give the sluggish EU economy a much needed kick-start at this stage. The directive aims to remove many of the barriers to cross-border trade and services and the reduce the red tape that businesses, especially small- to medium-sized enterprises encounter when they try to expand across borders into new EU markets.
Europe's small and medium-sized enterprises, with the capacity to grow, have been particularly disadvantaged by the costs attached to administration and legal requirements in the past. They can look forward to the benefits of this directive, which dramatically reduces that burden for future cross-border trade.
This directive, he continued, is of huge importance to Ireland because it is a net exporter or goods and services. Irish companies and service providers will now, he hoped, take advantage of the simplified environment for providing services across the European Union. The Directive will facilitate growth, job creation and increased economic activity in the services sector across the EU, while ensuring social and worker protection.
Commission response to the debate
Responding to the debate, Commissioner McCREEVY said the Commission could accept the three amendments on comitology but could support none of the others. Some MEPs had voiced concern about the legal certainty provided by the directive, saying that much would have to be clarified by the Court of Justice. He did not share this concern and pointed out that since no Member State had voted against the common position there was no reason why they would challenge the directive.
Now it was time to focus on implementing the legislation. "The Commission will start now", he said but the Member States, who have three years to transpose it, should also start soon, he said, "because their economies need this directive".
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Economic and monetary affairs
Integration of EU mortgage market should benefit the public directly
2006-11-20 - 16:07
MEPs say a well-focused integration of the market would bring benefits to consumers. They adopted a report on the issue on Tuesday, which was drawn up by John Purvis (EPP-ED, UK), as Parliament’s response to a Commission discussion paper on the mortgage market. The report says that any EU level action should aim principally at directly improving the situation for the public, notably by widening access to mortgages, for example to people with fixed term contracts. Stressing the need for extensive consultation in deciding on any EU action, MEPs say there are numerous obstacles to a single retail market in mortgages and call on the Commission to focus on targeted measures offering the greatest benefits, via market-led initiatives wherever possible.
Parliament calls for harmonisation of provisions for pre-contractual information noting that if lenders offer credit in a Member State other than their own, this information must be available in the language(s) of the consumer’s Member State. The Commission should consider making the existing Code of Conduct in this area mandatory if early compliance is not forthcoming says the report. Lenders should make available information on all the costs involved, not just the interest rate.
MEPs stress the importance of a single, open and compatible funding market as a first priority, as a way to diversify risk, boost efficiency and reduce costs. They urge the Commission to examine the legal and technical barriers to such a development, and support action to abolish discriminatory tax obstacles, such as different fiscal treatment of local and foreign lenders. They support the Commission’s action to facilitate cross-border mergers in financial services, while noting that these in themselves will not promote integration of the retail market.
Parliament recognises the important role of mortgage brokers and similar intermediaries and supports the Commission's commitment to consult on an appropriate regulatory environment for them.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Euro
Improving the performance of the Euro area
2006-11-20 - 16:07
MEPs adopted a report on the euro area, responding to the first annual report from the Commission on the subject. Drawn up by José Manuel Garcia Margallo y Marfil (EPP-ED, ES), Parliament's report is a wide ranging overview of ways to improve the functioning and economic performance of the euro area. On macroeconomic policy, Parliament calls for more transparency on the decision making process at the European Central Bank (ECB) and urges Member States to stick to a strict interpretation of the Stability and Growth Pact, notably by pursuing an annual improvement in cyclically adjusted budget deficits of 0.5 per cent of GDP. MEPs repeat their call for better coordination of national fiscal calendars, with national budgetary projections based on similar criteria.
The report stresses the urgency of implementing the Lisbon Strategy on economic reform equally across all the areas concerned, and reiterates Parliament’s call for a league table to show which Member States are making most, and least, progress. Parliament repeats is support for developing a common consolidated corporate tax base, if necessary via the enhanced cooperation mechanism which allows a group of Member States to go ahead with project between themselves, even if the whole EU does not want to take part.
Turning to the internal market, MEPs condemn the protectionist policies adopted by some Member States and stresses the need for more action to open up the fragmented retail financial services markets. They call on Member States to allocate more resources to research and development, and argue that labour markets should be made more flexible. The creation of an internal market for energy should be a high priority.
On the functioning of the Economic and Monetary Union, Parliament agrees that disparities in growth and inflation rates within the euro area are increasingly due to structural reasons. Welcoming Slovenia to the euro, MEPs ask the Commission and ECB to evaluate whether it is justified to use different price stability criteria for accession to the euro than those for setting interest rates.
Parliament argues that greater efforts should be made to coordinate representation of the euro area countries in international financial institutions. It asks the Eurogroup, Parliament and Council to step up coordination of exchange rate policy. It also calls for regular meetings between the European Parliament and national parliaments on economic issues, and for the Commission and the Eurogroup to establish a quarterly structured dialogue with Parliament on economic matters along the lines of that already existing with the ECB on monetary policy.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Agriculture
Reform of direct payments under the CAP - proposal rejected
2006-11-20 - 16:07
Parliament rejected a Commission proposal on laying down rules for voluntary modulation of direct payments, establishing common rules for direct support schemes under the common agricultural policy and establishing certain support schemes for farmers. The proposal was rejected by 64 votes in favour to 559 against and 16 abstentions. Parliament adopted a report on support for rural development recommending that Parliament approve the Commission proposal. Voluntary modulation of direct payments
The Commission proposal on the introduction of voluntary modulation goes back to a Council decision of December 2005. The background was the cuts in rural development funding which were agreed in the Council at the insistence of the 1% States, particularly Britain (around €69bn instead of €88bn), which were to be partially compensated by voluntary modulation. Parliament had immediately expressed strong reservations about this (see Declaration 9 on the Interinstitutional agreement on budgetary discipline and sound financial management (IIA)).
The Council decision also provides for the EU's total expenditure, including that on agricultural policy, to be subjected to a 'health check'. The European Parliament is to participate fully in the preparation and implementation of the results (cf. Declaration 3 on the IIA).
The Commission proposal, which partially deviates from the Council decision, contains the following essential elements:
- Member States may cut up to 20% of all direct payments under voluntary modulation (the Council also wished to include market expenditure).
- Modulation is not subject to any conditions, except that small recipients (i.e. those receiving less than € 5000 in direct payments) are exempt from it.
- The funds may be used freely in accordance with the provisions of the EAFRD Regulation; the rules on minimum expenditure per axis must be complied with (this was not what the Council advocated).
- Co-financing is not compulsory.
- Member States must decide the rate of reduction for the whole financing period within two months.
No impact assessment has been performed.
Member States are strongly in favour of a further increase in flexibility, i.e. in particular the abandonment of the earmarking of funds for particular axes, an extension of the declaration period, the possibility of adjusting modulation rates during the financing period, greater regionalisation, etc.
Assessment
The committee cannot agree to the proposal because:
- it jeopardises the survival of many farms,
- it distorts competition and discriminates against farmers in individual Member States in a way which violates the Treaty,
- it entails the abandonment or renationalisation of the CAP and abandons the principle of solidarity enshrined in the CAP,
- it disregards Community objectives in rural areas,
- it is unbalanced and incoherent, and
- it violates the EP's rights of participation.
In the absence of an impact assessment or reliable figures, Parliament cannot consent to such a far-reaching paradigm shift.
The rapporteur observes that, in the Reimer BÖGE (EPP-ED, DE) report, Parliament proposed that the financing problems of the CAP be solved by means of compulsory national co-financing of first-pillar expenditure. That would have made it possible to honour the pledges which the Heads of State and Government gave to farmers in October 2002 without calling into question the common agricultural policy, i.e. a policy decided jointly at European level.
The Council decision restricts the debate on the structure of agricultural expenditure in connection with the health check to modulation issues, as the statement by the Commissioner on the expansion of compulsory modulation after 2008 shows. There will evidently not be any sincere consideration of the proposals made by Parliament in the Böge report.
Individual retrospective improvements are not sufficient: rather, a comprehensive examination of all possible alternatives is needed, on the basis of which coherent and consistent measures could then be worked out.
Support for rural development
Parliament adopted a non-binding report on support for rural development recommending that Parliament approve the Commission proposal. The House adopted the report by 565 votes in favour, 12 against and 25 abstentions.
EAFRD - December 2005 Financing Agreement
All rural development payments from 2007 - 2013 will be made out of the EAFRD (European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development) – the single fund which will replace the two current sources of rural development funding (the EAGGF Guarantee and Guidance funds).
The December 2005 European Council financing agreement did agree certain parameters for the overall Rural Development fund of €69.75 billion before modulation. At least €33.01 billion will be shared between the ten New Member States, plus Romania and Bulgaria, which are expected to join the EU on 1 January 2007. The remaining €36.74 billion will be divided up among the EU-25, with at least half (€18.91 billion) being guaranteed for the EU-15.
Within this total, some €4.07 billion will be allocated to national envelopes for certain countries - i.e. €1.35 billion to Austria, €460m to Finland, €500m to Ireland, 500m to Italy, €20m to Luxembourg, €111m to France, €820m to Sweden and €320m to Portugal. In Portugal’s case, the Council concluded that the money should not be subject to co-financing, making reference to the particular constraints that Portuguese agriculture faces, as described in Commission's report 10859/03.
The total amounts for rural development have been agreed on a considerably lower level compared to the initial Commission proposal for the Financial Perspectives.
European Commission's Proposal
The European Commission's proposal COM (2006) 237 proposes, in line with the December 2005 Financial Council Agreement, to exempt Portugal from the application of the co-financing requirement for the amount of EUR 320 million.
Commission proposal COM (2006) 237, amending Regulation (EC) No 1698/2005, is necessary in order to bring the "capping provision" in line with the December 2005 European Council Agreement as well as with the relevant provision in the Community legislation governing the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund for the period 2007–2013.
Capping means the maximum total spending of all structural and rural development funds in a particular Member State, as a percentage of its GDP. As the total amount of funds at a European level has been agreed by the Council on a much lower level, as compared to the initial Commission proposal, the capping provisions in the corresponding legislation have to be altered accordingly.
The committee proposes to exceptionally accept the proposal to exempt Portugal from the application of the co-financing requirement for the amount of EUR 320 million assuming that this concerns a once-off operation. The proposed changes to the capping provisions seem to be rather technical amendments.
The committee understands the need to realign rural development legislation with the December 2005 European Council Agreement. However, budgetary decisions should normally follow legislative decisions and not the other way around. Moreover, the practice by which individual Member States are being persuaded to vote in favour of an agreement, by including particular extra amounts or preferential treatment for them (the so called Christmas gifts) is highly undesirable. Also for reasons of transparency, unity and sound financial management the practice of this kind of horse treading should be prevented.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Environment
Mercury thermometers soon to be museum pieces but derogation for barometers
2006-11-20 - 16:07
Parliament adopted a first reading report by 582 votes in favour to 17 against and 21 abstentions restricting the marketing of certain non-electrical measuring devices containing mercury. The draft directive outlaws the sale of certain measuring devices containing mercury. The directive would ban the sale of certain new non-electrical measuring devices containing mercury, as this metal poses a serious risk to health. The Council must now reach a common position. By the present Directive only the placing on the market of new measuring devices should be restricted. This restriction should therefore not apply to devices that are already in use, or those which have already been placed on the market. Medical thermometers, manometers and sphygmomanometers (used for measuring blood pressure) would be affected by the ban.
The House broadly backs the directive, and the author of its report, María SORNOSA MARTÍNEZ (PES, ES) is keen to see the legislation approved at first reading so it can enter into force and reduce industrial demand for mercury as quickly as possible.
Barometers not covered by the directive
MEPs adopted an amendment by way of derogation on the restrictions. Parliament says shall not apply to:
(a) measuring devices that are more than 50 years old on [the date of the entry into force of this Directive]or
(b) barometers. Member States shall establish appropriate and effective mechanisms for licensing and controlling the placing of them on the market in order to ensure that the objectives of this Directive are not undermined.
Parliament says that there still exists a small-scale production of barometers in the EU. These producers typically use only recycled mercury, function as a knowledge centre for the safe handling of this metal and are able to service and repair other mercury containing products. A ban on the use of mercury in barometers will lead to an increase of the amount of mercury found in household waste, as there will be no producers left to repair any broken instruments.
MEPs also ask the Commission to take short-term measures to ensure that all products containing mercury and currently circulating in society are collected separately and treated safely.
Parliament says that with the aim of minimising the release of mercury to the environment and to ensure the phase-out of the remaining measuring instruments containing mercury in professional and industrial use, especially sphygmomanometers in health care, the Commission should carry out a review of the availability of safer alternative solutions that are technically and economically feasible. In the case of sphygmomanometers in health care, medical experts should be consulted to ensure that the needs in terms of diagnosis and treatment of specific medical conditions are adequately addressed.
Mercury and its compounds are highly toxic to humans, ecosystems and wildlife. Around 80-90% of all mercury used in measuring and control devices is used in medical (fever) thermometers and other thermometers for household use. Although use of mercury is declining, some 33 tonnes are used for measuring and control devices per year in the EU.
Mercury can change in the environment into methylmercury, which is its most toxic form. Methylmercury collects and concentrates in the aquatic food chain, making populations with a high intake of fish and seafood particularly vulnerable (e.g. in coastal areas of the Mediterranean). Direct exposure to mercury via the inhalation of vapour and absorption through the skin is also a health risk.
No deal at first reading
The Environment Committee had tried to reach a deal with the Council to ensure adoption at first reading, but this was rejected by the Parliament. Next, the Council should reach a common position before it returns to Parliament for second reading.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Environment
Framework for Community action in the field of marine environmental policy
2006-11-20 - 16:07
Parliament adopted a legislative report on Framework for Community Action in the field of Marine Environmental Policy. The aim of the draft directive is to secure an ecologically sound marine environment is a key feature of EU environmental policy. Indeed, the EU’s 6th Environmental Framework Programme devotes a single Thematic Strategy to the protection and conservation of the marine environment. The European Council has stated its wish to see the outlines of an ambitious Marine Strategy in the course of 2005. In presenting this proposal, the Commission is fulfilling its obligation to establish just such a strategy.
The House says that this Directive establishes a framework within which Member States shall achieve good environmental status in the marine environment by the year 2017 at the latest and take measures which:
(a) protect and preserve the marine environment or allow recovery of it or, where practicable, restore the function, processes and structure of marine biodiversity and marine ecosystems;
(b) prevent and phase out pollution in the marine environment so as to ensure that there are no significant impacts on or risks to marine biodiversity, marine ecosystems, human health or legitimate uses of the sea;
(c) contain the use of marine services and goods and other activities in the marine environment to levels that are sustainable and that do not compromise uses and activities of future generations nor the capacity of marine ecosystems to respond to natural and human-induced changes.
North Sea Oil
The report, as adopted by MEPs on North Sea oil, states that the regulated operational discharges from platforms and pipelines and the use of drilling muds present no significant risk to the marine environment and accidental releases of substances from offshore oil and gas installations have been minimised
All operational releases and releases from shipping are regulated by and comply with international law, the regional seas conventions or EU legislation, and the risk of accidents has been reduced to a minimum.
This Directive is applicable to all European marine waters and, says the European Parliament, take account of the need to ensure the quality of the marine environment of associated and applicant States. The House also says that the following geographic marine areas should be covered:
(a) the Baltic Sea;
(b) the North East Atlantic Ocean;
(c) the Mediterranean Sea. and
(ca) the Black Sea.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Industry
European air traffic management
2006-11-20 - 16:07
Parliament adopted a consultation report by on the Joint Undertaking for the European air traffic management system (SESAR). The aim of SESAR is to set up a joint undertaking to create a new-generation European air traffic management system. SESAR is the technological element of the European single sky. In non-binding amendments, MEPs clarify the foreseen timetable and the three separate phases in terms of time period and content. Further proposed amendments deal with issues like safeguards for financial participation by the private sector, intellectual property rights, potential conflicts of interest, the statutes of the joint undertaking and their review, the procedure for the accession of new members and voting rights on the administrative board, and finally, the involvement of the European Parliament.
The modernisation of air traffic management in Europe is necessary since projections for the development of air traffic in Europe show that it should more than double in the next 20 years, or even triple in some regions, particularly central Europe. The present air traffic control (ATC) systems are based on technologies that are 20 years old, if not older and are approaching its limits. The ATC infrastructure is fragmented and only interoperable in part, so it cannot meet the challenges of the coming years: greater safety, increased traffic, energy efficiency and environmental constraints. There is a pressing need for innovation.
The European Commission has accordingly launched the European plan for modernising air traffic control (SESAR), in cooperation with the European Organisation for the Safety of Air Navigation (Eurocontrol) and, in principle, with financial support from the private sector. This configuration forms a public-private partnership (PPP) with a tripartite financial structure.
The challenge is to develop technologies, methods of organisation and industrial components that are capable of ensuring the safety and fluidity of air transport in the next 20 years in Europe and in the world.
The project is organised in three stages:
The definition phase (2005-2007) sets out the ATM Master Plan, defining the technologies to be developed and methods of organisation. Funding of 60 million euros is provided by the European budget and Eurocontrol (50/50).
The development phase (2008-2013), in which systems will be designed and their critical components produced, is estimated at about 300 million euros a year (1/3 European budget, 1/3 Eurocontrol, 1/3 private sector).
The deployment phase (2014-2020) will, according to the Commission, be financed by the private sector and installed on a wide scale in Europe and the associated countries.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External relations
Mikheil Saakashvili: “Georgia is an ancient European nation”
2006-11-20 - 16:07
Speaking to a formal sitting of the European Parliament, Mikheil Saakashvili, the President of Georgia, told MEPs his country was committed to the path of reform, integration with Europe, the peaceful resolution of the issues of South Ossetia and Abkhazia – and to working for better relations with Russia, which he said had imposed an economic blockage on Georgia. Welcoming Mikheil Saakashvili, President of Georgia to the Chamber, EP President Josep Borrell told him his name would go down in history in association with Georgia's "Rose Revolution" of three years ago. He had led his people in demanding clean elections, and an end to corruption and maladministration. Mr Borrell raised the issue of Georgia's relations with Russia, saying it was "obvious that Russia was exerting great pressure... We fully support your sovereignty and territorial integrity, while we have also said that the issues of South Ossetia and Abkhazia must be resolved around the negotiating table. We have called on Russia to end acts of harassment against Georgians in Russia, and to end the suspension of transport and postal links. The Commission and Council should help to overcome the impact of these measures."
Mikheil Saakashvili said Strasbourg was particularly important him, since it was here, as in intern at the Council of Europe, that he had first learned about the human rights principles he was now able to help apply in his own country. It was also here that he first met his future wife.
Georgia – an “ancient European nation”
He said Georgians had been Europeans "since the time when Prometheus was chained to our mountains and the Argonauts came to our country in search of the Golden Fleece... we are an ancient European nation." Europe, he said, had always been the first choice for help and moral support in troubled periods.
He was not, he said, requesting that Georgia be admitted to the EU: "Membership is a distant goal - and is not on our agenda today. Rather, it is the principles on which Europe is built that provide the cornerstones for our development... Our European path was chosen by the Georgian people themselves."
Rapid progress since the ‘Rose Revolution’
As the third anniversary of the 'Rose Revolution' approached, Mr Saakashvili said that at the time, Georgia had been a failed state. Survival had been a daily struggle for all but a privileged few, insecurity and disorder prevailed, the security of the country was subsumed to the interests of larger neighbours and there was rampant corruption and endemic injustice.
"Three years on, Georgia has changed beyond recognition. We are reforming our institutions and economy, to bring greater prosperity and stability to our people and our region." He outlined four goals which had been pursued consistently: the restoration of democracy and the rule of law; the eradication of corruption; the creation of revenue for citizens and the protection of territorial integrity.
"We have completely reformed our police forces - Georgian drivers no longer worry about being arbitrarily stopped by traffic police demanding bribes and business owners do not fear random harassment. We have made an irreversible commitment to reform our judicial system (...) we are strengthening the independence and professionalism of our judges and legal professionals, while reducing the powers of the President (...) We are reforming our legal education system (...) and building new prisons which meet the standards of human rights monitors."
He also stressed the "vigorous" oversight of the executive by Parliament and the "liberal free press and vibrant NGO community."
"Perhaps one of my biggest regrets to date is the fact that Georgia still does not have a robust and constructive opposition (...) Nothing would be more dangerous to a fledgling democracy that to artificially manufacture and opposition. I can only hope that Georgia's opposition parties will become more vigorous, as well as more responsible and competent, testing the government, and one day (but not that soon!) prevail in open and fair elections."
Mr Saakashvili said liberal economic reforms, low taxes and progressive labour laws had made Georgia an attractive target for investment, and had in themselves been "the best tool to fight corruption". They had also helped generate revenue to build roads, schools and hospitals. The World Bank had rated Geogia as the most successful reform country in the world - and one of the best places to do business. 2004, he said, was the first time since 1991 that there had been a positive birth rate and migration balance.
"I believe it is fair to state that these steps have allowed us to move closer to Europe - institutionally and culturally (...) I want my country to work with Europe so that Europe knows it has an utterly reliable partner and friend in Georgia."
Troubled relations with Russia
Turning to relations with Russia, he said that "the time of spheres of influence is over," echoing a statement adopted by Parliament. "Each nation must have the possibility to freely decide how and with whom they wish to build their future. We base our strategy on being a secure and reliable partner, not a tame and weak satellite."
Remarking that 2006 was neither 1938 not 1956, he asked "how often can we ask the smaller party to tone down its voice and resist reacting to provocation?" He hoped that when his country, or another European nation, was threatened, would Neville Chamberlain's line about "quarrels in a far-away country between people of whom we know nothing" be seen as an adequate response. "I hope that one day Georgians as well as proud representatives of that far-away country, the Czech Republic, will be equals in the European family."
Georgia, he said, was being punished for having aligned itself with the Euro-Atlantic institutions. Russia had closed its market for Georgian good, banning Georgian wine and mineral water, closing postal and transport links, while Gazprom has "announced a non-commercial doubling of the price that Georgia must pay for gas. Taken together, in plain language, the sum of these actions is an economic blockade."
Now, he said, rather than increasing tensions, he wanted to see diplomacy and discussion. He said there was an open invitation to Russia to return to the path of normalcy and harmony through dialogue. But the issue of justice remained a problem: "When children with Georgian last names are expelled from schools, all our children are at risk. When world famous artists, ballerinas, actors and sportsmen are hounded and silenced, we are all silenced. When thousands of citizens are forcible deported from their homes, taken off the streets in handcuffs, we are all deported."
"I, and the people of Georgia are grateful for your expression of support to my country. When we feared isolation, Europe raised the banner of her values. Indeed, this very Parliament has raised the voice of morality in Europe. and we will not forget your solidarity."
He praised those Europeans, and in particular Russian citizens, who had made personal expressions of solidarity with Georgia.
A peaceful solution for South Ossetia and Abkhazia
Regarding South Ossetia and Abkhazia, Mr Saakashvili stressed that Georgia’s intentions were exclusively peaceful. He noted that fewer than 40 000 ethnic Abkhaz lived in Abkhazia and around 20 000 ethnic Ossetians in South Ossetia. He said he understood their genuine concerns. “Over 300 000 ethnic Georgians were ethnically cleansed in the early 1990s as a result of war and violent separatism, along with hundreds of thousands of other nationalities who today cannot return to their homes.”
Georgia, he said, was a multi-ethnic states, and this was a great strength. While it was still a unitary state, this need not lead to conflict or dispute. “Our task is to extend our hand in peace, justice and reconciliation. To try to solve our problems through negotiations and compromise, so that these areas and all the peoples who call them home can share and be blessed by the same prosperity and guarantees of security enjoyed by the rest of Georgia today. Georgia is ready for compromise – we welcome European engagement – and we are ready for lasting peace.”
Following the path of engagement and mutual benefit
He said that with European help, Georgia could overcome the problems caused by the Russian “blockade” notably if free trade with Turkey and then with the EU could be arranged. He had already called for direct talks with Moscow and the leaders of separatist regions to find common ground.
“Today, it has been my privilege to share with you my observations and thoughts on Georgia’s European choice. A choice my people have embraced – and one my government is committed to fulfilling. I believe this path forward – one of engagement and mutual benefit – is finding greater resonance in the capitals of Europe and the European institutions – and this should be encouraged.”
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External relations
Formal address by the Emir of the State of Qatar
2006-11-20 - 16:07
In his speech to the House, Sheik Hamad Bin Khalifa Al-Thani, Emir of the State of Qatar, began by describing the European Parliament as an institution supporting "the most successful regional integration in the whole world" saying it "represents a beacon of inspiration for many other areas in the world". Turning to his own country's current programme for moving towards democracy, he said this reflected "obligatory practice of the Al-Shoura principle, which is acknowledged in Islam as a basic rule". Islam, he went on, "does not only urge its people to participate in public affairs, but it also admonishes them to respect minorities and to protect their rights, constantly reminding them to be acquainted with other world cultures and to interact with them as well in a give-and-take relationship".
The Emir called for dialogue between religions and urged "all reasonable, wise and honest people, both in the East and the West, to stand up together to block the cries for division and intolerance which threaten peace and respect for religions and holy places."
Turning to Middle East affairs, he argued that the geographical proximity of this region to Europe "makes it in the undoubted interest of Europe to support comprehensive reform in the countries of the Middle-East".
Immigration had become a huge challenge but this too was partly due to a lack of reform. "The majority of those who are looking for freedom and a decent life outside their countries will no longer emigrate when they find in their own countries what they aspire to", he argued.
A lack of democracy and the failure to reach a just solution for the Palestinian cause "has produced various forms of violence, which some people consider as terrorism" without differentiating between one form or another. "We are very keen to differentiate between the unjustified frightening of innocent people" and "the legitimate right to resist occupation according to international laws and customs", he stressed.
A just solution to the Palestinian question should be based on the implementation of all international resolutions by both the Israeli and Palestinian side. The Emir emphasised that "the Palestinian government, constituted by the Hamas Movement in accordance with the free will of the Palestinian people in the previous months, should have been given the opportunity to work for the people who have elected it". Yet, "Instead of rewarding the Palestinian people for practising democracy, something rarely witnessed in our region, they have been punished for it" by the international embargo. "Is this not a double standard: to demand free elections, and then object to the results?" he asked.
Turning to other countries in the region, the Emir expressed the hope that, following "the recent destructive war by Israel against Lebanon", Lebanon will become able to exercise its sovereignty on all its land. As to Iraq, he hoped it would "keep its sovereignty and unity of its territories, and that the Iraqi people will recover their security and freedom".
Stability in the Middle East also requires continued efforts to reach a peaceful solution to the question of the Iranian nuclear programme. On this point, he said, "we repeat our call to make the Middle East a region free of nuclear weapons and to oblige Israel to sign the Non-Proliferation Treaty".
Lastly, the Emir spoke of "the strength of cooperation relations between the European Union and Qatar specifically and the Cooperation Council of the Arab Gulf States in general". He looked forward to closer cultural, political and economic ties between Qatar and the European Union.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External relations
Situation in Gaza - MEPs express indignation at Israeli operation and call on militias to respect truce
2006-11-20 - 16:07
In adopting a joint resolution on the situation in Gaza, MEPs express their deep indignation at the Israeli military operation carried out in Beit Hanun and in Gaza, and condemn the Israeli army’s use of disproportionate action. MEPs call on the Palestinian militias to put an end to the firing of rockets into Israeli territory, which is indiscriminate and deliberately targets civilians, to respect the truce and to refrain from further escalation of the conflict. The House expresses its deepest condolences and sympathy to the families of the victims of the recent bombing in Beit Hanun and to all other innocent casualties. Parliament calls on the Israeli government to halt its military operations in Gaza immediately, and reaffirms that there is no military solution to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. The House expresses its deep concern about the possible grave consequences of the current crisis, including further military and terrorist attacks, undermining the fragile political situation in the region as a whole.
Parliament calls on the United States Administration to reassess its role in the Quartet and in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, with a view to supporting an end to the violence and a new and genuine dialogue between the parties.
The House invites the Quartet (UN, EU, USA and Russia) to act urgently for the resumption of negotiations with and between the parties concerned and full implementation of all parts of the Roadmap. Parliament declares once again, at this particular stage, that a solution to the Middle East conflict will only be possible through the negotiation of a firm and final peace agreement as set out in the Roadmap, without prior conditions, based on the existence of two democratic, sovereign and viable states, living peacefully side by side within secure and recognised international borders, and that the continuing loss of civilian lives is intolerable. The House calls on the Council urgently to convene the EU-Israel Association Council in order to express the position of the European Union after the Israeli military operations in Gaza, with regard, in particular, to full compliance with Article 2 of the Association Agreement. MEPs call on the Council to address itself, within the framework of the EU-Palestinian Association Agreement, to the new Palestinian government of national unity in order to confront the issue of violence and security.
The House supports the EU Presidency’s statement urging the Israeli government to cease all provocative activities in the Palestinian territories, including settlement building, the construction of the separation wall in the Palestinian territories, indiscriminate military operations and the demolition of Palestinian homes. MEPs call on the Commission and the Member States to supply extra medical aid to Palestinian hospitals, in particular in Gaza.
The House Calls on the Council and the Commission to continue to guarantee, together with the international community, essential humanitarian aid for the Palestinian population. Parliament demands that the TIM be reinforced and extended in terms of duration and resources. The House calls on the Israeli government urgently to resume the transfer of withheld Palestinian tax and customs revenues.
MEPs call on Israel to lift its economic blockade of Gaza, to facilitate trade between the Palestinian territories, Israel and the world as a whole, to promote economic development in Gaza for the benefit of both Palestinians and Israelis, and to permit the movement of people, in compliance with the Agreement on Movement and Access in Rafah (EU-BAM), in Karni and at other border crossings in Gaza.
MEPs reiterates their call for the immediate release of the Palestinian ministers and legislators in Israeli custody and of the abducted Israeli soldier. Parliament calls on the Council to make every effort to convene an international peace conference – along the lines of the 1991 Madrid Conference – in order to find a comprehensive, lasting and viable solution to the problems in the area, based on the relevant UN Security Council resolutions, and considers that a unilateral approach by any of the parties concerned must be rejected. Finally, The House considers the involvement of the Arab League to be essential in this context. MEPs consider the 2002 ‘Beirut Plan’, agreed by the member countries of the League of Arab States, and the Geneva Initiative to be important contributions to the negotiations, which should be duly taken into account.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External relations
Baltic Sea strategy for the Northern Dimension
2006-11-20 - 16:07
Parliament adopted an own-initiative report on a Baltic Sea strategy for the Northern Dimension. The House aspires, by means of this resolution, to make the most of the opportunities offered by the dynamic economies of the Baltic Sea region and systematically create a brand for the region as one of the most attractive and competitive areas in the world Parliament wants to help to improve the ecological status of the Baltic Sea, which is currently one of the most polluted sea areas in the world; reduce pollution andeutrophication and prevent further releases of oil and other toxic and harmful substances.
The report stresses the need to reduce the region's dependency on Russian energy and encourages the Member States in the region to examine the possibility of a common energy market. Parliament calls on the Commission, the Member States and the partners to promote joint projects on energy efficiency and renewable energy resources, in the light of the region's potential as a source of bio-energy, and to encourage the usage of biomass, solar, wind and hydro energy and support the work of the Baltic Sea Region Energy Co-operation.
The report also. suggests that the Trans-European Network Nordic Triangle be enlarged to cover the whole region and inclusion of the road and railway routes of the Barents Corridor and the Bothnian Corridor within the TEN system. The House calls for the realisation of the Rail Baltica project which would mean a high-speed train connection linking up the whole region. MEPs call for the realisation of the Via Baltica highway by 2013 as a priority project linking the Baltic Sea region with Member States in central and western Europe and stresses the importance of European funding for the realisation of the project.
Kaliningrad
The House notes the status of the Kaliningrad Oblast enclave surrounded by the European Union and calls for genuine cooperation between the regional authorities, the Russian Federation and the European Union. The report urges the Russian Federation and the European Union to examine the possibility of developing the Kaliningrad Oblast into a more open and less militarised pilot region with improved access to the internal market. Parliament stresses the need for full implementation of freedom of navigation in the Baltic Sea, including the Vistula Lagoon and Kaliningradzkij Zaliv, and free passage through the Pilava Strait/Baltijskij Proliv.
The report points out that the Northern Dimension Partnership in Public Health and Social Wellbeing (NDPHS) should become more practical in combating major diseases as well as enhancing and promoting health and socially rewarding lifestyles. MEPs call on the Russian Federation and the EU to examine the possibilities of practically engaging the Kaliningrad Oblast in NDPHS activities.
Parliament stresses that the Kaliningrad Oblast is still an enclave plagued with many social, economic and ecological problems, such as the significant ecological risk posed by the presence of the military bases and weapons in the region, the substantial health risk and the high levels of organised crime and drug addiction.
Eastern border
MEPs are concerned that the region's Eastern border is serving as a conduit for a significant level of organised crime, with trafficking in humans and drugs giving cause for particular concern. The House urges a strengthened Europol involvement and reinforced cooperation at both EU and intergovernmental levels on these issues. Parliament stresses the need to redouble efforts to improve the efficiency of border controls on the Eastern border, in particular as regards upgrading the existing infrastructure and promoting legal border crossing, and calls for sufficient funds to be earmarked from the European External Borders Fund.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Culture
Parliament welcomes strategy for multilingualism
2006-11-20 - 16:07
According to a recent Eurobarometer survey, only half of the EU citizens say they can hold a conversation in a second language apart from their mother tongue. Therefore, Parliament welcomed the Commission's proposals for a new Framework Strategy to foster the knowledge of languages and to take cultural and socio-economic advantage of it. In adopting a own-initiative report by Bernat Joan i Mari (Greens/EFA, ES) by 537 votes in favour to 50 against and 59 abstentions, MEPs said that it was essential to improve the quality, effectiveness and accessibility of the education and training systems in the EU by promoting foreign language learning.
At present, there was a lack of detailed and reliable data and appropriate indicators. They, therefore, welcomed the proposal for a European Indicator of Language Competence which should include all official EU languages and could be extended beyond the five widely-spoken languages, in order to gain a true picture of language competence. But it was also believed that proposals for multilingualism should not be limited to the main official Member State languages.
The rapporteur and many other MEPs took the view that the rights of the 46 millions EU citizens who speak lesser used languages like Gaelic, Welsh, Frisian, Catalan or Basque should be improved. Member State language plans should include these languages and the possibility for interested adults to learn these languages should be examined.
Parliament took the view that the widest opportunities should be provided for migrants to learn the language(s) of their host countries. Particular attention should also be given to promote language learning for people in disadvantaged and difficult circumstances and for people with disabilities. Language acquisition should be an essential element in the lifelong learning programme.
Furthermore, there was large support for the proposals to develop language-related professions and industries. All European languages will need new technologies such as speech processing, voice recognition as well as work on terminology, developing language teaching, certification ands testing. MEPs feared that otherwise lesser-used languages will left behind with their linguistic social space taken over by the more widely spoken languages.
The Commission's commitment to give citizens access to EU legislation, procedures and information in their languages was also fully supported. This would be an important step in closing the gap between the EU and many of his citizens. This communication in the national languages should be improved, regardless of whether the language in question has official status at Member State or EU level.
Finally, the European institutions and bodies were called on to cooperate closely with the Council of Europe in the protection of linguistic diversity and language learning, and to build on its experience in the area of language policy (such as the Charter for Regional and Minority Languages). The European Ombudsman was called on to pay particular attention to guaranteeing respect for the linguistic rights of European citizens, and to provide more ways of resolving EU language conflict situations.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External/international trade
Generalised System of Preferences - MEPs stress the importance of ILO rules
2006-11-20 - 16:07
In adopting a joint resolution on the EU system of Generalised System of Preferences, MEPs note the decision by the Commission to grant preferences under the GSP+ scheme to the countries listed in Commission Decision 2005/924/EC. MEPs call on the Commission to extend the commitment to respecting the ILO and UN rules to the rest of the GSP beneficiary countries, particularly as regards child and forced labour. Parliament notes that the economic development and integration into the world trade system of GSP+ beneficiary countries is crucial to achieving sustainable development objectives, including stability and good governance.
The House calls on the Commission, in cooperation with the beneficiary countries, to strengthen its commitment to promoting and ensuring effective implementation of the core human and labour rights of UN/ILO conventions in GSP+ beneficiary countries, as well as of the conventions relating to environmental and governance principles. MEPs believe that, as a general rule, granting preferential access to countries which do not respect human rights and international labour conventions tends to weaken the incentive for countries to comply with ILO standards.
Parliament calls on the Commission to strengthen its monitoring of the implementation of ILO conventions in GSP+ beneficiary countries, as well as of the conventions relating to environmental and governance principles, and, in particular, to carry out its obligations under Article 18 of the Regulation, namely to inform the Generalised Preferences Committee of the reported infringements of labour rights and to consult on whether an investigation should be carried out into the existence of serious and systematic violations of the ILO’s core labour rights conventions, particularly as regards child and forced labour.
The House calls on the Commission to inform Parliament at an early stage about any recommendation for a temporary withdrawal of preferences in accordance with Article 16 of the Regulation. Parliament stresses that a Commission decision to apply a temporary withdrawal of preferences in the event of serious violations of principles laid down in the ILO conventions should be based on the findings of the appropriate monitoring institutions, with due regard to the opinion of the European Parliament.
MEP call on the Commission to carry out a mid-term review of the GSP instrument. The House insists that an assessment of the effectiveness of implementation of the GSP+ requirements must be carried out before any renewal of GSP+ preferences is granted on the expiry of the current Regulation in 2008. The House calls on the Commission and the Council to ensure that Parliament’s views on the extension of the GSP+ scheme to specific countries and on any renewal of the current GSP Regulation in 2008 are taken into account. Finally, Parliament asks the Commission to produce a comprehensive annual country-by-country report, not only detailing the situation in the beneficiary countries, but also indicating the actions undertaken by the Commission.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Ombudsman
European Ombudsman's 2005 annual report
2006-11-20 - 16:07
In adopting an own-initiative report on the Ombudsman's 2005 annual report, Parliament declares its satisfaction with the public profile of the Ombudsman, welcomes the generally constructive cooperation between the Ombudsman and the institutions and endorsed him in his role of "external control mechanism and, in addition, as a valuable source of ongoing improvement to European administration". MEPs express their appreciation of the Ombudsman's good cooperation with Parliament's Committee on Petitions, but stress the need for "a clear definition and demarcation" of his role vis-à-vis that committee and urge him to "continue to remain within his terms of reference" when seeking to assist citizens. They acknowledge, however, that when the Ombudsman and the Petitions Committee investigate overlapping issues, "they can achieve useful synergy through close cooperation".
The House particularly welcomes the Ombudsman's special report on the openness of meetings of the Council when acting in its legislative capacity, and calls on the Council to act on the Ombudsman's - and Parliament's - recommendations and to ensure in future that all the meetings in which it acts in its legislative capacity are open and accessible to the public. As part of the efforts to boost transparency, the report also calls on future Council presidencies to do their best to provide Internet pages in all the official languages of the EU. Other proposals included establishing the entry portal http://europa.eu as the uniform entry page for all EU institutions to make life simpler for citizens and avoid unnecessary confusion from sites existing in parallel.
The report welcomes the introduction of new internal procedures at the Commission when it comes to answering inquiries from the Ombudsman, whereby individual Commissioners assume sponsorship for a specific case. It calls on the Commission to introduce this kind of procedure for the processing of petitions as well. The House also welcomes the European Network of Ombudsmen and called for a further strengthening of exchanges of best practice.
Lastly, noting that nearly 70% of complaints still fall outside the European Ombudsman's terms of reference, the European Parliament says that there is a need for a better communication strategy to ensure that the public was given more information about what the Ombudsman can and cannot do. It encourages the Ombudsman to "continue to place great emphasis himself on events involving citizens and, hence, potential complainants since clearly the demarcation of responsibilities and decision-making processes between the European, national and regional levels are still too hard to grasp for many citizens and businesses".
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Judicial cooperation
MEPs call for rules to simplify transnational successions
2006-11-20 - 16:07
In adopting a report on succession and wills by 457 votes in favour to 51 against with 22 abstentions, MEPs call on the Commission to put forward a legislative proposal to deal with succession and wills according to the detailed recommendations annexed to the text. The report was adopted by a majority of Members composing the European Parliament (i.e more than 367) as Rule 39 of the Rules of Procedure requires this majority when the Parliament asks the Commission to come forward with a new specific proposal.
According to a study commissioned by the European Commission in 2002, every year between 50 000 and 100 000 transnational successions arise in the European Union. Since there are significant differences between the national laws concerning succession, heirs experience difficulties when seeking to take possession of their inheritance. According to MEPs, this situation can be improved by, at the same time, harmonising the rules concerning jurisdiction and facilitating the recognition and enforcement of judgments. The new provisions would not modify the procedural law of the Member States concerning succession and wills.
The basic criteria adopted by the Members, to choose which Court is competent in cross-border litigations over a succession is the principle of the habitual place of residence of the deceased at the time of his death. Nevertheless, MEPs decided to introduce some flexibility to respect the freedom of choice to the involved parties. Freedom of choice is indeed granted to the testator. He/She would be able to choose which law should govern the succession in his statement. The choice can be between the law of the country of which he/she is a national or the law of the country of his habitual residence at the time the choice is made. According to the approved recommendations, the heirs involved in the dispute may also agree, under some conditions, to choose the competent court
In order to simplify the procedures to be followed by the heirs to gain possession of their properties, MEPs propose to introduce a ‘European certificate of inheritance’. In this document, issued by the competent authority, would indicate, with binding effect, the law applicable to the succession and the beneficiaries. The certificate, drawn up in accordance with a standard model, would be enforceable and recognised in all Member States, provided that it complies with national provisions concerning testamentary registers In addition, the EP proposes that "a European network of national registers of wills will be set up by linking up existing national registers, to simplify the task of finding and ascertaining the content of a deceased person’s will".
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Security and defence
EP calls for a more robust European security and defence policy
2006-11-20 - 16:07
"The EU is on the way to developing into a Defence and Security Union," says a report adopted today by a large majority (414 in favour to 117 against with 12 abstentions). MEPs argue for a more active European Security and Defence Policy, extending the Union's competencies through a common defence market, a civil protection force, as well as a standing naval force in the Mediterranean. In the own-initiative report on the implementation of the European Security Strategy (ESS), drafted by the Chairman of the Subcommittee on Security and Defence, Karl von Wogau (EPP-ED, DE) the EP recognises the "excellent analysis of the threats to the modern world" of the ESS, but considers "that the geopolitical challenges have evolved considerably since the adoption of the ESS in 2003, making its revision necessary in 2008, at the latest." MEPs also called for a regular 5-yearly review of the document, including a debate in the EP and national parliaments.
Towards a security and defence union
Although the report "emphasises that, in the event of an attack by the armed forces of a third country on the territory of the Union, NATO remains the guarantor of collective defence," it "points out that the EU is on the way to developing into a Defence and Security Union, as well." MEPs called on the Commission and Member States "to develop a system of integrated management of the Union's external borders." They also called for the European Security and Defence Policy (ESDP) capabilities of the Union to be strengthened by the setting up of a common defence market, a common system of intelligence and communications standards and a European civil protection force.
In addition, the report "stresses the importance of the Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe," especially the sections that would set up a solidarity clause in case of catastrophes, and a clause on mutual assistance, in case of an attack on one of the Member States. It favours the Constitution's plans to create a post of European Foreign Minister, as well as supporting the creation of a Deputy Foreign Minister in charge of security and defence policy. Finally, it suggests the "setting up of a European standing naval force, including a coastguard service, active in the Mediterranean Sea in order to demonstrate European presence and enhance the EU's crisis management potential in this region."
Preventive and non-military actions
The Parliament also focused on preventive measures, emphasising that "the Union, in light of new threats, must be ready to act before crises break out and take early preventive action," although always in line with the United Nations Charter. Members stressed that "one of the greatest contributions of the European Union to preventing international terrorism will be its capacity to be effective in the building or rebuilding of democratic institutions, social and economic infrastructure, good governance and civil society, and successfully combating racism and xenophobia."
European defence market
MEPs considered that "the EU should promote measures to harmonise equipment and armaments," and to develop a joint system of telecommunications to increase the effectiveness of multinational operations. Members also looked forward to the Commission's interpretative communication on the application of Article 296 (which allows governments to derogate from internal market rules for reasons of national security) and called for the Code of Conduct on Arms Exports to be given the force of law.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Security and defence
MEPs call for full compliance on the prohibition of biological weapons
2006-11-20 - 16:07
In adopting a joint resolution on the Convention on the Prohibition of Biological and Toxin Weapons (BTWC), cluster bombs and conventional arms, MEPs underline that the objective of the European Union should be to build on the success of the BTWC regime, to further strengthen the BTWC and to promote a successful outcome to the Sixth Review Conference. The House calls on the Council and Member States to promote the accession of all States to the BTWC, including by calling on all States not party thereto to accede to the BTWC without further delay and working towards a declaration that the ban on biological and toxin weapons is a universally binding rule of international law.
MEPs call on the Council and Commission to promote full compliance with the obligations under the BTWC and, where necessary, strengthening of national implementation measures, including penal legislation and control over pathogenic micro-organisms and toxins in the framework of the BTWC. The House call on the Council and Member States to contribute to the improvement of the mechanisms for verifying compliance by the States Parties by promoting efforts to enhance transparency through increased exchange of information among States Parties, including identifying measures to assess and enhance the country coverage and the usefulness of the Confidence Building Measures mechanism. Parliament also calls on the Council and Member States to promote compliance with obligations under UN Security Council Resolution 1540, in particular to eliminate the risk of biological or toxin weapons being acquired or used for terrorist purposes, including possible terrorist access to materials, equipment and knowledge that could be used in the development and production of biological and toxin weapons.
MEPs call on the Council and Member States to support a further intersessional work programme during the period between the Sixth and Seventh Review Conferences, to identify specific areas and procedures for further progress under this work programme and to promote the convening of a Seventh Review Conference of the BTWC to be held no later than 2011.
The House calls upon the EU and the Member States to demand – in the spirit of the CCW's aim of establishing protocols on relevant weapon-systems when the need arises and pending a specific Convention on this issue – the creation of a specific Protocol VI to unambiguously ban the production, stockpiling, transfer and use of all types of cluster munitions (fragmentation bombs).
Finally, Parliament calls upon all EU Member States, the Council and the Commission to work hard to ensure that, within the foreseeable future, both the BTWC and the CCW are equipped with a permanent secretariat to oversee their successful implementation, along the lines of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, OPCW, created for this purpose by the Chemical Weapons Convention.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Women's rights/Equal opportunities
Women in international politics
2006-11-20 - 16:07
Balanced participation by both sexes in decision-making is an essential condition for democracy, says the EP who has adopted a report focusing on the situation of women's participation in international and national politics and decision-making and proposing measures to promote women's participation. The report (adopted by 377 votes in favour to 77 against with 31 abstentions) drafted by Ana Maria Gomes (PES, PT) "deeply regrets that in spite of a large number of political statements and recommendations, programmes of actions adopted worldwide and specific legislation introduced at national level, inequality and gender discrimination and under representation of women in politics still persist in Europe and worldwide."
Numbers are not encouraging, of all parliaments worldwide (lower house and upper house combined) only 16,4 % are women (or 7,195 out of 43,961) These percentages indicate "a fundamental democratic deficit both at European level and in the wider international context". In the European Parliament 30 % of 732 MEPs (222) are female. The low participation of women in politics "deprives Europe of a precious human potential", says the Parliament.
The Parliament notes that "recent elections have brought women to the highest functions as Heads of State and Government in some Member States and third countries and "congratulates the Head of Governments that have used objective and non-discriminatory criteria for the selection of the members of their cabinets".
Reconciliation of social, family and professional life
The low level of participation by women in centres of decision-making and governance is often linked to problems with combining work and family life, to the unequal distribution of family responsibilities and to discrimination at work and in occupational training, highlights the Parliament who calls on the Member States to put in place measures aiming at the reconciliation of social, family and professional life in line with the conclusions of the Barcelona European Council and the Lisbon Strategy.
The report proposes a number of measures on national, European and international level to come to terms with this issue and promote parity in politics, for example educational programmes. MEPs encourages the inclusion of female police, civilian and military officers in EU and UN peace-keeping missions in order to enhance communication with women in local communities and local communities in general.
The EP also calls on political parties across Europe to promote balanced participation of both sexes on their lists of candidates.
MEPs further stress the need to look beyond numbers, and actually focus on how women active in politics influence the shaping of governance and conflict resolution, and how they contribute towards ensuring that governance reforms, accountability and the rule of law are highly placed on the political agenda at national and international level.
Finally, the report emphasises that the future European Institute for Gender Equality will have an important role to promote women's representation in international politics.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Information
Communication between the EU and its citizens should be improved
2006-11-20 - 16:07
Parliament says that the communication between the EU and its citizens should be improved. It, therefore, calls on the European Commission to support the creation of a European public space dedicating sufficient coverage to European affairs throughout national, local and regional media. Member States should encourage the national public audiovisual channels adequately to inform the citizens about the policies conducted at European level. The own-initiative report by Luis HERRERO-TEJEDOR (EPP-ED, ES) was adopted with 285 votes in favour 54 against with 6 abstentions.
In their rather critical reaction to Commissioner Margot WALLSTRÖM's White Paper on a EU communication policy, MEPs rejected the proposal that all EU institutions should be subject to a code of conduct regulating their communication with EU citizens. They felt that laying down rules of conduct for the elected European Parliament could lead to adverse consequences, reducing the scope for independent opinion. The Commission is asked to propose a draft inter-institutional agreement defining the common principles between the EU institutions as regards communication.
MEPs welcome the Commission's desire to communicate European issues to national, regional and local level in order to decentralise the message. The development of a European administration would help to form strong direct links between the EU and its citizens. The Commission's and Parliament's information offices in the Member States play an important role in this connection. A review and rethink of their work was needed, since, as MEPs said, their activities did not have wide appeal for citizens.
Parliament also took the view that, in order to reach the citizens, it was important to show the relevance of EU decisions for daily life through cooperation with regional and local institutions. Emphasis should be placed on communicating regularly to the citizens about relevant regional and local projects in which the EU has participated, with the objective of favouring a common European project.
Concerning working with the media and new technologies, the Commission was asked which role it would like to assign to the media. MEPs stressed that it was needed to find a formula that involved national, regional and local media more closely in communication policy, for which the use of alternative media as a communication channel should also be considered. The withdrawal of the proposal on the creation of an EU news agency was welcomed. They recommended that the Commission use clear and concise language when communicating with the citizens and the media. Using the EU jargon increased rather than closed the gap between institutions and citizens.
Parliament is against the Commission's proposals for the establishment of an Observatory for European Public Opinion in the short term and took the view that, before such a task is carried out, more coordinated use should be made of the data and resources already available.
The White Paper is one of the Commission's initiatives aimed at improving the EU's interaction with its citizens following the 'no' votes in referendums on the proposed EU constitution in France and the Netherlands.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Justice and home affairs
MEPs call for a EU action plan to fight human trafficking
2006-11-20 - 16:07
The European Parliament considers that all measures implemented by the EU to reduce human trafficking have been unsuccessful and call on the Commission and the Member States to adopt an action plan to prevent and combat this criminal activity. In adopting the own-initiative report by Edit Bauer (EPP-ED, SK), MEPs call for a new EU strategy to fight trafficking in human beings. The EP propose to adopt a more coherent approach and to implement an Action Plan that should involve all relevant policies, such as migration, gender, employment social and neighbourhood policy. The report asks, in fact, to take into account all forms of human trafficking, including sexual exploitation, labour exploitation, illegal adoptions, forced domestic servitude and selling of human organs.
Parliament proposes that victims of human trafficking should be granted short-term residence permits, including a recovery period of no less than 30 days and access to legal assistance. MEPs also call on the Commission to establish a multilingual hotline with a single European number to provide first assistance. In the approved recommendation, Member States are asked to provide all victims with access to education and training programmes during the criminal and administrative procedures that regard their cases. Finally, MEPs also propose that victims should not be returned in their home country if they may suffer further harm.
As far as labour exploitation is concerned, MEPs recommend extremely severe penalties to be imposed on those companies employing cheap labour force supplied through human trafficking. Moreover, Member States are asked to improve labour inspections and harmonise the penalisation on labour exploitation.
MEPs also ask the Commission to present, no later than 2007, a study on the casual correlation between legislation on prostitution and trafficking for sexual exploitation. In addition, Member States should encourage codes of conduct to be implemented by the tourism industry and internet providers to fight human trafficking for sexual exploitation.
Finally, as far as child trafficking is concerned, MEPs ask Member States to respect the UN definition of child; i.e. any individual below the age of 18. They also propose that debates on human trafficking should be part of education in schools as a means to raise awareness and prevent child trafficking. MEPs also ask the Commission to address the problem of child trafficking in the sport sector, particularly in cases where some clubs may offer contracts to very young children.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Human rights
Human rights - Ethiopia, Bangladesh and Iran
2006-11-20 - 16:07
At the close of this week's plenary session in Strasbourg, Parliament as usual adopted three human rights resolutions: on the ongoing crisis in Ethiopia since the 2005 elections, the situation in Bangladesh ahead of the elections scheduled for early 2007 and the deterioration in human rights in Iran over the past year.
Ethiopian government slammed for actions since 2005 elections
In its resolution on Ethiopia, Parliament looks at the crisis following the 2005 elections and the serious human rights violations that have taken place in the country since then, including the reports of continuing arrests, harassment, arbitrary detention and intimidation of opposition politicians, civil society activists, students and others. In the circumstances, MEPs deplore the invitation to the Ethiopian prime minister to address the European Development Days being held this month in Brussels.
Unconditional release demanded for all political prisoners
According to the resolution, "111 opposition party leaders, journalists and human rights defenders are still in custody and are facing trial on charges including 'outrage against the Constitution', 'inciting, organising or leading armed rebellion' and 'attempted genocide'". A number of "post-election political detainees" are listed by name.
Against this background, MEPs call on the Ethiopian Government "to immediately and unconditionally release all political prisoners, whether journalists, trade union activists, human rights defenders or ordinary citizens, and to fulfil its obligations with respect to human rights, democratic principles and the rule of law". They also call on the Government to disclose the total number of persons detained throughout the country, to allow visits by the International Committee of the Red Cross and to allow all detainees access to their families, legal counsel and any medical care that their health situation may require.
MEPs also deplore the expulsion of two EU officials, Bjorn Jonsson and Enrico Sborgi, from Ethiopia "on the alleged grounds that they tried to help Ms Yalemzewd Bekele, a lawyer and women's rights campaigner, working for the European Commission in Addis Ababa, to get out of the country".
Call for publication of report on killing of 193 people
The resolution refers to the Ethiopian government-backed Commission of Inquiry set up in November 2005 to investigate the killing of 193 citizens following demonstrations in June and November 2005. However, it points out that members of the Commission of Inquiry have been pressured by the Ethiopian Government to alter the findings and three of them have left the country after refusing government orders to do so.
The European Parliament therefore "calls on the Ethiopian Government to publish unamended and in its entirety, and without any further delay, the final report of the Commission of Inquiry; calls for the relevant courts to be supplied with the report, and urges them to take due account of it so that fair trials can be conducted".
EU invitation to Ethiopian prime minister criticised
In a strong message from MEPs to a fellow EU institution, the resolution "deeply regrets the EU Commission's invitation to Prime Minister Meles Zenawi to address the European Development Days" (being held from 13 to 17 November 2006 in Brussels), "especially on governance issues, a decision which sends out the wrong signal with regard to EU policy on respect for human rights, democratic principles, the rule of law and good governance".
Lastly the resolution points out that Ethiopia is a signatory to the ACP-EU Cotonou Agreement, "which stipulates that respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms is an essential element of ACP-EU cooperation". It therefore "asks the Commission and Council to closely monitor the situation in Ethiopia, and considers that development cooperation programmes under the Cotonou Agreement should be contingent on respect for human rights and good governance".
* * *
MEPs keep close watch on election process in Bangladesh
Looking ahead to the upcoming elections in Bangladesh, the European Parliament, in a resolution adopted by 60 votes to 1 with 1 abstention, welcomes the formation of a caretaker government but notes that many of the conditions for ensuring the neutrality of the electoral preparations have yet to be met.
MEPs deplore the recent violence in the country and condemn "the physical attacks on journalists, NGOs, trade unionists and others, and the violence related to the forthcoming general election and the transitional arrangements".
Caretaker government and Election Commission both have key roles to play
MEPs wish to see "a strong and decisive caretaker government" but they also urge President Iajuddin Ahmed's administration to reconstitute the Election Commission so as "to ensure that the latter can perform, and is seen to perform, its work in a truly neutral manner".
The government, say MEPs, should "create a climate in which all members of the electorate will feel genuinely free to use their right to vote" and should "guarantee media balance during the election campaign". To this end they ask the authorities to "put an end to the climate of impunity and to bring to justice the perpetrators of violence and harassment directed towards journalists in Bangladesh".
The Election Commission is urged, in cooperation with domestic and international experts, to improve the quality and accuracy of the voter register. According to the EU Commission, 13 million invalid names have been added to the register.
Journalists under attack
On press freedom, the resolution states that in 2006 three journalists were killed and at least 95 others attacked, and 55 press correspondents were the targets of intimidation because of articles considered to be ‘non‑Islamic’. In the course of the year more than 70 journalists have been forced to flee the country.
The case of Salah Uddin Shoaib Choudhury, a journalist who advocates dialogue between religions and recognition of Israel, is highlighted. He was arrested in November 2003 and is in danger of being condemned to death for sedition at his trial, which is due to open on 13 November. The resolution calls for a review of his trial and for his acquittal.
Appeal for political consensus and religious tolerance
The political parties are called upon to reach agreement on all controversial electoral issues, to avoid political violence and instability and to develop political programmes which will improve the standard of the population’s living conditions.
The resolution "reaffirms the European Parliament’s commitment to Bangladesh’s unique tradition of religious tolerance and secularism, as enshrined in the country’s longstanding cultural traditions and artistic heritage, and as endorsed in the European Parliament’s previous resolutions".
For their part, the Commission and Council are asked to monitor carefully the human rights situation, the political situation and press freedom in Bangladesh and draw up programmes, in the framework of EU-Bangladesh cooperation, to promote freedom of the press and freedom of speech.
Lastly, MEPs welcome the Commission's decision to send an EU Election Observation Mission to observe the forthcoming general election and urge "the rapid establishment of a European Parliament short-term political EOM".
* * *
Iran: human rights violations across the board
In a resolution on Iran - adopted by 60 votes to 0 with 3 abstentions - Parliament voices "serious concern about the deterioration of the human rights situation in Iran since President Ahmedinejad took office in June 2005".
The resolution "calls upon Iran to grant all persons the right to exercise their civil rights and political freedoms and hopes that the Iranian authorities will fulfil their commitments to promote universal values, which Iran is also obliged to do by international conventions that it has ratified".
Killing of political activists and executions of minors
Parliament urges the Iranian authorities to accelerate the investigation into the suspicious deaths and killings of intellectuals and political activists and to release all prisoners of conscience. It is also "appalled that there are still cases of executions of minors and sentences of stoning". According to the resolution, "Iran accounts for the highest number of juvenile executions worldwide".
It demands for the abolition of stoning, strongly condemns the death penalty, notably the executions of juvenile offenders and minors, and urges Iran "to respect internationally recognised legal safeguards with regard to minors such as the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child".
Minority rights and freedom of religion
The resolution calls on the authorities "to respect internationally recognised legal safeguards with regard to persons belonging to religious minorities" and "to eliminate all forms of discrimination based on religious or ethnic grounds or against persons belonging to minorities, such as Kurds, Azeris, Arabs and Baluchis".
MEPs remain concerned about the fate of the lawyer Saleh Kamrani, who defended Azeri Turks in a law suit and disappeared on 14 June, and they call on the Iranian authorities to "halt the imminent execution" of several Arabs, whose names are listed.
In the area of religious discrimination, MEPs call for the de facto ban on practising the Baha'i faith to be lifted. They are concerned at the arrest of two lawyers who received prison sentences while defending Sufis in Qom and are worried about the safety of Ayatollah Sayad Hossein Kazemeyni Boroujerdi, who has long advocated the separation of religion and state and has been rearrested, reportedly with more than 400 of his followers.
Freedom of the press
Parliament reminds the Government of Iran of its treaty obligations to safeguard freedom of opinion, and "calls for the release of all imprisoned journalists and webloggers". It condemns the imprisonment of cyber-journalists as well as the severe restrictions on the media in Iran. The Iranian Parliament is urged to amend the Press Law and the Penal Code to bring them into line with the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.
Women's and other rights
Against a backcloth of "continuous discrimination in law and in practice against women" and "the use of violence by the Iranian security forces against women", MEPs urge Iran to sign the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women.
Parliament "condemns the open call by President Ahmedinejad for a purge of liberal and secular academics in the universities and calls for all those expelled to be allowed to return and to teach". It "deplores the deaths of student activist Akbar Mahdavi Mohammadi and political prisoner Valiollah Feyz as a result of their hunger strikes and calls for the release of Manoucher Mohammadi".
"Adult consensual sexual activity by unmarried persons should not lead to prosecution", says the resolution, and "people should not be imprisoned or executed on grounds of their sexual orientation".
Turning to the upcoming elections, Parliament is concerned that "nominees once again have not been able to register and that reformists will boycott the elections due to the undemocratic procedures for the listing of candidates for the elections".
What steps can the EU take?
Lastly, the resolution calls on Iran "to recommence the EU-Iran Human Rights Dialogue with the European Union" and calls upon the Council and the Commission "to closely monitor developments in Iran and to raise concrete cases of human rights abuses as the basic condition for progress in EU-Iran economic and trade relations". It also urges the Commission to make effective use of the new Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights, for example by supporting uncensored media.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-024-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Adopted texts
2006-11-20 - 16:07
Texts adopted during the November plenary in Strasbourg can now be accessed via the link below . Adopted texts
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert.do;jsessionid=86D48B7FACEC43AD09A4B737EE99A555.node1?language=EN#
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-025-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Agenda for November plenary in Brussels
2006-11-20 - 16:07
Agenda for November plenary in Brussels (29-30 November) can be accessed via the following link . Agenda
EN
1
LINK
/omk/sipade3?PROG=AGENDA&L=EN&REF=2006-11&QUERY=ALL-SIT&NAV=S
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-024-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-024-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-025-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-FULL DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-FULL DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-024-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113BRI12514 ITEM-025-EN DOC XML V0//EN
