Highlights of Strasbourg Plenary: 13-16 November
Institutions
2006-11-14 - 16:59
Highlights will include Wednesday's vote on the Services Directive
The second reading of the Services Directive by MEPs on Wednesday is likely to be the centrepiece of the plenary session. The directive has been one of the most hotly debated pieces of EU legislation in past years. The issues at stake are the promotion of growth and jobs in the services sector while ensuring proper protection against unfair competition caused through wage and social security disparities. The sovereignty of countries in labour law and "vital interests" have also been key issues.
Following a decision by the Council of Ministers to take into account changes MEPs asked for at the first reading stage, MEPs are likely to approve the common position with little or no changes. Nevertheless, Parliament is expected to receive a written declaration from the Commission clarifying some aspects of the directive.
MEPs will also debate the dangers of mercury after Parliament's environment committee recommended supporting measures that will ban the sale of some measuring instruments that contain it.
The head of the Court of Auditors Hubert Weber will present to MEPs the annual monitoring report on EU spending for 2005. Parliament will also debate the contents of the European Commission's work programme for 2007.
Mikheil Saakashvili - President of Georgia since the "Rose revolution", will address the house as will the Emir of Qatar - Sheikh Hamad Bin Khalifa Al-Thani.
Monday 13 November The sessions opens with the first ever annual report on the Euro area. A proposed debate on the European Globalisation Fund has been postponed. Monday continues with discussions on changes to the way the EU's Common Agricultural Policy is administered - particularly in relation to direct payments.
Outside the plenary chamber Parliament's culture and media committee will vote on the revision of the "Television Without Frontiers" directive. Tuesday 14 November Hubert Weber, President of the Court of Auditors will present to MEPs the Court's annual report for 2005. For the 12th year running the Court has given a negative "Statement of Assurance " for three quarters of spending in 2005. MEPs will turn their attention to measuring devices containing mercury. There is support for protective measures although Members also want exceptions for antique instruments. A report on mortgage credit (in reaction to a Commission Green Paper on opening up mortgage markets) will also be considered. The House will also debate the issue of gambling and sports betting. At midday, and amid heightening tensions in the region, the House will hear from Georgian President Mikheil Saakashvili in a formal sitting. Tuesday afternoon is dedicated to debating the Commission's work programme for 2007.
Wednesday 15 November The key debate of the week takes place on Wednesday morning on the Services Directive. If Parliament approves the common position, then the earliest the legislation can be implemented would be December 2009. At midday, the Emir of Qatar, Sheikh Hamad Bin Khalifa Al-Thani, will address the House in a formal sitting. On Wednesday afternoon, the House will debate the situation in Gaza following the recent escalation of violence. Parliament will also vote on a resolution. Later on Wednesday afternoon, Parliament will debate a series of reports including the future of the European security strategy. MEPs then turn their attention to women in international politics. Thursday 16 November The European Ombudsman's 2005 annual report will be discussed with the current Ombudsman, Nikiforos Diamandouros. Parliament will then debate the Commission's white paper on a European communication policy. Finally, as is customary, the session ends with three debates and votes on human rights around the world. On this occasion the three topics are: Ethiopia, Bangladesh and Iran.
For a full round up of the Plenary, click on the briefing below.
20061110STO12474 Plenary 13-16 November in full
EN
1
PHOTO
20061110PHT12479.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061106BRI12349 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
