Thursday Plenary: Security, Wills, Gaza, Women in politics, communication
Institutions
2006-11-20 - 14:45
European security and defence was discussed by MEPs
Thursday in plenary was characterized by a huge variety of subjects. MEPs adopted a resolution on the situation in Gaza, called for a more active European Security Policy and expressed the desire for greater participation by women in politics. The House also reviewed the situation regarding people's Wills and supported a new EU Communication Policy aimed at bringing the EU closer to its citizens.
Gaza: MEPs condemn violence
Parliament adopted a joint resolution on the situation in Gaza, expressing their serious indignation at the Israeli military operation carried out in Beit Hanun and in Gaza. MEPs:
condemned the Israeli army's use of disproportionate force.
expressed their deepest condolences with the families of the victims of the recent bombing in Beit Hanun.
called on the Palestinian militants to bring an end to the firing of rockets against Israeli territory and specifically condemned the attack on Sderot and the killing of innocent Israeli civilians.
invite the Quartet (UN, EU, USA and Russia) to act urgently to resume the negotiations with and between the parties concerned.
called on all parts of the Roadmap to be implemented.
called on Israel to lift its economic blockade of Gaza.
Getting more women involved in politics
Measures to balance family and professional life and more efforts by political parties are the key to increasing women's involvement in politics according to a report supported by MEPs. It would like to see greater female representation in international and national decision making.
However, the report is against quotas for women candidates but calls of political parties to include the "aspirations of women in their programmes".
The number of women MEPs in the European Parliament is 30%, behind Scandinavia with 40% and ahead of Europe generally with 16.9%. The report was drafted by Portuguese Socialist MEP Ana Maria Gomes.
European security to reflect a changing world
The EU needs to adapt a security strategy that reflects recent changes in world affairs - that was one conclusion of a report voted on by MEPs on Thursday. The report says that "the geopolitical challenges have evolved considerably since the adoption of the European Security Strategy in 2003, making its revision necessary in 2008 at the latest".
It notes that "the EU is on the way to developing into a defence and security union" but wants an extension of EU influence through a common defence market (meaning that 25 different EU members don't buy 25 different types of military equipment), a civil protection force and a standing naval force in the Mediterranean. The report was written by European People's Party member Karl Von Wogau.
Ensuring their Will is done
When a family member of friend dies the grief is strong enough. However, dealing with confusion over the terms of the will or the rightful succession can be a nightmare for many families - especially if they live in different countries where the law differs. Figures compiled in 2002 estimated 50,000 - 100,000 "cross-border" cases a year.
A report adopted by MEPs listed several recommendations for improving the situation: Firstly, clarify which Court in which country has the proper authority, introduce a "European certificate of inheritance" valid in all 25 EU members and finally set up a European network of national register to make finding data on wills easier. The report was by Giuseppe Gargani, an Italian European People's Party Member. It asks the European Commission to draw up a draft legislative text.
Making Europe more present in daily life
How can the European Union communicate with the people in a more engaging manner? In the wake of the "No" votes to the European Constitution in France and the Netherlands - the need for the Union to communicate better with people has become a priority. On Thursday MEPs approved a report drafted by European Commission in the subject.
The report stresses that to reach citizens it is important to show the relevance of EU decisions in their daily lives, and to give them more information about what’s going on in European policy through TV, newspapers and magazines.
A better use of new communication technologies is also among the proposals, but the report warns about the "technological gap" opening up between rich and poor or young and old citizens. The European Parliament rejected a Commission suggestion to establishing code of conduct for all EU institutions when communicating with citizens. MEPs also stressed that the use of "EU jargon" should be avoided.
Cooperation in the Baltic Sea
After the EU took on 10 new members in 2004, the Baltic Sea is now bordered by eight EU countries with Russia being the non-EU member with a coast on the Baltic. Clearly, this has refocused attention on the sea.
Ahead of the upcoming EU-Russia summit at the end of the month, MEPs adopted a report by Finnish MEP Alexander Stubb of the European People's Party. Its aims are to support the EU's "Northern Dimension" policy, raise awareness of the Baltic Sea as a brand and a concept and help to improve the ecological status of the Baltic Sea.
20061120STO00008 European Security and defence policy Women in international politics wills Gaza: Communication Baltic Sea Strategy
EN
1
PHOTO
20061120PHT00033.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113IPR12545 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113IPR12546 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113IPR12549 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113IPR12542 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113IPR12551 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061113IPR12544 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
