MEPs approve the Bulgarian and Romanian Commissioners-designate
Institutions
2006-12-12 - 12:05
MEPs voted 583 votes in favour 21 against and 28 abstentions on the approval of the Bulgarian Commissioner, Mrs Meglena Kuneva for the term of office remaining until 31 October 2009. Mr Kuneva's portfolio is consumer protection. MEPs voted 595 votes in favour 16 against and 29 abstentions on the approval of the Romanian Commissioner, Mr Leonard Orban for the term of office remaining until 31 October 2009. Mr Orban's portfolio in the European Commission is multilingualism.
Before the vote, Commission President José Manuel Barroso said: " It is the first time that an accession treaty explicitly foresees a consultation of the European Parliament on the appointment of Commissioners from new Member States. I very much welcome that important role given to your institution as it increases both the democratic rights of Parliament and the Commission's accountability. I stand here before you today to ask for your approval of our two new colleagues. I do this because I sincerely believe that they both fulfil the highest standards. The approval by the European Parliament on the appointment of the two Commissioners-designate will allow the Council to formally appoint them. Mrs Kuneva and Mr Orban will thus become full members of the Commission as of 1 January 2007.
In the course of the last weeks many of you had the occasion to get to know the two Commissioners-designate, be it through bilateral context or through the hearings. Mrs Kuneva and Mr Orban have successfully passed in the relevant Parliamentary committees. It is my firm belief that both candidates in the course of the hearings have proved their personal integrity and independence, their general competence and professional experience, as well as their deep and genuine European commitment.
The promotion of linguistic and cultural diversity in the European Union touches the very substance of our European values and identity and is the prerequisite for communicating Europe and the multicultural dialogue. I am sure that Mr Orban is the right person to do this job. The protection of consumer rights is central to the interests of each and every one of our citizens. I am sure that Mrs Kuneva is the best person to do this.
1 January 2007 will be a truly historic moment. The accession of Bulgaria and Romania will complete the fifth enlargement of the European Union. The enlargement has not only contributed to peace, prosperity and stability throughout Europe, but has also made all of us richer socially, economically, and culturally. With Bulgaria and Romania becoming members of the European Union, we will see the fulfilment of the ambitions and hopes of so many people who have fought for freedom in Europe for so long.
The new Member States will now be firmly anchored in the community of European values which inform and permeate the public purpose of the European Union. Their rightful place at the heart of this community will give them new confidence and new dynamism which, I am sure, will generate benefits for the whole of our Union."
20061207IPR01147 Proposal for a decision approving the nomination of the new Member of the Commission designated by the Republic of Bulgaria, Ms. Meglena KUNEVA Proposal for a decision approving the nominating of the new Member of the Commission designated by Romania, Mr Leonard ORBAN New Commissioners-Designate HEARINGS OF THE COMMISSIONERS DESIGNATE FROM BULGARIA AND ROMANIA
EN
3
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/commission_barroso/index_en.htm#newCommissioners
EN
4
LINK
/hearings/commission/2006_enlarg/default_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT MOTION B6-2006-0644 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT MOTION B6-2006-0645 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
