Bulgaria and Romania all set to join the EU
Enlargement
2006-11-30 - 12:17
With the EU about to enlarge the size of its family to 27 members when Romania and Bulgaria join on 1 January 2007, by adopting two separate reports, Parliament took its final opportunity to review the situation of these countries ahead of their accession and to draw attention to areas where action is still needed.
Romania
The accession of Romania on 1 January was equally welcomed in a report which was adopted by 542 votes in favour to 41 against with 27 abstention. The Romanian authorities were congratulated on the extensive progress made in a short time, but they were also reminded to keep up the pace of reform after accession. MEPs felt that the other EU Member States should open up their borders to Romanian workers.
MEPs recognised the progress made on minorities, but said that the law on minorities should be approved as soon as possible and that efforts in the protection of minorities, children and the mentally handicapped should be stepped up. With regard to the Roma minority, the Romania was urged to "consolidate the reforms it has undertaken" and to ensure adequate funding. On the Hungarian minority, MEPs said that adequate funding should be provided for the improvement of education standards.
Parliament noted that the Commission had also evoked the need for further progress in the fight against corruption, the absorption of agricultural funds and the application of EU legislation on food safety. Also, Romania should speed up the processing of claims relating to the restitution of properties confiscated by the communist regime and should make further efforts in protecting the environment, with special reference to the mining in Rosia Montana.
Finally, MEPs insisted that after accession Parliament be further involved in the monitoring process regarding both Bulgaria and Romania.
Bulgaria
The accession of Bulgaria on 1 January was welcomed by the European Parliament, which, however, also noted that there are areas "that require further progress". In a resolution which was adopted by 505 votes in favour to 65 against with 36 abstentions, MEPs mentioned the need for maximum transparency in every sector, a stronger role for the Ombudsman, rigorous implementation of measures to improve the training of police investigators, the coordination of anti-corruption policies and a strengthening of inspectorates within public administrations. Also, police units specialising in the fight against organised crime, corruption, drugs and human trafficking should be expanded.
Points of some concern were the conditions in children's homes and other institutional care and the protection of minorities. MEPs welcomed the progress made on the trade in live animals and animal welfare, such as in the transportation and slaughter of animals and the treatment of animal by-products.
On matters of a more economic nature, Parliament expressed concern at "continuing invisible barriers to foreign investors", urging the Bulgarian government to take measures in order to ensure a "positive investment climate". With regard to energy, MEPs insisted that Bulgaria close down units 3 and 4 of the Kozloduy nuclear plant, as provided for in the Accession Treaty. The EU on its part should keep its promise and give 210 million euros to Bulgaria over 2007 and 2008 to help with this closure.
In the vote in plenary MEPs adopted an amendment expressing their concern at "the strong showing of anti-European forces in the elections (of 29 October 2006).
20061129IPR00711 Accession of Romania Accession of Bulgaria
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5342042
EN
2
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5342032
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
