MEPs and national MPs on conflict prevention: yes to more Europe, debate on priorities
External relations
2006-12-04 - 19:38
The working group on conflict prevention - part of the joint parliamentary meeting on the future of Europe - saw MEPs and national representatives debating on Monday the way in which the Union could contribute to a more peaceful globe. They agreed that more action was needed, but there were differences on regional priorities and the idea of a 'European army'.
Participants of the joint parliamentary working group on the EU's role in conflict prevention started from the premise that there is a real need for the EU to act in this area. "Third states want us to show greater engagement, and our own citizens support EU action in this area above all others," said Michael Roth (German Bundestag), the rapporteur of the working group. "China does not give morality or ethics great weight in its foreign policy. The US is too willing to use force, and has been discredited in many parts of the world. What is left? Europe," said Jo Leinen (PES, DE).
Support for greater EU engagement…
All agreed that the EU must do more and better if it wants to be an effective player in the world, and improve situations in conflict-ridden countries. "We should be more consistent, coherent, and comprehensive," said Jari Vilén (Finnish Parliament), co-chair of the session with MEP Angelika Beer (Greens/EFA, DE). Some called for the EU to have a single seat in the UN Security Council, but Lamberto Dini (Italian Senate) said that "before working on the Union speaking with one voice, we should try to convince the Commission to speak with one voice." He criticised the lack of coordination between different Commissioners dealing with external relations.
Wide support emerged for the foreign relations aspects of the Constitutional Treaty, as participants called for the establishment of a European Foreign Minister post, an EU diplomatic corps and the relaxation of unanimity voting in the Council. Ms Beer argued for the inclusion of civil society actors in conflict prevention actions, saying that "working with NGOs is crucial." All involved favoured greater parliamentary scrutiny of foreign and military actions, both on national and on EU level.
…but disagreement on its scope
When considering specific activity, however, there was less unity. The first debate was on the regional priorities of the EU. George Vella (Maltese Parliament) said that "Europe is like a crocodile: it seems to have very tough skin on top, but it has a very vulnerable underbelly," a reference to the southern shore of the Mediterranean. Others said that the focus of EU actions should be Africa, where poverty is at its most prevalent, or in the Caucasus, where energy sources are likely to fuel conflicts.
This led to a more general debate about the nature of EU conflict prevention strategies. "Should we become a moral agent or should we treat conflict prevention as a part of our Common Foreign and Security Policy," asked Ryszard Legutko (Polish Senate). "Should we stay regional or go global," asked Annemie Neyts-Uyttebroeck (ALDE, BE).
There were also differing views on the issue of establishing any kind of European army. While some called for a central Brussels command for the EU's Rapid Reaction Forces, others could not consider dispatching their country's troops anywhere without prior authorisation from national authorities.
EU as a beacon?
One idea, however, did gain wide acceptance. "All conflicts in the world come from previous unresolved conflicts," said Miomir Zuzul (Croatia), "so the key word is reconciliation." Participants broadly agreed, also noting that in this regard, the EU was very well-placed to serve as a model. "The EU itself is an example of successful politics of conflict prevention," said Ms Beer.
2006-12-04 Co-chair Angelika Beer Greens/EFA DE Co-Chair Jari Vilén Finnish Parliament FI
Joint parliamentary meeting on the future of Europe, 4 and 5 December 2006 - Working group on conflict prevention
20061204IPR00922 Joint parliamentary meeting website "The EU's role in conflict prevention" working group - details
EN
1
LINK
http://www.futureofeurope.europarl.europa.eu/future/cms/lang/en/
EN
2
LINK
http://www.futureofeurope.europarl.europa.eu/future/cms/cache/offonce/lang/en/pid/89;jsessionid=0CDF239E410D94C4783390E2B92FE975
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
