Petitioning Parliament - your right to write
Institutions
2006-12-04 - 13:21
Dealing with petitions in an important role for Parliament
Last year 1032 petitions were sent to the Parliament on everything from the environment to grievances about aspects of the working of the EU. Since 1993 the right of citizens to petition parliament has been enshrined in the Treaties. In the 6 years after this, an estimated 10 million people signed petitions and sent them to the Parliament. In late November sufferers of Multiple Sclerosis (MS) brought their case to the Parliament's Petitions Committee.
They were there to mark the second "European MS Awareness Day" with MEPs, NGO's and sufferers present to debate ways of tackling the condition. The specific cases concerned access to medicine and whether a pension should take into account the effects of the condition. In an 11th hour change the medicine the petitioner wanted was in fact authorised, while on the pension issue the petitions committee sought to build political momentum for a solution.
They invited the European Commission to attend ("we are working on a disability strategy and looking at whether the European Social Fund is accessible to MS sufferers"). They also forwarded the petition to the Finnish government, who as holder of the EU's rotating presidency currently chair all meetings of EU Ministers.
MS affects half a million people in the European Union - with thousands more acting as carers to those who have the condition. A progressive disease, MS affects speech, mobility and mental capacity. Pain and depression are just some of its symptoms.
MS code of good practice
In response to a petition by UK citizen suffering from MS - who protested at the disparity of treatment afforded by EU countries for sufferers - Parliament called in 2003 to call for a "European Code of Good Practice in MS" to be drawn up.
The Code - which was presented to the Petitions Committee in November - calls for equal access to treatment and better services for people with MS and that these should become a principal objective to be obtained by all health authorities in the EU.
Cross party support needed
In the hearing in late November - Michael Cashman, a British member of the Socialist PSE Group urged rapid European action on MS. Commenting on the time it took to draw up the code of practice he said that "masterpieces have been created in less time".
He urged the establishment of an "Intergroup" (a cross party group of MEPs) and the nomination of an individual MEP to follow the issue. He told those attending that this would "ensure care and treatment and encourage you not to have what you demand but deserve".
Marcin Libicki, Chair of the Petitions Committee said the matter would remain open with the Commission and EU Ministers being invited at a later date to explain their response.
Petitions tend to fall into two categories: general complaints - for example on the environment, the internal market and specific grievances - usually from individuals. If you would like to know how to petition the European parliament - please see the link below.
20061201STO00864 Parliament's Petitions Committee How do I petition? European Multiple Sclerosis Platform
EN
1
PHOTO
20061116PHT12826.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/committees/presentation.do?committee=1251&language=EN
EN
3
LINK
/parliament/public/staticDisplay.do?language=EN&id=49
EN
4
LINK
http://www.ms-in-europe.org/news/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
