Keep children safe while browsing the Internet, Parliament says
Youth
2006-12-12 - 13:11
Parliament approved the agreement reached with Council at second reading on actions to protect children from inappropriate content on the Internet. There was broad support for rapporteur Marielle De SARNEZ (ALDE, FR), who saw her recommendation on the protection of minors and human dignity and the right of reply in relation to the competitiveness of the European audiovisual and information service industry adopted without amendments.
The Internet has become one of the most popular means of communication among young people, who have access to it at school, in cybercafés and on mobile telephones. As, for example, there are currently an estimated 260 million Internet pages containing pornographic content, it was considered urgently necessary for the EU to propose a set of measures at EU level to provide at least a minimum degree of protection for the most vulnerable and for minors. So Parliament welcomed a Commission proposal on the possible creation of a new top-level domain named ".KID.eu" (like .com or .org) with content designed for children. This domain could provide a secure Internet area regularly monitored by an independent authority.
Parliament also called Member States upon to launch information campaigns to increase public awareness of the potential dangers of Internet and to distribute information packs concerning tips on "safe surfing", protective filter systems and the use of free hotlines to be introduced in each Member State for registering complaints or reporting harmful content. Ongoing training should be provided for teachers and educators concerning the use of Internet and the dangers of online discussion groups such as forums and chatlines.
Council and Parliament also agreed on the need to instil a greater sense of responsibility into those working in the sector, who should do everything possible to avoid any form of discrimination, prevent the circulation of illegal and harmful content, ensure that it can reported when this occurs and introduce a quality label for service providers. Finally, the proposal seeks to facilitate exercise of the right of reply in all online media, a system which already works satisfactorily in the written press and audiovisual services.
20061207IPR01240 Protection of minors andhuman dignity and on the right of reply in relation to the competitiveness of the European audiovisual and on-line information services industry
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=243292
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
