Security, competitiveness and efficiency through e-Customs
Customs
2006-12-12 - 13:11
Parliament adopted three co-decision reports all of which aim to revamp the EU customs framework to meet evolving challenges in trade, technology and security. The three reports -- on a modernised EU Customs Code, on a paperless environment for customs and trade, and on the launch of the Customs 2013 action programme -- all share one common denominator (and objective): the development of pan-European electronic customs.
New Customs Code and paperless customs
As the European Commission has put it, the present Customs Code "is out of date". An entirely new code must be drafted to accommodate the new electronic environment for customs and trade -- and to address emerging safety threats on the territory of the EU. The modernised code aims, therefore, to do away with outdated procedures developed for a paper-based environment -- procedures, which, as the Commission argues, "increase the risk of fraud, [and] compromise safety and security at the external border".
With that in mind, the new code introduces the principle of electronic declarations and electronic data exchange between customs administrations: with certain exceptions, electronic declarations would become the rule wherever a customs declaration is required. Under a "centralised clearance" system, an authorized economic operator can lodge an electronic declaration from his or her premises prior to the arrival of the goods in question -- and irrespective of the Member State at whose border the goods are entering into or leaving the Union.
MEPs, aside from adopting a number of technical changes to the draft code, adopted an amendment outlining the criteria necessary to meet the status of "customs representative". The latter is a person designated to deal with customs authorities on behalf of any person who chooses to solicit him or her as a representative. The "customs representative" status, MEPs decided, should be "subject to practical standards of competence or professional qualifications", open to all applicants and "recognized in all Member States when it has been registered in the Member State of application". This issue has proved a bone of contention between the institutions, however. As Taxation and Customs Union Commissioner László Kovács noted during a plenary debate yesterday, "it is the Commission's firm opinion that the accreditation of professional customs agents is not a matter for the Customs Code."
Christopher Heaton-Harris (EPP-ED, UK), the rapporteur on paperless environment for customs and trade, sounded a pessimistic note when he said that his particular report -- which backed the adoption of the Commission proposal without any amendments -- is likely to be "stuck" at the Council for a long time. Member States, he noted, are unlikely to put up the money needed to finance its provisions (which are themselves meant to be symbiotic with the Customs Code).
Customs 2013
The EP also approved the Customs 2013 programme -- the successor of Customs 2007 -- which foresees, among others, the development of pan-European electronic customs and the expansion of international customs cooperation with third-country administrations (candidate countries and ENP countries). The six-year programme, aligned with the duration of the financial perspectives, carries a budget of €323.8 million, a large increase from the €157.4 million assigned for Customs 2007. It is expected to finance, among other things, benchmarking activities, seminars, communication and information-exchange systems, and other activities in line with the main objective of the programme -- the creation of an electronic, paper-free customs environment.
The Customs 2013 and Paperless Customs reports are both set for a first-reading agreement. Agreement was not yet reached on the new Customs Code.
20061207IPR01230 Action programme for customs in the Community (Customs 2013) Community Customs Code (Modernised Customs Code) Paperless environment for customs and trade
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5345832
EN
2
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5295442
EN
3
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5295472
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
