Report to Parliament tells of persistent racism and discrimination
Human rights
2006-12-05 - 12:03
Grasping the opportunity to defeat racism
Migrant and ethnic minorities are suffering unchanged levels of discrimination in housing, education and jobs across the EU. That was the stark conclusion of a report presented to Parliament's Civil Liberties committee last week. Drawn up by the EU's anti-racism watchdog the "Centre on Racism and Xenophobia", it says policies are hampered by a lack of data collected by EU countries. Vice-Chair of the committee Stefano Zappalà MEP said racism was "widespread" and called for action.
In particular the annual report singles out Europe's 7-9 million Roma as being especially vulnerable. The report also says that asylum seekers, refugees and immigrants are at risk while Jews and Muslims remain vulnerable to racist attacks.
In the 11 countries that record racist violence and crime, 8 of them - Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Poland, Slovakia and the UK - have recorded increases in the last five years.
Not only violence
While violence against minorities may grab news headlines and lead to police action - there remains an almost "hidden" discrimination in jobs, housing, and education. The report found that unemployment remains high among immigrants and migrants - well above the national average in the countries concerned.
This is made worse by de-facto segregation in many schools across the EU - with pupils from minority groups often attending poorer schools. This makes their chances of higher education and a good job in the future even harder to achieve.
The picture is repeated in public housing allocation - minorities, asylum seekers and Roma live in poorer and more insecure accommodation, the report found.
"Data gaps can result in ongoing discrimination"
Beate Winkler, head of the monitoring agency told Parliament's Civil Liberties committee that most EU members "lack the necessary data to monitor how social and economic policies affect their ethnic communities". This is a serious issue as without data the scale of the problem cannot be determined. The Report says that only 2 of the 25 EU members (Finland and the UK) have what it calls "comprehensive data collection" on racist violence and crime. The rest have varying degrees of this but five countries - Cyprus, Greece, Italy, Malta and Spain have none. Ms Winkler called on Parliament to put pressure on all EU members to ensure data is collected as "data gaps can result in ongoing discrimination".
From Racism to Rights
Next month the Centre that drafted the report will be enlarged to become the European Agency for Fundamental Rights - a move strongly supported by Parliament. MEPs had wanted the Agency to cover police and criminal justice cooperation, for example air passenger data protection. However, in a meeting on 4-5 December, justice ministers decided to limit the focus of the Agency to the EU's Community law, for example, discrimination in the workplace. To read more of the report mentioned in this article see the link below.
20061205STO00945 Read Report on racism and xenophobia Parliament's Civil Liberties Committee Article: "MEPs back EU Agency for Fundamental Rights for 2007"
EN
1
PHOTO
20061205PHT00947.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://eumc.europa.eu/eumc/index.php?fuseaction=content.dsp_cat_content&catid=4491243f59ed9
EN
3
LINK
/activities/expert/committees/presentation.do;jsessionid=B40F2C8B87AF96177671B9C9C204EB82.node1?committee=1248&language=EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060915STO10742 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
