Opening of December plenary - Final REACH vote and Milinkevich for the Sakharov Prize
Institutions
2006-12-11 - 18:10
President Borrell opened the December plenary by announcing a series of changes to the agenda. Highlights of the week ahead include a debate and final vote on REACH, the awarding of the Sakharov Prize to Belarusian Alexander Milinkevich, the final vote on the EU budget for 2007, a debate on the forthcoming European Council, debates and votes on TV without frontiers and new EU rules on driving licenses. The House agreed the following changes to this week's agenda:
- Monday's debate and vote on the report by Friedrich-Wilhelm Graefe zu Baringdorf (EPP-ED, DE) on compound feedingstuffs was postponed;
- on Tuesday, the report by Erna Hennicot-Schoepges (EPP-ED, LU) on European Year of Intercultural Dialogue will be put to the vote without debate; At the request of the Council, the House will vote on Tuesday morning under the urgent procedure (Rule 134) on the financial package for freedom, justice and security.
- in the human rights debates on Thursday afternoon, a debate on Burma replaces the one on the medical staff imprisoned in Libya. Supporters of this change argued that Parliament should avoid prejudicing the outcome of the trial of the health workers.
- on Wednesday, the House will vote on a report on Council Directive 85/611/EEC on coordination of laws, regulations and administrative provisions relating to undertakings for collective investment in transferable securities (UCITS)
Clarification: Question Time to the Commission on Tuesday will be from 6.30 to 7.30pm, not 6pm to 7.30pm.
Highlights of the week
This last Strasbourg plenary of the year will be one the busiest for MEPs. Parliament will vote in second-reading on a compromise between MEPs and the Council on REACH. Parliament will also vote on the approval of Romanian and Bulgarian Commissioners-designate before the two countries join the EU on 1 January 2007. Belarus opposition leader Alexander Milinkevich will be awarded the 2006 Sakharov Prize for "Freedom of Thought" by the outgoing European Parliament President Josep BORRELL. Parliament will also debate and vote on the €115.5 billion EU budget for 2007 in a final second-reading. The House will debate the forthcoming European Council (14 and 15 December in Brussels under the Finnish Presidency) which will focus on further enlargement and justice and home affairs. MEPs will also focus on new rules on TV commercials and product placement under the revision of the Television Without Frontiers Directive and standard EU-wide format for driving licences.
Monday 11 December
The session starts off with one of the largest pieces of legislation ever to face the European Parliament - REACH. Delegations from the European Parliament and the Council have hammered out a deal on REACH, the draft regulation on chemical products, at their sixth set of informal negotiations. REACH proposes replacing the current 40 legislative texts with a single regulation establishing a single system called REACH (Registration, Evaluation and Authorisation of CHemicals). The compromise will be put to the vote by the full Parliament at the plenary session – if approved, following the compromise, REACH is due to enter into force progressively from 1 June 2007. The vote is scheduled for Wednesday 13 December.
Also on Monday evening, the House will debate a report on continuing to link compensatory aid for banana growers to banana production. It will also urge keeping current rules on producers' organizations, as well as the current system of advance payments. The committee nonetheless wishes the Commission to review the policy in 2009, especially if third-country import tariffs change in the meantime.
Tuesday 12 December
Tuesday starts off with a joint debate on the financing of development co-operation. After two years of negotiations with the Council, Parliament's Development Committee is recommending approving an agreement on the financing instrument for development co-operation for 2007-2013, which reflects Parliament's main demands on the structure and priorities of Community aid. Another key point for MEPs is that Parliament preserved its co-decision powers, which the Commission had sought to bring into question.
This debate is followed by a conciliation agreement discussion on improving the cleanliness standards of groundwater. During the conciliation talks, Parliament's negotiating team successfully pushed for stricter measures by Member States to prevent inputs into groundwater of hazardous substances. As MEPs had wanted, the scope of the directive was broadened so that its aim will now be to protect groundwater "against pollution and deterioration" and not only "against pollution" as Council had proposed in its common position.
Parliament will vote (by simple majority) on the approval of the Romanian (Leonard ORBAN - mulitlingualism) and Bulgarian (Meglena KUNEVA Bulgaria, consumer protection) Commissioners-designate on the basis of a motion for a resolution to be tabled by the political groups.
At midday on Tuesday, President Borrell will award the 2006 Sakharov Prize to Belarus Opposition leader Alexander Milinkevich. Milinkevich stood in presidential elections last March, the results of which were condemned by the EU and the US. At an opposition rally protesting the results, Milinkevich was arrested and held for 15 days. The prize comes with a certificate and a cheque for €50 000.
Tuesday afternoon starts with the House debating a proposed overhaul of the advertising rules for TV channels in Europe, including a new approach to product placement. However, the committee is also suggesting a number of substantial amendments to the draft directive revising the Television without Frontiers (TWF) directive. The new legislation aims to update the 1997 TWF directive, now to be dubbed the Audiovisual Media Services Directive, to bring it into line with new developments in audiovisual technology and advertising.
Later on Tuesday afternoon, MEP debate the EU budget for 2007 totalling €115.5 billion in payment appropriations, the vote will take place on Thursday.
On Tuesday evening, the European Parliament debates an agreement between the Employment Committee and Council on the Commission's proposal to establish a European Globalisation Adjustment Fund (EGF), the Fund which will provide up to €500 million each year to help reintegrate into the labour market workers made redundant due to changes in global trade patterns, will be able to become operational as of 1 January 2007, if the plenary follows the recommendations of the Employment Committee.
Wednesday 13 December
Wednesday starts off with a joint debate on the enlargement process. Elmar BROK (EPP-ED, DE) for the Foreign Affairs Committee will be putting forward a report concerning EU enlargement notably to Turkey, Croatia and the Western Balkan countries. In a separate report, the Constitutional Affairs Committee says the European Union needs to develop its institutional, financial and policy structure before any further enlargement can take place. This comes in a report on the institutional reforms required to improve the EU's capacity to integrate new Member States.
The key debate of the week is on the preparation for the forthcoming European Council to be held in Brussels on 14 and 15 December under the Finnish Presidency. Enlargement and Justice and Home Affairs are the main topics on the table for EU Heads of State and government.
On Wednesday evening, MEPs turn their attention to a legislative report at second-reading on the introduction of a standard EU-wide format for driving licences comes before the House. As from 2013, all newly issued or replacement driving licences will be in a single EU-wide credit card format, which will replace the over 110 different models currently existing in the Member States.
Thursday 14 December
On Thursday, Eluned MORGAN (PES, UK) for the Industry and Energy Committee will be tabling a report which says there should be binding targets for reducing carbon dioxide emissions and on increasing the use of renewable energy sources. These views are set out in a wide ranging report on the Commission's energy strategy proposals. Parliament will also debate the establishment of an Instrument for Nuclear Safety and Security Assistance for third countries.
As is customary, the session ends on Thursday afternoon with debates and votes on three human rights issues around the world. The topics are: the situation in Fiji, the implication of UN forces in sexual abuse in Liberia and Haiti and the situation in Burma.
Extraordinary plenary 18 December
An extraordinary plenary session will take place on Monday 18 December from 11am - 1pm in Brussels in order for the Council and Finnish Prime Minister Matti VANHANEN to formally inform the Parliament on the results of the European Council held on 14 and 15 December in Brussels and on the conclusions of the Finnish Presidency.
20061207IPR01144 Briefing - 11-14 December (Strasbourg) Final draft agenda 11-14 December (Strasbourg Plenary) and 18 December (Extraordinary Plenary - Brussels)
EN
2
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?language=EN&reference=2006-12
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061127BRI00306 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
