EP speaks out for maintaining support to banana producers in outermost regions
Agriculture
2006-12-13 - 14:08
MEPs voted to keep compensatory aid to banana growers linked to their continued production. They also stood up for maintaining rules on producers' organizations, as well as the current system of advance payments. The House called on the Commission to review the policy in 2009, especially if third-country import tariffs change in the meantime.
In a consultation report by Jean-Claude FRUTEAU (PES, FR), the Parliament expressed its opinion on the Commission's plans to reform the existing compensatory aid scheme for the banana sector. This scheme is especially important for the Union's outermost regions, which have seen increased competition from Central and South American banana producers.
The Commission had proposed shifting towards producer support by using the Single Payment Scheme (SPS), which would decouple payments from banana production. Members would prefer 40% of the national aid to be dispersed through a crop specific payment, and only 60% to be available through the SPS, keeping incentives for producers to continue cultivation.
For the same reason, MEPs also sought to maintain the community-level rules on producers' organizations, which play a key role in the management of crop specific aid. Mr. Fruteau's report suggests that affiliation to a recognised organisation be mandatory for EU payment recipients, unless their geographical circumstances make this impossible.
The EP also called for the system of advance payments to be maintained, which helps producers tide over the time period until October, when the first payments are made. Finally, the report argues that any changes in tariffs against third countries would necessitate a review of the aid scheme, since a fall in tariffs would need to be compensated for by a larger compensatory aid envelope.
20061207IPR01234 Banana sector
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5388242
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
