Post-Briefing - 29-30 November 2006 - Brussels
2006-11-30 - 17:02
Future of Europe: PM Ahern calls on the EU to look forward
The House debated the future of Europe, with a speech from the Prime Minister of Ireland -Taoiseach Bertie Ahern. This is the second of a series of debates on the future of Europe with members of the European Council organised by the European Parliament. The previous one involved Guy Verhofstadt - Prime Minister of Belgium. On 4 and 5 December, in the European Parliament, MEPs and national parliamentarians will hold a joint conference on the future of Europe.
Bulgaria and Romania all set to join the EU
With the EU about to enlarge the size of its family to 27 members when Romania and Bulgaria join on 1 January 2007, by adopting two separate reports, Parliament took its final opportunity to review the situation of these countries ahead of their accession and to draw attention to areas where action is still needed.
Green light for Seventh Framework Research Programme for 2007-2013
The European Parliament gave the go-ahead for the EU's research and development funding for the period 2007-2013, when MEPs adopted 10 reports relating to the 7th Framework Research Programme (FP7). This programme, the EU's main instrument for funding scientific research, will have a budget of more than €54 billion over its seven-year life.
Parliament adopts report on rules on fireworks
The EP gave its strong backing (by 565 votes to 22 with 6 abstentions) to a co-decision report on "the placing on the market of pyrotechnic articles" -- that is to say, among other things, fireworks. Every year, estimates the European Commission, up to 45,000 accidents involving fireworks take place in the European Union.
World AIDS Day - 1 December: MEPs call for increased funding for Global Health Fund
In adopting a joint resolution by 546 votes in favour to 34 against with 24 abstentions on HIV/AIDS one day ahead of World AIDS day, MEPs call on the Commission to increase to €1 billion its contribution to the global fund against HIV/AIDS, malaria and TB, and on all Member States and G8 members to increase their contribution to €7 billion in 2007 and €8 billion in 2008, in order to provide UNAIDS with the resources necessary to reduce the epidemics.
The draft agenda for the Strasbourg plenary session from 11 - 14 December 2006 can be found here :
20061129BRI00708
EN
1
A
/omk/sipade3?PROG=AGENDA&L=EN&QUERY=ALL-SIT&NAV=S&REF=2006-12
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Future of Europe/European integration
Future of Europe: PM Ahern calls on the EU to look forward
2006-11-30 - 17:02
The House debated the future of Europe, with a speech from Taoiseach Bertie Ahern. This is the second of a series of debates on the future of Europe with members of the European Council organised by the European Parliament. The previous one involved Guy Verhofstadt - Prime Minister of Belgium. On 4 and 5 December, in the European Parliament, MEPs and national parliamentarians will hold a joint conference on the future of Europe. The Irish Prime Minister said: "Since I last addressed you in 2004, the constructive influence of the European Parliament in advancing the concerns of Europe’s citizens has continued to grow. Your vision is needed as we face the difficult challenges ahead. I wish every success to you, President, for the remainder of your term of office, as well as to your successor.
Explaining Europe to the public remains probably our greatest challenge, at both European and national level."
"The phrase “Future of Europe”, like so many phrases, has become part of our jargon. But let us recall for a moment the significance of what those words “Future of Europe” really mean – for ourselves and for the wider world.
For our own people in Europe, as we approach the 50th anniversary of the Treaty of Rome, it means consolidating and developing our extraordinary Union - a Union which has been so successful that many now take its success for granted. In a world which knows so much uncertainty, oppression, deprivation and violence, the Union is a bed-rock of prosperity, stability and deep-rooted democracy.
The very essence of the European Union, this powerful blend of pragmatism, patience and vision was captured by Robert Schuman when he observed that: “Europe will not be made all at once, or according to one single plan: rather it will be formed by taking concrete measures which bring about real solidarity.”
"Today Europe faces as great an array of challenges as ever including globalisation, technological change, migration, energy security and terrorism. These challenges have not been dreamed up in Brussels or Strasbourg. They have risen up the Union’s agenda because they are very real and directly relevant to our citizens. The challenges must not only be met but also addressed in a way which reassures our citizens and responds to their anxieties and aspirations.
The Union, in approaching these issues, is rightly pursuing two broad parallel tracks. In respect of both tracks, the role of the European Parliament will be crucial.
On the one hand, we are continuing to reflect on the question of the Constitutional Treaty and will return to it next June on the basis of a report by Chancellor Merkel. On the other hand, we are seeking to address the concerns of our citizens in practical ways under the existing Treaties. Both of these tracks are essential. We cannot put practical progress on hold. Neither can we wish away the need to provide the Union with a coherent, streamlined basis for addressing the challenges of a new century.
The Constitutional Treaty is designed to provide a much needed basis for practical progress; and the practical progress we strive for will contribute to a positive context for reaching agreement on the urgent institutional questions. I would like to address these two issues in turn.
A good starting point for trying to evaluate what lies ahead is often to reflect briefly on why and how we got to be where we are today. History is important because it can help us to make wise choices about the future. Since the Irish Presidency had the privilege of bringing the IGC negotiations to conclusion, I have particular awareness of the process which made agreement possible.
First, it’s important to remember that the Constitutional Treaty was agreed because it was necessary. The need for its substantive provisions has grown rather than diminished. We need its more coherent external policy to meet our growing international responsibilities. We need its subtle, balanced and effective provisions in the area of Justice and Home Affairs to strengthen our fight against crime. We need its more open, comprehensible, democratic and effective procedures, including its significantly enhanced role for the European Parliament. We need its principles and its values.
Second, the process which led to agreement on the Constitutional Treaty was long, complex and difficult. The Convention was unprecedented in its openness and achievement. The European Parliament was highly influential at the Convention which also benefited greatly from the direct involvement of national parliamentarians. The subsequent IGC involved intensive bilateral and collective negotiations in which the views of each Member State, as well as of the Commission and Parliament, were taken very carefully into account.
Third, participants were in the end able to accept the outcome of the negotiations because they saw it as a balanced overall package. The institutional provisions in particular were closely inter-related and formed a single whole.
As I said at the outset, it is essential that Europe also pursues the second track which we have set for ourselves – namely addressing, as best we can under the existing Treaties, the priorities of our citizens. I believe it is important to maintain broadly the distinctiveness of the two tracks. We should be wary of the selective advance application of elements which form part of the balance in the Constitutional Treaty.
Let us not be unduly pessimistic about what we have achieved so far in terms of practical progress. The European economy is gaining in strength. More people are in work. An enlargement of historic proportions, which not long ago seemed unimaginable, has taken root and has greatly enriched our Union.
But we are not here, at either European or national level, to congratulate ourselves. The successful football club is not the one that focuses on the trophy room. It is the one that focuses on the matches ahead.
One only has to look at the agenda of any of your parliamentary sessions to appreciate the range and depth of the challenges we face. Time requires me to address what seem to me to be the strategic underlying challenges. Allow me to address briefly five of those challenges.
First, there is the competitiveness challenge. This has many important European dimensions - better regulation, a strong and appropriate competition policy, research and development, the removal of barriers in the internal market; perhaps above all innovation in relation to which the proposed European Institute for Technology can make an important contribution.
Our objective should be to make Europe attractive for investment. I have repeatedly stressed to my colleagues on the European Council and to the Commission that Europe is increasingly in competition not within itself but with other parts of the world, notably in Asia. The reality of this competition must give urgency as well as direction to the development and implementation of policies at European level.
Our second strategic objective should be to ensure that achieving competitiveness does not threaten the European social model, that competitiveness and social inclusion are partners not rivals. This is the key principle underpinning our own national system of social partnership. Our experience of extensive and intensive social dialogue has delivered 18 consecutive years of economic growth, improved living standards and greater social inclusion. In our approach at European level, including where appropriate through legislation, we should reflect the principle that economic and social policies can and should be mutually reinforcing.
We must above all ensure that solidarity and opportunity are at the heart of the Union and must drive Europe’s future. The test of Europe’s credibility today is whether it can deliver policies which build up solidarity within the EU and secure opportunities for all our people.
Respect for diversity can play a particularly important part in connecting the Union with its citizens. Ní fhéadfadh aon rud meas na hEorpa ar charachtar indibhidiúil a cuid Ballstát a léiriú níos fearr ná an stádas feabhsaithe a bheas ag an nGaeilge ó 1 Eanáir. Tá Éire an-bhuíoch den Pharlaimint as bhur gcuid tacaíochta i dtabhairt na socruithe nua isteach. [Translation: Nothing could better illustrate Europe’s respect for the individual character of its Member States than the enhanced status to be enjoyed by the Irish language from 1 January. Ireland is very grateful to the Parliament for your support in introducing the new arrangements.]
Allow me, in conclusion, to say that we should not lose sight of the fact that at the heart of our Union, when it was founded half a century ago, was the determination to bring permanent peace “among peoples long divided by bloody conflicts”, as the first Treaty put it. The Union has been resoundingly successful in that aim within our borders. The Union is also an increasingly important factor for stability beyond our borders. I would like to pay particular tribute to the fact that the European Union has played a crucial role in relation to our own peace process in Northern Ireland. The Union has provided not just generous financial support but also a context and an example
In the second half of the 21st century, another generation of Europeans will be living with the consequences of the decisions we take. I hope that, when they cast an eye back to our generation of Europeans, they will be able to conclude that we had the imagination, courage and intelligence to consolidate our unique Union and to provide a solid, comprehensive and consensual basis for taking forward its achievements."
Political group speakers
The leader of the EPP-ED group, Hans-Gert POETTERING (DE), saw next year's declaration to mark the 50th anniversary of the Treaty of Rome as a good opportunity to send the "important psychological message" that "the European institutions are committed to leading Europe forward". As far as the EPP part of his group was concerned, it was crucial that the European Parliament be "an effective, strong institutional part of the conference" which will tackle the question of the future of Europe.
The EPP did not want "to go back to square one" and hold new negotiations on the constitution, he said. The substance of the existing text must be used "and that includes the 'values' part - the Charter" because "without a foundation of values the European Union has no future". Ultimately, the EU must "be strengthened, made more democratic and more transparent".
Martin SCHULZ (DE), for the Socialist Group, praised Mr Ahern and other heads of state and government who had spoken in favour of the European project. Not all of them "have had the courage" to do this, he said.
He endorsed all that the Irish prime minister had said, though added there was one thing missing - ratification of the constitutional treaty by his country. He pointed out that "a majority of Member States are in favour of ratification" and added "we should be bold enough to say that minority has to move on that".
On behalf of the ALDE group, Graham WATSON (UK) said "there is at least as much a communication crisis in Europe as a constitutional crisis". "We risk slowly but inexorably losing the trust of our citizens by our collective failure to respond to their concerns", he said.
Referring to the rejection of the constitution by the Netherlands and France, he said "We need the prime ministers of those two countries to come here and explain how they see the way forward". As to Ireland, it could play a key role in helping the EU return to "the balance and the substance" of the constitutional treaty. Ultimately, though, it was best to "think less about changes to the constitution and more about building the collective courage to go out and persuade people why it is necessary".
Austrian MEP Johannes VOGGENHUBER spoke on behalf of the Greens/EFA group. He said some questions had still not been answered. "What were the reasons for the No votes in France and the Netherlands? What were the disappointed expectations of the citizens?" A recent Eurobarometer survey indicated that 65% of the French did want a constitution but one "with more social powers for the Union". However, said Mr Voggenhuber, "I've never heard any government leaders reflect on that". So the reason policies fail, he concluded, is that "there is a crisis of democracy and trust in Europe".
Gabriele ZIMMER (DE), for the GUE/NGL group, saw one key issue as being "how to manage the richness of the EU - its diverse cultural identities" and how "to forge a common identity from that". Another was the desire of the people for "a more social Europe", something she said had been "scandalously neglected so far". Indeed, "many people see the European Union as endangering their jobs, jeopardising their social welfare", she added.
Brian CROWLEY (IE) for the UEN group said: "You successfully ran the Irish Presidency of the European Union which both oversaw the Enlargement of the European Union and you secured agreement for the provisions of the draft constitutional treaty. You are in a very strong position indeed to talk about how Europe can move forward from the difficulties that is facing at present. We all know that Europe is at an impasse.
But the status quo cannot live on. The provisions of the Nice treaty only provides the legislative machinery for a union of 27 members and no more. To overcome the constitutional problems in Europe is going to require strong leadership and a real commitment from EU Governments to bring about the much needed changes to modernise how the institutions of Europe operate. We need simplified decision making processes in Europe so that we can tackle head on the economic and political problems facing Europe which include the need to implement the Lisbon agenda, reduce the gap between rich and poor and promote regional equality. The problems we face because of the non ratification of the EU constitutional treaty in France and the Netherlands are not and will not go away. A political solution must be found so that the EU can modernise how it does it's business. This is the core challenge facing us all. With strong leaders like Bertie Ahern in power in Europe , this is a challenge that Europe can face with confidence and with a sense of determination."
Kathy SINNOTT (IND/DEM IE) said: "I welcome you to have an honest discussion here today about the future of Europe, but as I was once told when asking for directions, I would not start from here. Your government has cultivated Ireland’s image in Europe as a success story, the once poor nation made good, but I think this House deserves to know what lies behind this so-called success. As the Irish know, Ireland is now open for business – but closed for people. We spend freely to lure the market but cut every corner in social spending.
You also seem to believe that the mental health and suicide problem which grows with our economic success, are a mere inconvenience and not a tragedy which our country has never really addressed. Why, Taoiseach, has your government destroyed our sugar industry for an EU scheme when Irish agriculture is struggling for survival and when we need biofuels like ethanol. Finally, Taoiseach, why have you come here propositioning us with the dead Constitution that the Irish do not want. We already have a truly great Constitution for which Irish men and women laid down their lives, a Constitution which gives us a genuine foundation for real and respectful cooperation with our European neighbours. Ireland is a great country with amazing people. They certainly deserve better and I think you will finally discover this when you put the Constitution, or whatever you decide to call it, to a referendum."
Jim ALLISTER (UK, non-attached) said: "The last time Mr Ahern was here at the end of his Presidency of the Council, he was celebrating having overseen agreement between the Heads of Governments on the EU Constitution. He readily basked in the adulation of europhile fanatics in this House. By now, November 2006, he and they assured us, the EU Constitution would be in full operation but, as often, they reckoned without the most important component of democratic politics: the views of the people.
As the Constitution floundered on the rocks of rejection in France and Holland, Mr Ahern - though an avowed euro enthusiast - my government in the United Kingdom, lost their nerve and hurriedly abandoned the prospect of the people of the British Isles being given the chance to give their verdict by postponing the referenda because they were fearful of the result. Now he returns to tell us again of the marvels of European integration and that the rejected Constitution must be revived. It seems to me that it is a stale message about a moribund Constitution from one who may well soon be judged by his own electorate to be a stale politician."
PM Ahern response to the debate
Responding to the debate, Mr Ahern stated: "With respect, I never quite understand when people are arguing the issue on Europe why we always forget all the positives. That applies to members of the European Council - I would accept that criticism - and I think it applies to Members of the European Parliament. However, look at what has been achieved because of the strength of Europe. Look at the equality agenda. Look at the health and safety agenda. Look at the welfare agenda. Look at the mobility of workers. Would any of these been here if this institution had not been here? Not a hope in hell! Europe has achieved this. So to talk against your own achievements is never a good idea, in my view. Europe has achieved all these things and the chance of our harmonising, getting stronger environmental laws, more cooperation and helping less developed countries - all these are European policies that never would have happened otherwise. Europe has pulled Ireland and other countries up and it has applied pressure, it has fined and prosecuted people. However, the fact is that the citizens have gained from every one of those issues.
I would say to my good colleague, Mrs Sinnott, that the reason we have progressive disabilities legislation, the reason that we are putting huge resources into disability, the reason we have an Environmental Protection Agency, the reason we have far greater health policy, the reason we are able to support these things, is not because there is any difference between the 1937 Constitution - which treasures all the people and children of Ireland equally - and what we have today. It is because we have been able to make progress because Europe has progressed. I think these are great issues.
I am delighted to see Mr Allister here. His party has moved forward progressively. It has moved away from the past, even if not all of its members have, including himself. However, we are moving on, we are making progress. I will deal with my electorate and I wish you well in your February election, too."
Irish and British speakers
Avril DOYLE (EPP-ED, IE) said: "As leader of the Fine Gael delegation in the largest and most influential group in the European Parliament, the EPP-ED, I join in the welcome to you today as Prime Minister of our esteemed Republic. Notwithstanding, the politically hyped and inaccurate reports to the contrary.
"We are Irish. And as such we are European. This is not a political statement. It is a historical fact. The original Irish were primarily a Celtic people. Our ancestors, the Celts, lived, thrived and established settlements throughout the European continent, from shores of the Mediterranean to the peaks of the Alps, from the plains of Romania to the Atlantic coast. Like many recent new arrivals in our country, we migrated here from the mainland, seeking asylum from war, disease and over population. seeking economic opportunity Over the subsequent centuries, Vikings, Saxons, Anglo-Normans, Jews, English, Scots, Spaniards, French Huguenots and many other races came, saw and inter-married with the Celts. The modern day Irish you see around you are the result of this genetic soup of different European races. Our cultural life is now richer and more diverse than ever thanks to our maturing relationship with Europe. Would Riverdance have ever been created without the Eurovision Song Contest? Would the Green army have captured the soul of the Nation without our famous victories in Stuttgart and Genoa? It is only by interacting daily with other nations on an equal footing that one realises what it is that makes us Irish.
"I admire Ireland’s membership of and contribution to the Union. I look around me and I see a confident pluralistic society far removed from the introspective sectarian island in which our parents and grandparents were raised. Europe has helped us to define our place in the wider world. If we are to become more genuinely Irish, we must become more genuinely European. Don’t throw away all the progress made over the past 30 years. Let us not become the wreckers of our rich and colourful European heritage."
Proinsias DE ROSSA (PES, IE) said: "I welcome your commitment to the substance of the Constitution text. However, Member States and Council right now are denying Europeans the accountable democratic and socially engaged Europe they want. Why Taoiseach are you and other Member States blocking key social directives on ferry crews, on working time, on migration and on temporary work agencies and I ask you will you now help to unblock all of these as a means of rebuilding Europeans confidence in Europe.
The Constitution must not be filleted. A mini-treaty will give us a mini-Europe when what we need is a strong democratic Europe capable of coping with the global challenges we all face together. The most democratic way forward I believe is to negotiate legally-binding protocols to address the concerns raised by the pro-European French and Dutch electorates. Such an approach would reassure those pro-Europeans who voted no would not oblige those who have already ratified to reopen the issue and would make it more likely that those yet to ratify such as Ireland can do so."
Mary Lou MACDONALD (GUE/NGL IE) said: "I am very pleased that the Taoiseach is addressing today's plenary session. The European Union is in a phase of transition, continued expansion, new cultures, new ideas and new challenges. The important question for us is how to meet these challenges. Is it through a race to the bottom as evidenced in Ireland during the Irish ferries dispute last year and repeated many, many times since, or is it by ensuring that we are to the fore in demanding the highest standards of rights, reform of bureaucratic EU structures and a political programme that truly puts the people across the European Union first. I believe that we must promote a Europe which seeks to protect our most vulnerable, particularly the 65 million across the Union who are living in poverty. Taoiseach in Ireland, we must do the same and this means the success of our peace process, ending partition, building strong public services and promoting equality in every aspect of life. I believe that all of these challenges can be risen to and met but only if there is real political will, a will to radically alter the EU's current and future priorities. This is not a matter of presentational nuance, it is a matter of substance and I would ask you Taoiseach and other EU leaders to truly listen to people across the EU and to respond to their needs. This can be best done by defending workers' rights, protecting public services and halting the drive towards a militarised and a fortressed European Union."
Seán Ó NEACHTAIN (UEN, IE) speaking in Irish said: "I am delighted that the Taoiseach has spoken some Irish here today in his speech on the future of Europe. This is very symbolic considering that the Irish language is due to shortly become an official working language within the European Union institutions. The Taoiseach deserves to be given a lot of credit for ensuring that the European Council, comprised of a range of different European Governments supported his proposal to promote the Irish language to a far greater extent within Europe. In fact, this week alone has seen the European Parliament hearings for the two prospective nominees to the European Commission from Romania and Bulgaria. I fully support the decision of José Barroso, the President of the European Commission to give the Commissioner designate Lenard Orban from Romania the job to promote multi-lingualism within the European Union. We all know that Europe is at an impasse in the context of how it is going to reform the workings of the EU institutions and make them become more efficient.
President Merkel has already said that she intends to put the issue of the constitutional difficulties facing Europe at the top of the political agenda of her German Presidency. Other EU Governments must work carefully with President Merkel in an effort to find a political formula for the European Union to extricate itself from the political logjam that it finds itself in - due to the reason that the draft constitutional treaty was defeated in both the Netherlands and in France."
Timothy KIRKHOPE (EPP-ED, UK) said: "I would like to start on a note of harmony in saying that I have read with great interest his recent statements on the so-called ‘passerelle’ clause in matters relating to justice and home affairs and I entirely agree with him that we should not proceed down this road.
Criminal justice policy, the fight against terrorism and action to defeat trafficking and illegal emigration, are matters which rightly belong to the nation state, yet we have not even explored all the options to improve intergovernmental cooperation in these and other justice fields and I believe that we should. As for the Constitution, the debate now seems to be entering realms of fantasy. The French and Dutch people delivered the fatal blow, and yet we hear this week that the Finnish Presidency has been quietly stocktaking with Member States to see whether it can somehow be resuscitated.
Mr Sarkozy calls for a so-called mini-Constitution. The Commission rejects it. The German Government says it wants the Constitution kept intact and then resurrected. The outgoing Dutch Government made clear it would not have a second referendum. The British Government, true to form, appears to be split. The Foreign Secretary says it was a grandiose scheme which had failed. The junior Europe Minister says we need to address the substance of the Constitution. Well, has the penny dropped yet? Europe needs to move on. It needs to move on to stop alienating the electorate in a dangerous way.'"
Marian HARKIN (ALDE, IE) said: "I am happy to say that, broadly speaking, I agree with your analysis. I do believe that we need to change the context, highlight the positives and retain the balance and essential substance of the Constitution.
The impasse in the Constitution was precipitated by the 'no' vote in France and the Netherlands, but in my opinion, this was not a 'no, no, no' to everything European. It was a wake-up call which said, 'The future of Europe concerns us as ordinary citizens and we too have a role to play'. Democracy, like life, can be a messy business and, while leaders must lead, they must also listen. We have had our period of reflection and I now believe we need a period of consolidation, where the EU is seen to deliver for it citizens on the Lisbon Agenda, on protection of workers, on support for European business, on environmental sustainability and on the ability of the EU to compete as a player on the global stage. In essence, the EU has to manage the challenge of globalisation for all its citizens. If the EU can deliver on this - and that is a major task - then I believe it has a solid future."
Andrew DUFF (ALDE, UK) stated that as " the Taoiseach properly said that the achievement of the 2004 package was extremely tricky and complex. Surely it would be sensible therefore to ringfence the preamble and the first and second parts from renegotiation and to focus all the effort on modernising and improving part III. Surely we cannot achieve the greater competitiveness the strengthened social partnership the improvements to a common energy policy and so forth without a substantive improvement to part III."
Richard CORBETT (PES, UK) said: " Taoiseach, may I in the language of some of my ancestors say
Fáilte go dtí Parlaimint na hEorpa - welcome to the European Parliament - which symbolises the motto of the European Union, 'unity with diversity'. You have here representatives of every political party in Europe, from Left to Right, from capital cities to regions, from parties in government to parties in opposition and the Parliament that voted by 500 votes to 137 to endorse this Constitutional Treaty as the best way forward for the future of Europe.
That is why I am particularly glad to hear you today, to say that we must find the solution to these issues, because the problems that Constitutional Treaty was intended to solve have not disappeared overnight. They have not gone away. We must find a solution acceptable to all 27 countries, including the two that voted 'no'."
Irish PM response to the debate
Responding to the debate, PM Ahern stated "I think that the Constitution is a very balanced and fair document. I think it is an equitable document. Of course it is made up of compromises. When you are trying to get 25 countries – as it was then – to agree, there have to be compromises in the text. It was not just a quick question of any one person saying ‘this is the position’. Things change. As I went around Europe there were many issues that were totally different in different countries, that caught the public imagination, that created a lot of difficulties in the media, and then people had to change or deliberate on what wording they could agree on, so it is not perfect insofar as it is just written with no ambiguities whatever, but it has been negotiated.
There are those who believe that perhaps it was written in isolation – I think there were some comments about that. I understand that after a few years, but I would remind Members of Parliament that the Convention had a very active group from Parliament. They worked very hard. They were the representatives of the people, they were elected by the people, they were answerable to the people and I think the governments are too. You cannot have a Constitution that is negotiated by 500 million people. You have to have their representatives doing it, and I think they did a good job on it. So sometimes that is the issue about legitimacy and democracy.
I noted the points about fighting for the issues of human rights and values, and that this is what people are about, and not crime and drugs. The people I meet are far more concerned with both issues. They want to see that the rule of law, the rule of courts, the legal system protects everybody equally. However, they also want to see that those who are involved in criminality across borders and those who are engaged in criminal activity are dealt with. So if you are a supporter of human rights, then you are obviously a supporter of the Constitution, because the Charter for Fundamental Rights is the first time in Europe that we have put all these things into the Constitution so I think you should definitely be a strong advocate of the Constitution.
I think what is necessary for us now is not to try to renegotiate everything. With the German Presidency coming up, the Chancellor has clearly stated that she will set up a small group of officials to deal with a small group of officials in every country to identify where there are differences or difficulties. In my view, that should count 90% of the Constitution out. The focus and the concentration and effort will then be on the remaining 10%.
My colleague from Ireland, Mr De Rossa, made a very fair point, one I have made several times, and it happened in the case of Ireland and Nice. The issue then is to try to get protocols to deal with the issues, that is the sensible thing: not throwing away parts of the Constitution that have been agreed upon by Parliament, by the Council, by 18 countries across Europe, but to try to find and accommodate the difficulties and analyse what the difficulties are in those countries which have voted ‘no’, or perhaps others which have reservations. That is not an impossible task. It has been done already in the countries where the Constitution was lost. As stated earlier on, there were opinion polls looking into what those issues were and trying to deal with those issues. I think that is possible. If those issues are looked at in the IGC or the Council, it should be possible. I do not think it should take a long time.
I would just ask Parliament, and hope – as I will try to do in Council – to keep supporting the Constitution with the balanced view that we have to deal with a small number of outstanding issues as regards some countries and perhaps as regards countries that have declared their positions recently because of changes in governments. We should try to deal with that. If we can do that, then with the reason and purpose and the whole desire to have a European Constitution – if that is what it is called; that is not something I get too excited about – we can move forward collectively to do that. I really believe it is possible."
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Enlargement
Bulgaria and Romania all set to join the EU
2006-11-30 - 17:02
With the EU about to enlarge the size of its family to 27 members when Romania and Bulgaria join on 1 January 2007, by adopting two separate reports, Parliament took its final opportunity to review the situation of these countries ahead of their accession and to draw attention to areas where action is still needed. Romania
The accession of Romania on 1 January was equally welcomed in a report which was adopted by 542 votes in favour to 41 against with 27 abstentions.The Romanian authorities were congratulated on the extensive progress made in a short time, but they were also reminded to keep up the pace of reform after accession. MEPs felt that the other EU Member States should open up their borders to Romanian workers.
While MEPs recognised the progress made on minorities, they said that the law on minorities should be approved as soon as possible and that efforts in the protection of minorities, children and the mentally handicapped should be stepped up. With regard to the Roma minority, Romania was urged to "consolidate the reforms it has undertaken" and to ensure adequate funding. On the Hungarian minority, MEPs said that adequate funding should be provided for the improvement of education standards.
Parliament noted that the Commission had also evoked the need for further progress in the fight against corruption, the absorption of agricultural funds and the application of EU legislation on food safety. Also, Romania should speed up the processing of claims relating to the restitution of properties confiscated by the communist regime and should make further efforts in protecting the environment, with special reference to the mining in Rosia Montana.
Finally, MEPs insisted that after accession Parliament be further involved in the monitoring process regarding both Bulgaria and Romania.
Bulgaria
The accession of Bulgaria on 1 January was welcomed by the European Parliament, which, however, also noted that there are areas "that require further progress". In a resolution which was adopted by 505 votes in favour to 65 against with 36 abstentions, MEPs mentioned the need for maximum transparency in every sector, a stronger role for the Ombudsman, rigorous implementation of measures to improve the training of police investigators, the coordination of anti-corruption policies and a strengthening of inspectorates within public administrations. Also, police units specialising in the fight against organised crime, corruption, drugs and human trafficking should be expanded.
Points of some concern were the conditions in children's homes and other institutional care and the protection of minorities. MEPs welcomed the progress made on the trade in live animals and animal welfare, such as in the transportation and slaughter of animals and the treatment of animal by-products.
On matters of a more economic nature, Parliament expressed concern at "continuing invisible barriers to foreign investors", urging the Bulgarian government to take measures in order to ensure a "positive investment climate". With regard to energy, MEPs insisted that Bulgaria close down units 3 and 4 of the Kozloduy nuclear plant, as provided for in the Accession Treaty. The EU on its part should keep its promise and give €210 million euros to Bulgaria over 2007 and 2008 to help with this closure.
In the vote in plenary, MEPs adopted an amendment expressing their concern at "the strong showing of anti-European forces in the elections (of 29 October 2006).
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Research and innovation
Green light for Seventh Framework Research Programme for 2007-2013
2006-11-30 - 17:02
The European Parliament gave the go-ahead for the EU's research and development funding for the period 2007-2013, when MEPs adopted 10 reports relating to the 7th Framework Research Programme (FP7). This programme, the EU's main instrument for funding scientific research, will have a budget of more than €54 billion over its seven-year life. As Parliament and Council have settled their main differences through a compromise package, FP7 is to enter into force on 1 January 2007. What is FP7? The Seventh Programme is intended to build on the achievements of its predecessor by making further progress towards the creation of a European Research Area, the equivalent of a "common market" for research. The long-term goal is for the European Union to become the world’s leading research area. Successive framework programmes (FPs) have operated since 1984, each covering a five year period. The current programme - FP6 - expires at the end of 2006. However, FP7 will run for seven years - from 1 January 2007 to 2013 - so as to coincide with the EU's multiannual budget framework (the Financial Perspective). Simpler instruments and procedures for funding and participation are a feature of FP7, which will promote collaborative research based on broad research areas, with much continuity from FP6 plus two new topics, space and security. Only projects involving several partners from different countries will be financed. The programme's funds are not general subsidies to research organisations or companies: they may only be used for specific work or research projects. The 7th Framework Programme is organised around four Specific Programmes: Co-operation: a programme to support cooperation between universities, industry, research centres and public authorities, and between the EU and third countries. Ideas: a programme to create an autonomous European Research Council to support investigator-driven “frontier research”. People : a programme to support training and career development of researchers. Capacities: a programme focusing on the coordination and development of research infrastructure, support for regional research clusters, SMEs, closer ties between science and society and international cooperation. In addition, Specific Programmes will be set up for the Joint Research Centre (non-nuclear activities) and Euratom nuclear research and training activities. Separately, the Euratom Framework Programme (which also has a Specific Programme) covers two areas: fusion energy research and nuclear fission and radiation protection. Parliament's role The European Parliament has joint legislative power with the Council (under the codecision procedure) on the main programme (FP7) and the rules for participation. It is only consulted on the Euratom programme and the various specific programmes. Parliament strongly backed this legislation from the outset and made every effort to speed it through the legislative process. On 15 June, the EP adopted its first reading position on the main FP7 programme and its report on the Euratom part. Many of Parliament's first-reading amendments were accepted by Council, including those aimed at encouraging participation by small and medium-sized firms and boosting the position of young researchers and women in science, and those dealing with stem cell research. The 39 new compromise amendments adopted by Parliament deal with the remaining issues which MEPs still wish to emphasise, including Parliament's priorities, the European Research Council and the proposed Risk Sharing Facility. Members also stress that no money from FP7 should be used to finance the proposed European Institute of Technology. Parliament's priorities MEPs are insisting on shifting some of the spending towards Parliament's own priorities, including research on renewable energy and energy efficiency as well as the possibility of funding research on children's health, respiratory diseases (including those induced by allergies), plus research into neglected diseases. The compromise states that renewables and end use energy efficiency will account for the "major part" of the budget of FP7's energy theme - rather than the two thirds proposed in Parliament's first reading. Special attention will be devoted to coordination of issues linked to rational and efficient use of energy within the Framework Programme and in other EU policies and programmes. European Research Council The compromise also includes amendments concerning the European Research Council - a new body to support investigator-driven “frontier research”. It was agreed that the administration costs of the ERC should not exceed 5% of its total budget in order to maximise funding for frontier research - in its first reading Parliament had asked for a limit of 3%, to avoid top-heavy administration. On the question of how far Parliament should be involved in an interim evaluation of the ERC's structure, it was agreed that the co-decision procedure would be used if changes in the structure of the ERC become necessary. Ethical questions Ethical issues were of great concern to all involved in the adoption of the programme, with opinions differing sharply. At its first reading Parliament adopted a compromise which the Council was able to accept (with opposition from a couple of Member States Parliament and Council agreed that all the research activities carried out under the Seventh Framework Programme must be carried out in compliance with fundamental ethical principles. Thus, no Community funding will be allowed for research aimed at human cloning for reproductive purposes or research intended to modify the genetic heritage of human beings. Nor will funds be available for research intended to create human embryos solely for the purposes of research or stem cell procurement, including by means of somatic cell nuclear transfer. Research on the use of human stem cells, both adult and embryonic, may be financed, depending both on the nature of the scientific proposal and the legal framework of the Member State(s) involved. As regards the use of human embryonic stem cells, institutions, organisations and researchers must be strictly licensed and controlled in accordance with the legal framework of the Member State(s) involved. Risk Sharing Facility and European Institute of Technology The Risk Sharing Finance Facility, designed to encourage bank lending to research projects, is also part of the second-reading compromise. The Council had planned to allocate €1 billion from FP7 to finance the RSFF (to be matched by an equal amount from the European Investment Bank) but now the compromise provides for a lower contribution from FP7 until 2010 - €500 million - with the possibility of releasing up to an additional €500 million after an evaluation process. The Industry Committee has meanwhile stressed that no FP7 funds should contribute to the establishment or administrative costs of the European Institute of Technology. Only administrative costs directly associated with research projects may be covered. Budget The overall budget planned for the 7th Framework Programme in the 2007-2013 Financial Perspective is €54 582 million in current prices. Of this, €50 521 million is for the European Community programme and €2751 million for the Euratom programme, which runs from 2007 to 2011. A further €1310 million is indicatively planned for the Euratom programme for 2012-2013 but this will need to be confirmed at a later stage. (all figures in EUR million)
Parliament - compromise with Council (13.11.2006)
Council Common Position (September 2006)
Cooperation
32413
32365
- Health
6100
6050
- Food, Agriculture and Fisheries, Biotechnology
1935
1935
- Information and Communication Technology
9050
9119
- Nanociences, Nanotechnologies and new Production Technologies
3475
3500
- Energy
2350
2300
- Environment (including Climate Change)
1890
1900
- Transport (including Aeronautics)
4160
4180
- Socio-economic Sciences and the Humanities
623
610
- Security
1400
1350
- Space
1430
1430
Ideas
7510
7460
People
4750
4728
Capacities
4097
4217
- Research Infrastructures
1715
1850
- Research for the benefit of SMEs
1336
1336
- Regions of Knowledge
126
126
- Research Potential
340
370
- Science in society
330
280
- Coherent development of research policies
70
70
- Activities of International Cooperation
180
185
Non-nuclear activities of the Joint Research Centre
1751
1751
TOTAL
50521
50521
Rules for participation Parliament also adopted a codecision report (first reading) by Philippe Busquin (PES, BE) on the implementing rules for participation of undertakings, research centres and universities in activity under the Seventh Framework Programme. Here too a first-reading compromise has been reached between rapporteur, shadow rapporteurs and the Council, the main aim of which is to simplify the rules.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External relations
MEPs debate EU-Russia relations
2006-11-30 - 17:02
On Wednesday, 29 November, the plenary session debated the outcome of last week's eighteenth Russia-EU summit - held in Helsinki on 24 November - with the Council and Commission. Energy, human rights, overflight payments, customs issues and Russia's ban on meat imports from Poland were all part of the discussion. Finland's Minister for European Affairs Paula Lehtomäki spoke for the Council Presidency at the opening of the debate. She reported that the central questions in EU-Russia relations had been discussed extensively, and in a constructive spirit. The EU would continue working on a negotiating mandate for a new EU-Russia framework agreement, with the aim of getting negotiations started as soon as possible, she said. In Helsinki, the two parties had noted their strong common interest and interdependence in the field of energy. The EU had emphasised the principles of transparency, predictability, reciprocity and openness, which the parties are expected to apply in energy markets, investments and transit infrastructures. These principles should also be included in the new EU-Russia framework agreement, she said. The two parties had noted that progress in negotiations on Russia's membership of the World Trade Organisation would boost trade, and EU-Russia free trade negotiations could be opened as soon as Russia joins the WTO. On human rights, the EU had expressed concern about the situation in Chechnya and stressed the importance of thoroughly investigating all human rights offences and bringing the perpetrators to justice. The EU had also raised the issues of the rule of law and media independence in Russia, including the investigations of journalist Anna Politkovskaya's murder. The two parties had underlined the importance of direct contacts between citizens, inter alia through student exchanges, as a basis for strategic partnership. External Relations Commissioner Benita Ferrero-Waldner pointed out that the summit had been the third EU meeting with President Putin this year. She said she was very pleased that the agreement to end payments for overflight of Siberia, ending a persistent irritant in the relationship. Immediately before the summit, a meeting of EU and Russian business leaders had discussed closer economic integration. At the summit itself there was a consensus to take these matters forward. "Our ambition is to have a single economic space, applying essentially the same rules and allowing the possibility for fair trade." Mr Putin, she said, had confirmed that the energy charter would not be ratified, but said he was willing to work together with the EU to find a mutually acceptable solution to the issues concerned. Mrs Ferrero-Waldner said she was confident that remaining obstacles to a strategic agreement could be dealt with. Mr Barroso, she said, had made clear that the ban on Polish meat was disproportionate, and proposed three way talks to resolve the issue. Mr Putin, she said, had made clear the problem was not Polish meat but third country meat transiting through Poland. It was, at least, agreed that there would be no legal vacuum at the end of the present cooperation agreements. Urgent attention would also be given to reducing the queues which are building up at customs control points on EU-Russia borders. Issues relating to Kaliningrad had been discussed, as had cooperation in the common neighbourhood, notably on nuclear non-proliferation. The issue of human rights in Russia had also been raised, she said, notably including the killing of Anna Politkovskaya. Mr Barroso had said that the perception of a lack of due process was a problem, and he raised the case of Mikhail Khodorkovsky in this regard. Mr Putin had defended Russia's approach to such matters. The Commissioner indicated that work was also ongoing to try to reduce the difference between the EU and Russia on Kosovo and Georgia. Political group speakers Close partnership was vital to both the EU and Russia and each needs to invest in the other, said Camiel Eurlings (EPP- ED, NL), but this partnership must be based on a proper balance between economic interests and democracy. Some progress had been made at the Russia-EU summit (e.g. on overflight of Siberia and visa facilitation), but the outcome had been generally disappointing. The EPP nonetheless understands Poland's position on Russia's year-long ban on meat imports from Poland, and would not wish to see it extended to other EU countries. We were going through a difficult phase in EU-Russia relations, noted Hannes Swoboda (PES, AT), and although his group would have liked to see the launch of new partnership agreement, "we also understand the Polish veto." Mr Swoboda stressed that the EU should take a common line in trade deals with Russia, and support its Black Sea coastal neighbours. "We will not be silent about human rights" he said, adding that if Russia's President Vladimir Putin had nothing to do with the death in London of former spy Alexander Litvinenko, then he should be striving to see that the people responsible are brought to justice. Speaking for the ALDE group, Paavo Väyrynen (FI) said there was now an atmosphere of cooperation between the EU and Russia. The difference was that difficult topics, such as democracy and human rights, were being discussed in a constructive spirit. Difficulties had prevented the conclusion of a strategic partnership agreement, but cooperation could continue on the basis of present agreements. Phasing out the flyover payments and the new northern dimension agreement were also positive steps. Regarding the transport backlogs on the border, Mr Väyrynen said "I hope open discussion can resolve this, in particular by reducing the number of authorities involved." Daniel Cohn-Bendit (DE), speaking for the Greens/EFA group, said that relations between Europe and Russia were sometime surrealist, or like something from a Woody Allen film. "Either Russia is right, and Polish meat is bad, in which case it should not be distributed in Europe, or Russia is wrong, their ban is unfair and we should apply sanctions," he said. There was, said Mr Cohn-Bendit now "a chain of murders across Europe" but Mr Putin just "shows his angelic face, trained by the KGB, and says he has nothing to do with it." When the Duma adopted laws preventing opposition or NGOs from operating, Mr Putin disclaimed all responsibility. "There is a difference between not wanting to return to the Cold War and accepting the insistent lies of a politician on every topic under the sun," he said. For the GUE/NGL group, Vladimír Remek (CZ) said the Helsinki summit had not been a success and the blame lay with the EU. If we continued to blame Russia, he said, they would only go on working with more pragmatic Member States bilaterally. "We cannot expect them to agree on an energy deal which is only favourable to our companies," he said, before criticising MEPs who failed to take part in the EP-Russia joint parliamentary committee meetings. "There's every indication that Russia is not prepared to pursue [partnership] negotiations", said Konrad Szymanski (UEN, PL), citing, allegations that documents accompanying meat imported from Poland had been falsified in Russia itself. "Whether we overcome this tension will affect the future of the EU - if Russia succeeds in splitting us today, they will do so again in one year and we shall take two steps backwards" he said. "Russia is trying to divide the EU" said Miroslaw Piotrowski (IND/DEM, PL), adding that this was a tactic that it had already tried with the Baltic countries, and an effective one, inasmuch as some Member States appeared to be siding with Russia. "Why is the EU so in awe of Russia?" he continued, condemning human rights abuses in Chechnya, and the murder of journalist Anna Politkovskaya, who had done much to expose them. UK Speaker One British MEP took the floor during the general debate - "We need a strong, stable, reliable Russia as a bulwark against militants" said Charles Tannock (EPP-ED), but the EPP took a "dim view" of Russia's involvement in Chechnya, its alleged involvement in the death of Alexander Litvinenko, its practice of "cosying up" to big EU Member States in order to put pressure on smaller ones and its use of phytosanitary regulations to "bully" neighbours. Responses to the debate Summing up, Paula Lehtomäki stressed the interdependence of Russia and the EU, and the need to treat each other on equal terms, with mutual respect. Human rights are "not for sale", and basic principles, such as the rule of law, are at the heart of EU-Russia relations, she said. But the debate had brought out the very clear need for solidarity among EU Member States. In her response to the debate, Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner spoke of the importance of cooperation with both Russia and Turkey on Black Sea issues, which was one issue addressed in the Commission's neighbourhood policy communication, adopted earlier that day. She said useful progress had been made on energy issues, and insisted that the Commission's stance had been as supportive of Poland as it was possible to be. "It was a frank and open meeting, which is always good," she said, "then there is a chance to solve at least one issue and move on to the others afterwards." Parliament will vote on a resolution on the outcome of the EU-Russia summit during its December plenary session in Strasbourg (11-14 December 2006).
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Justice and home affairs
Progress made in the EU towards the area of freedom, security and justice
2006-11-30 - 17:02
The European Parliament calls for an application of the 'passerelle' clauses in police and judicial cooperation on criminal matters and extending codecision within Parliament, qualified majority voting in Council and the Court of Justice's role, in a resolution on progress made in the EU towards the Area of freedom, security and justice adopted with a large majority. The resolution was adopted with 488 votes in favour, 85 against and 25 abstentions. The proliferation of legal bases for a single political objective, jurisdictional conflicts and appeals to define the scope of the institutions’ powers, the unanimity rule and, above all, the absence of genuine democratic and jurisdictional control all make the current situation of the third pillar policies extremely fragile from the point of view of EU respect for the principles on which it claims to be founded (Article 6 TEU - fundamental rights), says the Parliament. MEPs also note that the demand of European citizens for the right to enjoy greater freedom, security and justice within the Union is constantly increasing.
The resolution adopted on Thursday, 30 November 2006, drafted by Jean-Marie CAVADA (ALDE, FR) calls "on the Commission to submit to the Council in 2007 the draft Decision activating Article 42 TEU and bringing the provisions concerning police (including EUROPOL) and judicial cooperation on criminal matters (including EUROJUST) into the Community sphere (Title IV TEC).
MEPs call on the Council to adopt "as a matter of urgency the draft Decision based on Article 67 (2) TEC removing the restrictions on the powers of the EC Court of Justice in the context of Title IV of the TEC and to do everything to speed up the handling of preliminary rulings in AFSJ matters. The Council is encouraged to provide for "extending codecision within Parliament and qualified majority voting in Council" on areas such as legal immigration or integration of third country nationals.
When it comes to policies as sensitive as those connected with fundamental rights, immigration and increased security, "the EU institutions should not seek to replace the Member States but to play a complementary role", says the Parliament. The resolution recalls the need to maintain a certain consistency as regards legislative powers at EU level by providing, for example, for immigration legislation not to be limited to illegal immigration only, but to cover legal immigration too.
The activation of the "passerelle" leaves the possibility open for the Council to decide on its voting conditions. In this context various solutions could be found to preserve unanimity in certain cases and/or for specific periods providing that, in any event in all matters affecting European citizens' rights there was EP codecision, and that the EP could not be viewed as having less decisive weight than the smallest Member State. National parliaments are invited to "ascertain as soon as possible the impact at national level of the new provisions contemplated by the Council as regards data protection."
Finally the report expresses its "deep concern" at the US letter of interpretation of the PNR agreement, which shows that the US authorities have an interpretation going beyond the content of the agreement. The resolution follows up the 27 September plenary debate based on a question to the Council for the annual debate on the progress made in the Area of freedom, security and justice (Articles 2 and 39 of the EU Treaty).
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Consumers
Parliament adopts report on rules on fireworks
2006-11-30 - 17:02
The EP gave its strong backing (by 565 votes to 22 with 6 abstentions) to a co-decision report on "the placing on the market of pyrotechnic articles" -- that is to say, among other things, fireworks. Every year, estimates the European Commission, up to 45,000 accidents involving fireworks take place in the European Union. Moreover, available statistics show that a disproportionately high number of children are being hurt be it as a result of malfunction or misuse. As IMCO Chair Arlene McCARTHY (PES, UK) put it during an earlier committee debate -- alluding to scenes of mayhem witnessed in many European cities during New Year's Eve celebrations -- "we have young people using fireworks in urban guerrilla warfare."
Moreover, pointed out rapporteur Joel HASSE FERREIRA (PES, PT), national laws on pyrotechnic articles are different across the EU: in effect, different fireworks are banned in different countries. The objective of the proposal, therefore -- aside from reducing the number and seriousness of accidents -- is to ensure the free movement of pyrotechnic products within the Union. Notably, the market for pyrotechnic articles, which also includes generators used in car airbags and seatbelt pretensioners, is currently estimated at nearly €7 billion.
Under the proposed directive fireworks would be classed in four categories according to use, purpose, hazard and -- as MEPs decided -- noise level, which should never be harmful for human health. Members also backed a system of minimum age restrictions for potential buyers or users:
- Category 1 (safest) fireworks would not be available to consumers below 12 years old.
- Category 2 fireworks: 16 years.
- Category 3: 18 years.
Category 4 fireworks -- which present a high hazard -- would only be available to persons "with specialist knowledge".
Although the directive sets out to ensure the free movement of pyrotechnics, it should allow Member States to "prohibit or restrict the possession, use and/or the sale to the general public of category 2 and 3 fireworks", MEPs decided -- but only as long as such measures are justified "on grounds of public security or safety or public order or environmental protection."
The proposed directive would also contain a number of provisions on essential safety requirements. Manufacturers would have to submit their product to a "conformity assessment" procedure, affix the CE marking, and ensure that each pyrotechnic is tested under realistic conditions.
As Mr. Ferreira pointed out, citing 2004 figures, 96% of fireworks on the market are imported from China. It is with this in mind -- and as to ensure that products comply with EU safety requirements -- that MEPs backed an amendment whereby importers would have to ensure that their non-EU-based supplier "has fulfilled his obligations under this Directive". Otherwise, importers would have to "assume these obligations [themselves]"
With the adoption of a package of compromise amendments, the Parliament and Council have arrived at a first-reading agreement.
Noting the need for manufacturers to adjust to the new legal framework, MEPs decided to extend the Commission's proposed transitional periods for implementation. EU members, they voted, should adopt provisions necessary to comply with the directive within 30 months (as opposed to 18) of its publication. They will have 3 years (instead of 2) to apply them for fireworks of categories 1, 2 and 3 -- and 6 years (instead of 5) for category 4 fireworks, as well as other pyrotechnic articles.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Public health
World AIDS Day - 1 December: MEPs call for increased funding for Global Health Fund
2006-11-30 - 17:02
In adopting a joint resolution by 546 votes in favour to 34 against with 24 abstentions on HIV/AIDS one day ahead of World AIDS day, MEPs call on the Commission to increase to €1 billion its contribution to the global fund against HIV/AIDS, malaria and TB, and on all Member States and G8 members to increase their contribution to €7 billion in 2007 and €8 billion in 2008, in order to provide UNAIDS with the resources necessary to reduce the epidemics. MEPs express their deepest concern at the expansion of HIV/AIDS and other epidemics amongst the poorest populations in the world and at the lack of focus on prevention of HIV/AIDS, inaccessibility of key medicines, insufficient funding and the lack of research efforts on the major epidemics.
Parliament stresses the importance of accountability of governments, health service providers, the pharmaceutical industry, NGOs and civil society, and others involved in prevention, treatment and care. MEPs call on all international donors to work to ensure that HIV prevention programmes reach the people most at risk of infection as identified in the UNAIDS conclusion that these vulnerable groups are not being provided for The House stresses the need for the EU to fund specific programmes to ensure that those children affected by the AIDS epidemic through the loss of one or both parents or through contracting the disease themselves remain in education and are supported.
Parliament calls on all aid programmes to make sure that once a patient starts a course of treatment, funding is provided for continued uninterrupted treatment, in order to prevent the increased drug resistance that results from interrupted treatments.
Sexual and reproductive health
The House stresses that the strategies needed to combat the HIV/AIDS epidemic effectively must include a comprehensive approach to prevention, education, care and treatment and must include the technologies currently in use, expanded access to treatment and the development of vaccines as a matter of urgency. MEPs call on the European Commission and the governments of our partner countries to ensure that health and education, and HIV/AIDS and sexual and reproductive health in particular, are prioritised in Country Strategy Papers.
MEPs call on the Commission and Member States to support programmes that combat homophobia and break down the barriers that stop effective tackling of the disease, especially in Cambodia, China, India, Nepal, Pakistan, Thailand and Vietnam and across Latin America, where there is increasing evidence of HIV outbreaks among men who have sex with men. The House welcomes the inclusion of research into HIV/AIDS in the 7th Research Framework Programme and calls for research on vaccines and microbicides, diagnostic and monitoring tools suited to developing countries’ needs, epidemic transmission patterns and social and behavioural trends to be supported. The House underlines that women must be involved in all appropriate clinical research, including vaccine trials. Parliament also calls for investment in the development of female-controlled prevention methods such as microbicides, female condoms and post-exposure prophylaxis for survivors of rape.
Access to medicines
The House encourages governments to use all the possibilities available to them under the TRIPs Agreement, such as compulsory licences, and for the WHO and the WTO and its members to review the whole of the TRIPs Agreement with a view to improving access to medicines . MEPs calls on the Commission and the Member States to take the necessary steps in the WTO, in association with the developing countries, to modify the TRIPS Agreement and its article based on the Decision of 30 August 2003, particularly in order to abolish the complex, time‑consuming procedural steps needed for authorisation of compulsory licenses. The House meanwhile, encourages and calls on all countries facing major epidemics to make immediate use of Article 30 of the TRIPS Agreement to access the necessary medicines without paying royalties for patents to the right-owners.
Parliament supports the commitment made by heads of state and government at the 2005 UN World Summit calling for universal access to HIV/AIDS prevention services, treatment and care by 2010. The House believes, however, that a clear plan for funding universal access should be developed and international and interim progress targets set. Finally, MEPs call for support for the developing growth of regional and national generic drug industries in affected areas with a view to facilitating access to affordable drugs.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Social policy
Situation of disabled people in the enlarged EU
2006-11-30 - 17:02
Parliament adopted an own-initiative report by Elisabeth LYNNE (ALDE, UK) on the situation of people with disabilities in the enlarged EU. In adopting the report by a large majority, Members underlined that accessibility to public transport and information and communication technologies is vital for disabled people. Furthermore, MEPs called for better integration of people with disabilities into mainstream education and the job market and for a European charter on quality of support for disabled people.
MEPs welcome the gradual trend towards eliminating the many forms of discrimination that disabled people encounter when using air, land or sea transport. They note that EU legislation already exists concerning the rights of disabled persons and persons with reduced mobility when travelling by air and encourage the Commission is to expand the same legislative rights to disabled persons in relation to all modes of transport.
Members welcome efforts by Commission to improve accessibility to information and communication technologies since it may contribute effectively to reducing high unemployment among people with disabilities. They note, however, that 80% of public websites, including those of the European institutions, are generally not accessible to people with disabilities Parliament calls on the European institutions and Member States to take specific action aimed at ensuring that all public institutions' web sites are accessible to disabled people. Furthermore they recall that documentation produced by the European institutions should always be made accessible on demand in accessible formats.
To encourage the integration of disabled people, from an early age, in mainstream education wherever possible whilst still acknowledging in some cases that special schools are necessary, the Commission should work together with Member States. The Commission should furthermore undertake research into the possibility of establishing a right to mainstream education for disabled children and their families who choose it.
MEPs want to launch information campaigns to raise awareness amongst employers of their duties and responsibilities and to ensure that they view the engagement of a disabled person without any kind of prejudice, in particular, as regards misconceptions concerning the financial cost of employment and the candidates' capabilities. The Member States should explore more intensively ways of offering jobs to people with disabilities.
Members welcome moving away from the institutionalisation of disabled people but note that deinstitutionalisation requires a sufficient level of community-based quality services favouring independent living the right to personal assistance and full participation in society within Member States.
They call on the Commission to press for a European charter on quality of support for disabled people with a view to ensuring a high level of integration and participation whatever the method of support.
Finally the Commission is asked to publish every two years a progress report on the policies and good practice pursued on behalf of the disabled in the individual Member States of the EU in the various sectors concerned.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Adopted texts
2006-11-30 - 17:02
Texts adopted during the plenary can be accessed via the following link. Text adopted during the mini-plenary 29-20 November 2006. Latest texts adopted
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-FULL DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-FULL DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129BRI00708 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
