How do I listen to the debates live and when it suits me?
Institutions
2006-12-06 - 11:40
Follow all the action on "EP Live"
If you want to see a mix of politics, personalities and pop then the "EP Live" part of this website could have the answer. It brings you all the debates and votes live and recorded from the European Parliament. You can also see videos of press conferences, important hearings and access the "Europe by Satellite" TV station. This week saw EP Live relay all the action as MEPs and MPs from across the continent debated how they think the European Union should look like in future.
Every minute of every debate during Parliament's monthly sessions in Strasbourg is covered on EP Live. To follow just click on the "live broadcast" icon on the left and the Plenary chamber and speaker will appear on your screen!
Will I be able to understand? Absolutely! No matter what language the MEP is speaking you can choose whichever of the 20 language options you prefer - the translation comes directly from the chamber itself.
Missed it or found yourself late for a debate? No problem at all. The debates and conferences are now recorded as is a summary of the Plenary - you needn't miss a thing.
Debates, conferences, seminars...pop songs!
As well as debates EP Live also covers the meetings of the most important Parliamentary Committees, public conferences, seminars and press conferences. Also featured are visits by European and International leaders to the Parliament. A recent visitor was the Tibetan spiritual leader the Dalai Lama.
Sometimes pop and politics collide in Parliament and on EP Live. The last few months have seen performances by Colombian singer Juanes - who brought his campaign about landmines to the Chamber and Italian singer Claudio Baglioni who highlighted immigration issues. Both of these were carried live on EP Live.
Europe by Satellite...and online
Europe by Satellite, or EbS for short, is the EU's TV news agency covering European affairs with live broadcasts and transmissions of summaries and news reports. Available for the public and journalists via EP Live it has a daily schedule to allow people to follow what is going on in the European Institutions. "Parlamento", a weekly round up of the Parliament which is aired on "Euronews" is also available.
How do I find the event I am looking for?
It's easy - you can either click on the "European Parliament Agenda" which gives a full list of upcoming events in Parliament or try the "EP Live schedule".
Coming up in December, a new video will be released for the award of Sakharov prize for freedom of thought. Also available soon will be a video from the Parliament's archive that will form part of the 50th anniversary celebrations of the signing of the Treaty of Rome which founded what we now call the EU.
20061206STO00972 EP Live!
EN
1
PHOTO
20061206PHT00974.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/eplive/public/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
