Progress made in the EU towards the area of freedom, security and justice
Justice and home affairs
2006-11-30 - 12:44
The European Parliament calls for an application of the 'passerelle' clauses in police and judicial cooperation on criminal matters and extending codecision within Parliament, qualified majority voting in Council and the Court of Justice's role, in a resolution on progress made in the EU towards the Area of freedom, security and justice adopted with a large majority. The resolution was adopted with 488 votes in favour, 85 against and 25 abstentions.
The proliferation of legal bases for a single political objective, jurisdictional conflicts and appeals to define the scope of the institutions’ powers, the unanimity rule and, above all, the absence of genuine democratic and jurisdictional control all make the current situation of the third pillar policies extremely fragile from the point of view of EU respect for the principles on which it claims to be founded (Article 6 TEU - fundamental rights) , says the Parliament . MEPs also note that the demand of European citizens for the right to enjoy greater freedom, security and justice within the Union is constantly increasing.
The resolution adopted on Thursday 30.11.06, drafted by Jean-Marie CAVADA (ALDE, FR) calls "on the Commission to submit to the Council in 2007 the draft Decision activating Article 42 TEU and bringing the provisions concerning police (including EUROPOL) and judicial cooperation on criminal matters (including EUROJUST) into the Community sphere (Title IV TEC).
MEPs call on the Council to adopt "as a matter of urgency the draft Decision based on Article 67 (2) TEC removing the restrictions on the powers of the EC Court of Justice in the context of Title IV of the TEC and to do everything to speed up the handling of preliminary rulings in AFSJ matters. The Council is encouraged to provide for "extending codecision within Parliament and qualified majority voting in Council" on areas such as legal immigration or integration of third country nationals.
When it comes to policies as sensitive as those connected with fundamental rights, immigration and increased security, "the EU institutions should not seek to replace the Member States but to play a complementary role" , says the Parliament. The resolution recalls the need to maintain a certain consistency as regards legislative powers at EU level by providing, for example, for immigration legislation not to be limited to illegal immigration only, but to cover legal immigration too.
The activation of the "passerelle" leaves the possibility open for the Council to decide on its voting conditions. In this context various solutions could be found to preserve unanimity in certain cases and/or for specific periods providing that, in any event in all matters affecting European citizens' rights there was EP codecision, and that the EP could not be viewed as having less decisive weight than the smallest Member State. National parliaments are invited to "ascertain as soon as possible the impact at national level of the new provisions contemplated by the Council as regards data protection."
Finally the report expresses its "deep concern" at the US letter of interpretation of the PNR agreement , which shows that the US authorities have an interpretation going beyond the content of the agreement. The resolution follows up the 27 September plenary debate based on a question to the Council for the annual debate on the progress made in the Area of freedom, security and justice (Articles 2 and 39 of the EU Treaty).
20061129IPR00718
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
