MEPs debate EU summit, Finland's Presidency in last '06 Plenary
Institutions
2006-12-19 - 11:48
Finnish PM Matti Vanhanen addresses MEPs
In one last "extraordinary" plenary of 2006, MEPs debated the outcome of the European Summit Thursday and Friday. They also heard Finland's Prime Minister Matti Vanhanen bring down the curtain on his country's 6-month EU Presidency. With Parliament's President Josep Borrell he also signed the REACH chemicals bill and the 7th Research programme into law. Both enter into force in 2007.
Enlargement of the EU dominated the summit . Finland's Prime Minister spoke of the EU's troubled relationship with Turkey , saying Ankara "did not honour its commitments and that has consequences. But I want to stress that Turkey’s future is in the European Union".
On the Constitutional Treaty he said picking it apart (i.e. cherry picking some parts of it) was no solution. Mr Vanhanen said the main priority of the Finnish presidency had been EU unity. He was proud that EU took "a strong and united position" towards the conflict in Lebanon and noted that the Lahti EU Summit succeeded in sending one voice to Russia. "I am not altogether sure that Russia is heading in the right direction" but said "Russia is important for the EU," Mr Vanhanen said.
MEPs reactions: "Finnish Presidency has done a good job"
Hans-Gert Poettering of the European People's Party congratulated the Finnish presidency on its "famous successes such as REACH, the services directive and the 7th framework programme". He said Parliament could be proud of its leading role in passing this legislation. On the Constitution, the People's Party wanted a result before the next European elections in 2009.
The leader of the Socialist group Martin Schulz said that there could be "no more enlargements without reform". Another message to emerge from the last six months was that "Europe needs a migration policy which is not just about restrictions. We need migration on this continent and we need immigration".
The leader of the liberals, Graham Watson said there was "too much accent on security and too little on the humanitarian issues".
For the Union for Europe of Nations Group (UEN) Brian Crowley said that the EU must look at the "core reasons people are running away" and seeking access to the Union. He said the genocide in Darfur is an example of "failure" by the international community. The leader of the Greens Monica Frassoni welcomed the progress made by the Finnish Presidency on immigration, climate change and the Constitutional Treaty. She also called for more investment in renewable energy resources.
Sylvia-Yvonne Kaufmann of the European United Left group struck a discordant note when she said her group could not agree with either the Services Directive or the Reach chemicals package. 'The EU has not turned away from economic liberalism". Nigel Farage of the Independence and democracy Group chided the Finnish PM for ratifying the Constitution, saying that "although the Constitution is dead, the contents are not and improving decision making will mean more power for the EU".
Finally, Commission President José Manuel Barroso, said that the past year was "win-win situation for everybody". He cited the services directive, enlargement, energy policy, REACH, the 7th framework programme and the new Schengen system as examples of progress. "We have seen the three institutions more focused on results and less on Brussels turf wars," he told MEPs.
REACH, 7th Research Programme signed
The EU's main policy for funding scientific research - the Framework Research Programme was adopted by the European Parliament on 30 November with a budget of more than €54 billion over its seven-year life.
REACH chemicals package signed: The aim is to gather more data on the safety of around 30,000 substances that were placed on the market before 1981. Of these products, around 3000 hazardous substances must now be subject to a strict authorisation procedure. The text, which exceeded 1000 pages at first reading in November 2005, was still 720 pages long at the end.
20061219STO01642 MEPs debate the Finnish Presidency and European Council with PM Vanhanen Parliament and Council officially sign REACH and FP7
EN
1
PHOTO
20061219PHT01649.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061214IPR01533 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061214IPR01531 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
