Strasbourg Plenary: 11-14 December
Institutions
2006-12-20 - 09:36
The last plenary session of the year was one of the busiest for MEPs. They voted to approved the REACH chemicals package, one of the largest pieces of legislation ever considered by the Parliament. Members also approved a new regulation that will govern the amount of advertising and product placement that can be contained in TV programmes and films.
MEPs also approved Romania and Bulgaria's nominees to be Commissioners when their countries join the EU on 1 January. Clean water, energy and new rules on driving licences also featured.
Finally, the 2006 Sakharov Prize for freedom of thought was awarded to Aliaksandr Milinkevich by Parliament's President Borrell.
20061214FCS01557
Monday opening, look ahead at the week
Monday in Plenary The last Strasbourg Plenary session of the year was opened yesterday by Parliament's President Josep Borrell. After the traditional "1 minute" speeches by some individual MEPs, the Chamber moved on to discuss the long running and complex REACH chemicals package - a final vote on this is due Wednesday. MEPs also debated compensation for banana growers. Today sees the awarding of the Sakharov prize and a debate on the "Television Without Frontiers" directive.
Tuesday: development, groundwater, Sakharov, TV Today begins with a debate on financing development cooperation for the next six years. Following this MEPs will debate hygienic standards for groundwater in the European Union. With just two weeks before Romania and Bulgaria join the EU, their nominees to sit on the European Commission - the EU's executive - will be put to the vote by MEPs. It follows an earlier question and answer session between them and MEPs. Later in the day the MEPs will debate the EU's € 115.5 billion euro budget for next year. A vote follows Thursday. At midday the much awaited Sakharov Prize 2006 will be presented to Belarus Opposition leader Alexander Milinkevich by President Borrell. In the afternoon the debates will focus on the advertising rules for TV channels in Europe, including a new approach to product placement. In the evening the House will debate the Commission's proposal to establish the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund (EGF). This initiative aims to provide up to €500 million to help workers made redundant by globalisation find new jobs. Wednesday: EU enlargement, European Council, driving licences The ever increasing numbers of EU members and how the Union will cope as it enlarges is debated on Wednesday morning. Also discussed by MEPs will be the agenda of EU leaders who are due to meet on Thursday. Enlargement of the EU and justice and home affairs issues are expected to dominate the summit. Later, proposals for an EU wide driving licence to replace the over 100 in existence will be discussed at their second reading. Thursday: climate change, human rights The last day of the last plenary of 2006 is made up of two issues that have been in the news during the year - climate change and human rights. A report on setting binding targets for the reduction of carbon dioxide emissions and on increasing the use of renewable energy sources will be tabled by British Socialist MEP Eluned Morgan. The Thursday afternoon debate will reflect on three human rights issues: the situation in Fiji, the alleged involvement of UN forces in sexual abuse while on mission in Liberia and Haiti and the situation in Burma. Post Strasbourg briefing
Romanian & Bulgarian Commissioners, Clean water dominate Tuesday
On the second day of their Plenary in Strasbourg, MEPs voted in favour of Romania and Bulgaria's candidates to be future European Commissioners. With both countries joining the EU in two weeks, their nominees now look set to take their place on the EU's executive. MEPs also approved legislation that should improve the cleanliness of groundwater - for many regions the main source of drinking water. The Sakharov prize was also awarded to Aliaksandr Milinkevich, Belarusian opposition leader.
The two Commissioners approved are: Meglena Kuneva from Bulgaria who has been allocated the Consumer Protection portfolio. Her duties will include ensuring that Europe's Consumers get a fair deal in terms of price and quality. For Romania: Leonard Orban will take over the "multilingualism" file at the Commission. He will be responsible for promoting language learning across the EU. Applause for Romanian, Bulgarian candidates Both candidates had a question and answer session with MEPs on 27 November. The object of this exercise was for Members to question the two about their experience and judge their suitability for the post. The "Yes" vote and subsequent applause by MEPs were firm endorsements their candidatures. Their future boss - Commission President José Manuel Barroso - had earlier told MEPs: "it is my firm belief that both candidates in the course of the hearings have proved their personal integrity and independence, their general competence and professional experience, as well as their deep and genuine European commitment". Cleaner groundwater, cleaner drinking water MEPs backed tough new legislation that should improve the cleanliness of water by much stricter measures against pollution by preventing "hazardous substances" such as cyanide, arsenic, biocides and phytopharmaceutical substances seeping into the water. The measure is particularly important as in many areas groundwater is the largest source of public drinking water. aking prior to the debate Christa Klass, the German People's Party MEP who drafted a report on the issue said that "groundwater is our most important natural resource but over half the bodies of freshwater in the EU are polluted and can never be cleaned up again". EU members have two years to integrate the directive into EU law. Sakharov prize: "we are doing this for our children" In his remarks after receiving the award, Aliaksandr Milinkevich told MEPs that "we are fighting for freedom and defending our independence...we are doing this for our children, who like French, Lithuanian, Polish and British children have the right to live in a free country". Parliament's President Borrell - who presented the prize - told Mr Milinkevich that "you are fighting against fear and intimidation", a reference to the authoritarian regime of President Lukashenka in Belarus
MEPs support Romania and Bulgaria More on groundwater
EU Summit debate, REACH, TV rules dominate Wednesday Plenary
REACH Press conference The debate over the future shape and size of the European Union took centre stage in the Hemicycle chamber in Strasbourg on Wednesday. MEPs debated the agenda of today's summit of EU leaders in Brussels - top of which is enlargement of the Union. They also supported two reports that call for a change in the structure of the EU before more countries join after the current wave. Also Wednesday, the REACH chemicals law was passed as was the "TV without Frontiers" directive.
EU Summit in Brussels: MEPs give their view With EU leaders meeting in Brussels to discuss "all aspects" related to EU enlargement, immigration, energy and the Union's external relations - leading MEPs gave their view as to what they thought should be discussed. On the future EU enlargement Hans-Gert Pöttering , speaking for the Group of the European People's Party said the EU should be "open to any country that has the right to aspire to membership, but there are also conditions". He said "the EU needs to prepare itself to take in new members". He also stressed the necessity to treat climate change "as a priority". Martin Schulz, leader of the Socialist PSE Group said "we are willing to cooperate with the other EU-institutions to get EU out of its dead-end". He also spoke about Turkey, and urged the sceptical parties in the Parliament to make up their minds: "do they want Turkey in the EU or not! He stressed that the accession process is an important "bridge-builder" to the Islamic world. Graham Watson for the Liberal ALDE group said that the EU has to get the "Constitutional arrangements sorted" before future enlargements. He also spoke of the need to stress the humanitarian aspects of migration and develop an EU energy policy to avoid being "held hostage". Europe "Also needs doors" For the Greens their leader Daniel Cohn-Bendit spoke about Europe's problems with immigration: "we only put windows to the common European house...and people are climbing in. We also need doors. You have to let people come into Europe". For the Group of the European United Left (GUE), Esko Seppänen criticised the Finnish Presidency on promoting the draft constitution and for Finland ratifying it. "The Finnish Presidency has done major part of its work in secret...this is in contradiction with the principle of transparency.." Brian Crowley for the Union for Europe of Nations Group (UEN) warned: "if Turkey doesn't respect the Ankara-Protocol (on relations with Cyprus) if will have consequences. This doesn't mean slamming the door in their face". Jens-Peter Bonde of the Independence and Democracy group had one comment on the institutional debate: "why not involve the citizens in the preparation of the new basic set of rules?" Parliament's President Borrell will deliver a statement to EU leaders immediately prior to the summit. As the Finnish Presidency of the EU enters its last two weeks, Minister of Foreign Trade Paula Lehtomäki gave her assessment of what they expect from the last EU summit they will chair. She said the aim was to consolidate a consensus when it comes to Turkey and Croatia and how to proceed with the enlargement process. She also said most EU states see Treaty reform as important. President of the European Commission José Manuel Barroso said that the Commission's recent recommendation to suspend some aspects of negotiations with Turkey showed the EU was "credible", "fair and firm". However, he also said candidate countries must be kept motivated" by the prospect of EU membership. Parliament will have an extraordinary plenary session on 18 December to discuss the outcome of the Council. Brok and Stubb reports point way on EU Enlargement The debate and vote yesterday centred on two reports on the "main challenges" that lie ahead for the EU in the coming years and whether the EU will be able to "integrate" new members. MEPs agreed that the five enlargements of the Union had been a great success - although before any new countries join a new "institutional settlement" should be made, which in practice means ratifying the troubled European Constitution. The point stressed in the reports and debate is that the EU must be able to "integrate" new members. They also said the EU should honour existing commitments to countries in the Western Balkans. The reports were by German Christian Democrat Elmar Brok who said if the Union enlarges without institutional reform "we will have first and second class memberships...this is why we need a constitution". Introducing his report Finnish People's Party MEP Alexander Stubb said "we have to set our house in order before we can enlarge". His report also called for Parliament to grant its "Assent" at the start and end of accession negotiations. REACH chemicals package sees light One of the biggest pieces of legislation in the EU's history, REACH will set up a system for the registration, evaluation and authorisation of chemicals for sale in the EU. About 30,000 substances stand to be registered and 3000 authorised. It puts the burden of proof on industry to prove that their chemicals are safe or undertake research to prove they pose not threat to human health and the environment. A new EU Chemical's Agency based in Helsinki will be responsible for the registration and authorisation of chemicals. Television / Films: MEPs back new advertising rules New rules on the number of ad breaks and the amount of product placement are two features of the revised "Television without Frontiers" directive agreed by MEPs yesterday. Parliament agreed to allow breaks for commercials in movies and some other TV programmes every 30 minutes and that they should not contain material likely to cause offence. Product placement will be allowed in a limited range of programmes, but only under strict rules and will be banned in "news and current affairs programmes, children's programmes, documentaries and programmes of advice". However, it remains possible in cinematographic works, films and series made for television and sports broadcasts. EU enlargement debate REACH TV without frontiers
Thursday in plenary: energy, budget, driving licences
Energy production was on the agenda On Thursday, the MEPs debated and voted on the future of the EU energy policy, as it tries to cope with the challenges of safety, competitiveness and sustainability. They also approved the EU budget for 2007 and voted a recommendation on personal data. Finally, they confirmed we could all start getting “credit-card” format driving licences from 2013.
MEPs approved a Green Paper on a "European Strategy for Sustainable, Competitive and Secure Energy". The draft should set binding targets for 2020 that will:
reducing carbon dioxide emissions.
increasing the use of renewable energy sources (e.g. wind, water, solar energy, biomass) - by 25 per cent. Decisions on the future of nuclear power must be taken by the EU countries individually but an Instrument for "Nuclear Safety and Security Assistance" (financial, economic and technical assistance) should be established. MEPs call for EU strategy of sustainable transport energy use. In particular the:
the phasing out of fossil fuel.
a reduction in oil dependency.
a gradual introduction of clean energy. EU members are called to "to make the production and use of biofuels more attractive through the taxation and excise system ". The aim of the EU is to make it he most energy efficient economy in the world by 2020: As part of this consumers should have:
easy access to price and provider information.
an easy method of switching their energy provider.
a right to be heard by the regulators of the energy in each EU member.
Driving licences in "credit card" format for all A report on a new driving licence format was adopted which will mean that from 2013, all newly issued or replacement driving licences will be in a single EU-wide credit card format replacing the more than 110 existing different models in EU members. In practice it will mean:
Limited administrative validity - 10 years (EU members can increase to up to 15).
Harmonising existing classes of vehicles.
Combating “driving licence tourism” (which means that banned drivers banned in one EU country are free to drive in the other states).
“Progressive access” for motorcycles: riders must accumulate experience on smaller motorcycles first.
The EU has now a budget for 2007 It is the first one to deal with a Union of 27 members, following the accession of Bulgaria & Romania on the 1st January. It means that:
Appropriations are set at €126.5bn, payments at €115.5bn, equalling 0.99 % of Gross National Income. It represents an increase of 3.2% over 2006 levels in payments.
The crux throughout the preparation has expenditure for the Common Foreign Security Policy - CFSP. Parliament managed to get a pledge from Council to be timely and adequately informed on all CFSP actions.
The money falls under several main headings: Sustainable growth, natural resources, Justice and Home Affairs, the EU as global partner, administration. Parliament voices on use of personal data Parliament also approved a recommendation to the Council for the rapid adoption of a framework decision on the protection of personal data processed in the framework of police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters. MEPs anticipated an agreement that should be soon adopted within the Council, and declared themselves as "extremely concerned" at the direction taken by the debate in Council. Members recalled their consultation report last 27 September, stating that data collection and access to national governments or competent authorities must be limited "to specific purposes", only "if strictly necessary", and carried out with the "principles of proportionality and necessity" and for the purpose of "preventing a threat to public security or to a person". Sensitive data such us biometrics or DNA information should follow additional specific safeguards to ensure they are accurate and that they can be challenged by the subject of such data, insisted MEPs. Another big concern was the potential access to personal data that authorities from third countries could ask in the name of fight against terror and organised crime. This issue deals with the use of “Passengers Names Records” (PNR) on transatlantic flights, as agreed between the US and Europe in October. Concerns of MEPs that data would be used wrongly by the US authorities The rapporteur who guided it through Parliament, French Socialist MEP Martine Roure, said "we think that the fight against terrorism cannot be efficient if we treat each person as a potential criminal.." More on energy Budget info Focus on the budget
EN
1
PHOTO
20061212PHT01414.jpg
EN
5
PHOTO
20061213PHT01519.jpg
EN
9
PHOTO
20061215PHT01573.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207IPR01147 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207IPR01146 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207IPR01152 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061213IPR01493 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061211STO01289 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061208IPR01269 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207IPR01150 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061106FCS12347 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
