EU Summit debate, REACH, TV rules dominate Wednesday Plenary
Institutions
2006-12-14 - 11:47
European Parliament, 13 December, REACH press conference
The debate over the future shape and size of the European Union took centre stage in the Hemicycle chamber in Strasbourg on Wednesday. MEPs debated the agenda of today's summit of EU leaders in Brussels - top of which is enlargement of the Union. They also supported two reports that call for a change in the structure of the EU before more countries join after the current wave. Also Wednesday, the REACH chemicals law was passed as was the "TV without Frontiers" directive.
EU Summit in Brussels: MEPs give their view
With EU leaders meeting in Brussels to discuss "all aspects" related to EU enlargement, immigration, energy and the Union's external relations - leading MEPs gave their view as to what they thought should be discussed.
On the future EU enlargement Hans-Gert Pöttering , speaking for the Group of the European People's Party said the EU should be "open to any country that has the right to aspire to membership, but there are also conditions". He said "the EU needs to prepare itself to take in new members". He also stressed the necessity to treat climate change "as a priority".
Martin Schulz, leader of the Socialist PSE Group said "we are willing to cooperate with the other EU-institutions to get EU out of its dead-end". He also spoke about Turkey, and urged the sceptical parties in the Parliament to make up their minds: "do they want Turkey in the EU or not! He stressed that the accession process is an important "bridge-builder" to the Islamic world.
Graham Watson for the Liberal ALDE group said that the EU has to get the "Constitutional arrangements sorted" before future enlargements. He also spoke of the need to stress the humanitarian aspects of migration and develop an EU energy policy to avoid being "held hostage".
Europe "Also needs doors"
For the Greens their leader Daniel Cohn-Bendit spoke about Europe's problems with immigration: "we only put windows to the common European house...and people are climbing in. We also need doors. You have to let people come into Europe". For the Group of the European United Left (GUE), Esko Seppänen criticised the Finnish Presidency on promoting the draft constitution and for Finland ratifying it. "The Finnish Presidency has done major part of its work in secret...this is in contradiction with the principle of transparency.."
Brian Crowley for the Union for Europe of Nations Group (UEN) warned: "if Turkey doesn't respect the Ankara-Protocol (on relations with Cyprus) if will have consequences. This doesn't mean slamming the door in their face". Jens-Peter Bonde of the Independence and Democracy group had one comment on the institutional debate: "why not involve the citizens in the preparation of the new basic set of rules?"
Parliament's President Borrell will deliver a statement to EU leaders immediately prior to the summit.
As the Finnish Presidency of the EU enters its last two weeks, Minister of Foreign Trade Paula Lehtomäki gave her assessment of what they expect from the last EU summit they will chair. She said the aim was to consolidate a consensus when it comes to Turkey and Croatia and how to proceed with the enlargement process. She also said most EU states see Treaty reform as important.
President of the European Commission José Manuel Barroso said that the Commission's recent recommendation to suspend some aspects of negotiations with Turkey showed the EU was "credible", "fair and firm". However, he also said candidate countries must be kept motivated" by the prospect of EU membership.
Parliament will have an extraordinary plenary session on 18 December to discuss the outcome of the Council.
Brok and Stubb reports point way on EU Enlargement
The debate and vote yesterday centred on two reports on the "main challenges" that lie ahead for the EU in the coming years and whether the EU will be able to "integrate" new members.
MEPs agreed that the five enlargements of the Union had been a great success - although before any new countries join a new "institutional settlement" should be made, which in practice means ratifying the troubled European Constitution. The point stressed in the reports and debate is that the EU must be able to "integrate" new members. They also said the EU should honour existing commitments to countries in the Western Balkans.
The reports were by German Christian Democrat Elmar Brok who said if the Union enlarges without institutional reform "we will have first and second class memberships...this is why we need a constitution". Introducing his report Finnish People's Party MEP Alexander Stubb said "we have to set our house in order before we can enlarge". His report also called for Parliament to grant its "Assent" at the start and end of accession negotiations.
REACH chemicals package sees light
One of the biggest pieces of legislation in the EU's history, REACH will set up a system for the registration, evaluation and authorisation of chemicals for sale in the EU. About 30,000 substances stand to be registered and 3000 authorised. It puts the burden of proof on industry to prove that their chemicals are safe or undertake research to prove they pose not threat to human health and the environment. A new EU Chemical's Agency based in Helsinki will be responsible for the registration and authorisation of chemicals.
Television / Films: MEPs back new advertising rules
New rules on the number of ad breaks and the amount of product placement are two features of the revised "Television without Frontiers" directive agreed by MEPs yesterday. Parliament agreed to allow breaks for commercials in movies and some other TV programmes every 30 minutes and that they should not contain material likely to cause offence.
Product placement will be allowed in a limited range of programmes, but only under strict rules and will be banned in "news and current affairs programmes, children's programmes, documentaries and programmes of advice". However, it remains possible in cinematographic works, films and series made for television and sports broadcasts.
20061214STO01535 Enlargement debate Parliament adopts REACH - new EU chemicals legislation and new chemicals agency EP Live Article "TV without Frontiers: but without adverts, product placement?" 11.12.06
EN
1
PHOTO
20061213PHT01519.jpg
EN
4
LINK
/eplive/public/freetext_page_direct/20061120FTX00012-2101/default_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207IPR01152 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061213IPR01493 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207IPR01149 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
