MEPs discuss EU involvement in peace process with Olmert and Abbas
External relations
2006-12-22 - 09:32
In meetings with an EP ad-hoc delegation in the region, Israeli Prime Minister Ehud Olmert and Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas both welcomed the initiative of the upcoming German council presidency to revive and strengthen the role of the Quartet in the Middle East peace process.
"There is an absolute necessity to support President Abbas' attempts to improve the political and socio-economic condition of the Palestinian people, which is a crucial step towards the greater goal of sustainable peace in the region," said Elmar Brok (EPP-ED, DE), the Chairman of the delegation, "The EU can and must make significant contributions towards this objective, through, for instance, broadening the Temporary International Mechanism (TIM)."
In extensive talks with the Israeli Prime Minster and the Palestinian President, Members reiterated the EP's position - as expressed in its recent resolutions - as to the respect of international obligations by all parties, and called for a rapid re-launch of negotiations along the road-map in order to reactivate the peace process. In this context, both sides welcomed the recent initiative of the European Council to revive the Quartet's role in the peace process.
Concerned about the difficulties experienced by the Palestinian Authority (PA) to form a government of national unity, MEPs repeated their warnings to President Abbas about the dire consequences of any further escalation of the confrontation between Fatah and Hamas. They strongly agreed with his attempts to reform Fatah structures while also resuming the direct dialogue with Israel in view of a negotiated solution. Members supported President Abbas' statement that only a national unity government which met international obligations made sense, as only such a government could lead to the lifting of the embargo on international aid.
EP ad-hoc delegation members Elmar Brok and Véronique De Keyser (PES, BE) called on Prime Minister Olmert and Foreign Minister Tzipi Livni to release PA tax revenues and channel them to Palestinians through a financial mechanism similar to TIM. Together with the extension of the cease-fire from Gaza to the West Bank and the improvement of the free movement of people and goods, this step would allow President Abbas to have more means for effective action within the territories. MEPs also insisted on the necessity to involve moderate Arab forces as well as neighbouring states in the peace process, by considering some of the proposals contained in the Arab Peace Initiative.
Besides these exchanges of views at governmental level, the delegation also met with the Chairmen of the Foreign Affairs Committees of both the Israeli Knesset and the Palestinian Legislative Council (PLC), as well as with the Deputy Speaker of the PLC. Members heard from civil society actors, human rights NGOs and humanitarian organizations about the situation of everyday citizens both in Israel and the Palestinian territories. The delegation also travelled to Hebron and Sderot to gain first-hand knowledge of the situation on the ground on both sides of the border.
The 6-member delegation, including vice-chair Véronique de Keyser, David Hammerstein Mintz (Greens/EFA, ES), Luisa Morgantini (GUE/NGL, IT), Baroness Emma Nicholson of Winterbourne (ALDE, UK) and Konrad Szymanski (UEN, PL) visited Israel and the Palestinian territories on 20 and 21 December, holding high-level political meetings.
2006-12-21 Chair Elmar Brok EPP-ED DE
Ad-hoc delegation to the Middle East
20061218IPR01601
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
