Women's rights in Turkey: improvements still needed
Women's rights/Equal opportunities
2006-12-20 - 17:09
Turkey's legal framework on women's rights "has in general been satisfactory, but its substantive implementation remains flawed", says the EP Women's Rights Committee in its second report on women's role in social, economic and political life in Turkey, adopted on 20 December. The report emphasises that respecting human rights, including women’s rights, is a 'conditio sine qua non' for Turkey's membership of the EU.
The own-initiative report by Emine Bozkurt (PES, NL), which follows up Parliament's July 2005 resolution on women's role in Turkey, highlights key areas of concern. It welcomes the start of active EU accession negotiations with Turkey, but "regrets the slowing down of the reform process in Turkey over the last year and the persistent problem with women's rights" and reiterates Parliament's call for "full and effective implementation of the Community acquis in the field of women's rights, particularly in the poorer regions of the country".
Tackle violence against women
The report condemns violence against women, including honour killings, domestic violence, forced marriage and polygamy. It calls on the Turkish Government and the Commission to tackle "violence in general and honour crime in particular" as a priority and to set up special high-security shelters. The report also "stresses the importance of systematic investigation and effective punishment" and therefore the training of police and judicial authorities in gender equality issues and the fight against violence. The report calls on Turkish institutions to build alliances with all groupings - civil, social or religious - in society so as to initiate awareness-raising campaigns against violence against women.
Gender equality in access to education and labour market
The Committee expresses concern about the Commission's observation that women remain vulnerable to discriminatory practices in Turkey, due inter alia to a lack of education and a high illiteracy rate. UNICEF estimates that each year between 600,000 and 800,000 girls are either prevented by their families from going to school or do not attend it because of logistical difficulties. MEPs call on the Turkish government to ensure gender equality , especially in the south-eastern regions, in access to education and the labour market. The female employment rate is just under 25%, compared to 55% for the EU-25.
MEPs also highlight the lack of accurate data on the situation, role and rights of women in Turkey. Finally, the report notes that political participation in Turkey is "too low". The Committee urges the political parties in Turkey, starting from the upcoming elections in 2007, to include more female candidates on the electoral list.
2006-12-20 Committee on Women's Rights and Gender Equality Chair Anna Záborská EPP-ED SK
Procedure: own-initiative Plenary vote: February 2007, Strasbourg
20061218IPR01605 2006: Women's role in the social, economical and political life in Turkey European Parliament resolution on the role of women in Turkey in social, economic and political life (06.07.2005)
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5378852
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2005-0287 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
