Borrell: "where there is no argument there is no participation"
Institutions
2006-12-27 - 08:00
Parliament's President Josep Borrell
Moving from 15 to 27 EU members, overcoming "a certain distrust" with national Parliaments, a visit to China and a "breakthrough" in Parliament's communication with the people: Josep Borrell considers these some of the high points of his two-and half-year Presidency of the European Parliament. As the 22nd president, he has chaired the Plenary and represented Parliament on the European and world stage. As he enters his last weeks in office, we asked him about his term.
Q. Thinking back to when you were elected and took up your duties, what surprised you most?
JB: The complexity. I am used to a national Parliament which works in a single language and in a single national dimension. Here in the European Parliament everything is a little bit more complicated: in addition to left and right you have the national dimension of 25 States and the linguistic dimension.
Q. What has been the biggest challenge of your Presidency?
The move from a Parliament of 15 members to a Parliament of 25, soon to be 27. Apart this "internal' challenge, the EP faced big legislative topics: the Services directive and the chemicals regulation REACH.
We also have worked a lot together with the national parliaments, and I believe we have overcome certain distrust. With the other two main European institutions Parliament has established better relations, in spite of the difficult start with the Commission.
Finally, I would highlight the parliamentary diplomacy, the relations with third countries. In addition to the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly, I have put a lot of interest in the relations with Latin America, Asia and Africa, more than in traditional relations with the US for example.
Q. As President you have travelled to quite a few countries. Which visit was the most remarkable?
JB: The most impressive was the visit to China, which I guess is something everybody who travels to China would say, although every part of the world has its own particularity. The countries of Southeast Asia, China and India make a great impression on you not least their sheer size; they make you feel small and a little bit out of step with history….
You also feel overwhelmed by the poverty in Africa, and in Latin America, which is of special interest for a Spaniard. I hope that the European Parliament will continue to take care of Latin America at a maximum institutional level, in particular with the European Latin American Parliamentary Assembly. Finally, Bulgaria and Romania are countries to which I have dedicated special attention.
Q. Would you say the EU is in a crisis at this moment (for example with the Constitution)?
JB: It is not possible to go from 15 to 27 members without some adjustments. Doubtless, Europe is going through a triple crisis: a crisis of dimension, legitimacy and efficacy. A decision making system that has not been adjusted to the number of countries produces inefficiency, because it takes longer to decide, and that has the risk of making the Union lose its legitimacy.
Some say that the crisis has to do with identity, but identity questions have more to do with the absence of clear objectives for the EU. Until now, Europeans knew why they were together: in order not to fight with each other. We have already accomplished that - so what's next?
Now the question is how much further we want to integrate. My personal answer would be that the tomorrow's Europe needs to give a response to the globalised world. We have to tackle policy aspects about which we were not thinking before: energy, immigration, security and police cooperation.
Q. What can the Parliament do to raise people's interest and identification with the Parliament?
JB : The European Parliament election should become more like national elections. Currently they are very different because in national elections people choose a government and with EP elections you don't.
Also it is not clear what people are voting for - is it for different ways to construct Europe? There needs to be more controversy and debate in European elections. And perhaps it is starting to go naturally in that direction. In the next elections we will face questions where one can have an argument and where the political parties will take different positions: like Turkey’s accession to the EU for example.
Until now, the European debate has been rather bland because more or less everybody is in favour of Europe. However, now we are starting to debate what kind of Europe we want and what is Europe for. And that question is starting to be contested, which is a good thing. Where there is no argument there is no participation. If everybody is of the same opinion, then why bother to vote?
Q. What would you like to be remembered for as President?
JB: It is a difficult question, but I would like to be remembered for the breakthrough in communication. "I believe that the European Parliament has made a qualitative leap in its capacity to be heard and seen in the media. After the refusal to confirm Mr Butiglione as Commissioner, the services directive, the demonstrations in front of the Parliament when we were deciding on the port services directive…our work is starting to be known. The other institutions take us into account, but the public also knows that we are more than just the proverbial Tower of Babel.
20061219STO01647 President Borrell's website
EN
1
PHOTO
20061219PHT01653.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/president/defaulten.htm?home
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
