German teenagers quiz leading MEPs on EU
Institutions
2006-12-20 - 10:34
Teenagers quiz MEPs in the "Europa-Saal" of the Bundestag
Approximately 115 teenagers from schools in Berlin had a lot of questions when they met leading MEPs in the Bundestag Tuesday for a question and answer session. What's happening with Turkey? Has enlargement negatively affected the European Union's inner strength? Is Europe an alternative to the US? Why is education not the first priority in the budget? These were among the questions (and many firm statements!) just days before the start of Germany's Presidency of the EU.
Every MEP had to respect a tough 1 minute 30 second time limit for answers and an "EU-fanfare interrupted" any breaches of this time limit.
"The future of the European Union will affect all of us but it will affect especially the young generation", Norbert Lammert, President of the Bundestag, said when opening the Youth Forum. Parliament's President Josep Borrell said "we have built this Europe for you, for the young generation. We want to know now what you expect from European integration."
"Should the European Union be a rival to the US?"
The youngsters chose the topics (which were not revealed to MEPs beforehand) and it may surprise some that they saw foreign policy as the most important issue: "Should the European Union be a rival to the US?" one student asked and his colleague wanted to know "what lessons has Europe learned from incoherent foreign policy approaches during the Iraq crisis?"
Hans-Gert Pöttering of the European People's Party stressed the need for "friendship and partnership with the US" but said also "that we have to state whenever there are disagreements about certain issues, as for instance about Guantanamo."
Martin Schulz leader of the EP's Socialist Group emphasised the need "to strengthen multilateralism". He said the Iraq war led directly to "disaster". However, Europe has a responsibility for Iraq and especially for the Iraqi people: "We have an obligation to help them to get out of the disaster."
Daniel Cohn-Bendit for the Greens said Europe "should define itself as a pole" and still "Europe has to learn to find a common position." "But would this not become even more difficult with an EU army?", another student asked.
Graham Watson of the Liberal ALDE group agreed that "we need more coherence" but also stressed the need for an EU army "for that we can defend our common values." Jens-Peter Bonde of the independence and democracy Group strongly disagreed: "We should make war against poverty." Vice-President Sylvia-Yvonne Kaufmann of the European United Left said, Europe should "look deeper into the causes of conflicts and address them. It is too easy to send simply troops into conflicts."
The students also wanted to know whether the EU has "overstretched its own capacities with the latest big enlargement rounds". All MEPs, highlighted the benefits of a united Europe. Irena Belohorska, the only MEP of the round coming from a country that joined in 2004 stressed that she is "simply glad that we are today part of this community. We had to wait for such a long time."
Economic challenges of Europe
The social model and the economic challenges for an aging Europe, facing the increasing pressure of the emerging economies, notably China and India, was also a matter of concern for the young generation. Brian Crowley of the Union for the Nations (UEN) mentioned the immense successful Irish mixture of "state responsibility, participation and individual responsibility" that resulted in high wage and low unemployment.
Other MEPs highlighted the need for better education and said that only with more investment in education and innovation Europe will be able to maintain its power and prosperity. "But how is it that this priority for more education and innovation is not reflected in the EU budget?" one student pointed out - this may well be a question to be answered during the coming six-month presidency of Germany.
The Youth Forum was jointly organised by the European Parliament's German Information Office and the Bundestag.
20061220STO01665
EN
1
PHOTO
20061220PHT01681.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
