Thursday in plenary: energy, budget, driving licences
Institutions
2006-12-15 - 12:07
Energy policy was discussed by MEPs
On Thursday, the MEPs debated and voted on the future of the EU energy policy, as it tries to cope with the challenges of safety, competitiveness and sustainability. They also approved the EU budget for 2007 and voted a recommendation on personal data. Finally, they confirmed we could all start getting “credit-card” format driving licences from 2013.
MEPs approved a Green Paper on a "European Strategy for Sustainable, Competitive and Secure Energy".
The draft should set binding targets for 2020 that will:
reducing carbon dioxide emissions.
increasing the use of renewable energy sources (e.g. wind, water, solar energy, biomass) - by 25 per cent.
Decisions on the future of nuclear power must be taken by the EU countries individually but an Instrument for "Nuclear Safety and Security Assistance" (financial, economic and technical assistance) should be established.
MEPs call for EU strategy of sustainable transport energy use. In particular the:
the phasing out of fossil fuel.
a reduction in oil dependency.
a gradual introduction of clean energy. EU members are called to "to make the production and use of biofuels more attractive through the taxation and excise system ".
The aim of the EU is to make it he most energy efficient economy in the world by 2020:
As part of this consumers should have:
easy access to price and provider information.
an easy method of switching their energy provider.
a right to be heard by the regulators of the energy in each EU member.
Driving licences in "credit card" format for all
A report on a new driving licence format was adopted which will mean that from 2013, all newly issued or replacement driving licences will be in a single EU-wide credit card format replacing the more than 110 existing different models in EU members. In practice it will mean:
Limited administrative validity - 10 years (EU members can increase to up to 15).
Harmonising existing classes of vehicles.
Combating “driving licence tourism” (which means that banned drivers banned in one EU country are free to drive in the other states).
“Progressive access” for motorcycles: riders must accumulate experience on smaller motorcycles first.
The EU has now a budget for 2007
It is the first one to deal with a Union of 27 members, following the accession of Bulgaria & Romania on the 1st January. It means that:
Appropriations are set at €126.5bn, payments at €115.5bn, equalling 0.99 % of Gross National Income. It represents an increase of 3.2% over 2006 levels in payments.
The crux throughout the preparation has expenditure for the Common Foreign Security Policy - CFSP. Parliament managed to get a pledge from Council to be timely and adequately informed on all CFSP actions.
The money falls under several main headings: Sustainable growth, natural resources, Justice and Home Affairs, the EU as global partner, administration.
Parliament voices on use of personal data
Parliament also approved a recommendation to the Council for the rapid adoption of a framework decision on the protection of personal data processed in the framework of police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters.
MEPs anticipated an agreement that should be soon adopted within the Council, and declared themselves as "extremely concerned" at the direction taken by the debate in Council.
Members recalled their consultation report last 27 September, stating that data collection and access to national governments or competent authorities must be limited "to specific purposes", only "if strictly necessary", and carried out with the "principles of proportionality and necessity" and for the purpose of "preventing a threat to public security or to a person".
Sensitive data such us biometrics or DNA information should follow additional specific safeguards to ensure they are accurate and that they can be challenged by the subject of such data, insisted MEPs.
Another big concern was the potential access to personal data that authorities from third countries could ask in the name of fight against terror and organised crime. This issue deals with the use of “Passengers Names Records” (PNR) on transatlantic flights, as agreed between the US and Europe in October. Concerns of MEPs that data would be used wrongly by the US authorities
The rapporteur who guided it through Parliament, French Socialist MEP Martine Roure, said "we think that the fight against terrorism cannot be efficient if we treat each person as a potential criminal.."
20061215STO01565 Info energy: More budget Info Focus on the budget
EN
1
PHOTO
20061215PHT01573.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061208IPR01269 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207IPR01150 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061106FCS12347 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
