The Week Ahead - 22 - 28 January 2007
Institutions
2007-01-19 - 09:27
Committee week - Brussels
UN. The President of Parliament, Hans-Gert Poettering, receives United Nations Secretary General Ban Ki-moon (Wednesday) .
CIA. The temporary committee on illegal activities of the CIA has reached the end of its mandate and will adopt the final report completing its work over the last twelve months. The rapporteur, Claudio Fava (PES, IT) will hold a press conference (Tuesday) .
German presidency. Representatives of the German presidency of the EU will set out their work programmes to Parliament's committees (Monday-Thursday) .
Roaming. The Internal Market Committee and the Industry Committee are holding a joint hearing as part of discussions of a draft regulation on mobile phone roaming. This will be one of the biggest issues at Parliament in 2007 (Tuesday) .
Wine and spirits. The Agriculture Committee adopts a report on reform of the common market organisation for wine (Wednesday) . Ahead of a vote the following week, the Environment Committee will examine amendments to the "vodka" report on the definition and labelling of spirits (Tuesday) .
Foreign affairs. Two high-profile guests, Geoff Hoon and Benita Ferrero-Waldner, will discuss with members of the Foreign Affairs Committee a whole range of subjects, including Iraq, enlargement and the EU's neighbourhood policy (Tuesday) .
Air safety. The Transport Committee is expected to vote for the scope of the European Aviation Safety Agency to be broadened considerably (Tuesday) .
Gender equality. The Women's Rights Committee will vote on a "road map" aiming at equality between men and women in the years ahead. ( Wednesday ).
Committee office-holders. Please note that the elections of chairs and vice-chairs of parliamentary committees, initially scheduled for this week, have been postponed for some days.
20070119IPR02245 Agenda
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070400AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
