Professional football needs better governing rules, says EP Culture Committee
Sport
2007-01-30 - 12:00
Professional football in the EU needs better governing rules in many areas, from managing clubs' finances to recruiting young talent, the EP Committee on Culture and Education said on Monday. The socio-economic challenges facing soccer are too great for the football governing bodies to tackle alone, and the European Commission should propose solutions, it adds.
The key challenge is getting the rules clear, said the Culture Committee, in an own-initiative report on the future of professional football, drafted by Ivo Belet (EPP-ED, BE). Uncertainties stemming from a complicated legal environment that combines European and national laws with the rules of sports governing bodies have been accentuated by football's growing professionalisation and commercialisation over the past two decades.
Supporting football's governing bodies
The report's primary aim is therefore to support sports governing bodies - especially UEFA - in their efforts to improve self-regulation, for the benefit of the entire football sector. Football rules and procedures need to be guided by good governance principles such as transparency, representativeness and accountability, and measures taken should be proportional to the aim they are meant to achieve, says the Committee.
Football results, unlike rules, need to be less certain. The widening gap between top-end and smaller clubs has increasingly concentrated sporting success amongst a small number of clubs, and this threatens to erode the competitive balance and uncertainty of results which is the essence of an exciting sport, noted the Committee.
The report looks at governance in sport, employment rules, the economic importance of media rights, support for local young talents and hence the social and cultural role of football and football clubs. It highlights the need for action to combat crime, corruption, violence, racism and doping.
Recommendations
The Belet report calls on the European Commission to draw up an "action plan" for European sport in general and football in particular. It notes that although the EU has no specific legislative powers in this area, the EU treaties do contain a wide array of instruments that could serve such a plan, and says the Commission should specify the conditions under which legitimate and adequate self-regulation is supported. There was a strong support for Europe's "pyramid" model of football, which links all levels of professional and amateur sport through the principles of relegation and promotion and financial solidarity.
Committee members backed the UEFA club licensing system , which aims to ensure a level playing field for clubs and contribute to their financial stability. MEPs called on UEFA to further develop this system in order to guarantee financial transparency and proper management, and also recommended creating an independent supervisory body with the main purpose of monitoring the financial and commercial activities of European clubs.
Members also backed measures to promote young local talent, such as the UEFA "home-grown players" rule .
With regard to clubs which were giving contracts to children below 16 years of age, the Committee insisted that immigration law must always be respected in relation to the recruitment of young foreign talent.
Young players must be given the opportunity for a general education and vocational training , in parallel with their club and training activity, so that they do not entirely depend on the clubs.
Action is also needed to prevent the social exclusion of young people who were ultimately not given contracts by clubs.
With regard to racism, the Commission, the Member States and all those involved in professional football were asked to step up the fight against racism and xenophobia, inside and outside stadiums. UEFA and national football associations and leagues should apply disciplinary rules in a firm and co-ordinated matter, without neglecting the financial situations of clubs, said MEPs.
Committee on Culture and Education
Chair: Nikoaos Sifunakis (PES, EL)
Procedure: Own-initiative report -
Plenary vote: March II, Brussels
20070130IPR02568 Draft report on the future of professional football EP procedure file Culture Committee meeting documents
EN
1
LINK
/meetdocs/2004_2009/documents/pr/631/631110/631110en.pdf
EN
2
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5353822
EN
3
LINK
/meetdocs/2004_2009/organes/cult/cult_meetinglist.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
