MEPs debate German Presidency with Chancellor Merkel
Institutions
2007-01-17 - 17:28
Chancellor Merkel and new EP President Poettering
Chancellor Angela Merkel gave her first speech to the European Parliament as President-in-Office of the European Council. Chancellor Merkel highlighted the forthcoming Berlin Declaration to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the European Union and the need for tolerance. MEPs from the different political groups gave their reactions with fellow German Christian-Democrat Hans-Gert Poettering chairing the debate as the newly elected European Parliament President.
Speaking on behalf of the German presidency of the Council, Chancellor Angela MERKEL touched on broad questions relating to the essence and future of Europe as much as the practical detail of her government's work programme for the next six months. She reminded her audience that, having grown up in former East Germany, she had "up to the age of 35 seen the European Union from the outside". And seen from the outside the EU was "an unparalleled historic success", which had "secured freedom for the people of Europe and brought them prosperity". Now, seeing it from the inside, she found it even more attractive. In her view "there is no better place for us to live than our common European home". Yet people were now asking what Europe was about, how it should be defined. Jacques Delors had spoken of the need to "give Europe a soul" but Mrs Merkel believed Europe already had a soul, which was linked to its "tremendous diversity". She quoted the Czech writer Karel Čapek , who had said "The Creator made Europe small and even divided her, so that our hearts could find joy not in size but in diversity." But for diversity to exist, another quality was needed: freedom. And real freedom required respect for the freedom of others or, to use the famous quotation attributed to Voltaire, "I may disapprove of what you say but I will defend to the death your right to say it ". Ultimately, she believed, "Europe's soul is tolerance. Europe is the continent of tolerance". This lesson had taken a long time to learn and the worst period of "hatred, devastation and destruction" lay not so far in the past but this was all the more reason for Europe to promote the virtue of tolerance at home and abroad. The Chancellor referred to Lessing's story Nathan the Wise, a key text of the German Enlightenment which urges understanding between Christianity, Islam and Judaism. She, as a Christian, felt the finest moment in the play was when, seeking to overcome the gulf created by their differing beliefs, the Muslim simply says to the Jew "Be my friend". This "has always been and remains the great aim of European integration". The motto of her country's EU presidency was "Succeeding together" and indeed, to deal with the challenges of the 21st century, she believed "Europe can only succeed together". Moving on to her government's programme for its six months in office, Mrs Merkel spoke first of the urgent need for new groundrules to enable the EU to function properly. "I undertake to produce a roadmap by the end of the German presidency to enable the constitutional process to move towards completion", she said. This must be achieved by the next European Parliament elections in 2009. "Failure would be a historic let-down". On external policy, priorities would include Kosovo, the Middle East, Iran's nuclear programme, Afghanistan, the European Neighbourhood Policy, the Doha Round, the EU-US summit and a new partnership agreement with Russia. The EU also needed to be a trailblazer on climate change. And an EU-Africa summit was needed "to redefine our relations with Africa". To do all this, it was essential to have a European foreign minister, and "that is reason enough for a constitutional treaty". On internal policies, Mrs Merkel emphasised growth and jobs, including the Lisbon strategy. In connection with "better regulation", she proposed a "discontinuity principle", whereby any legislation not passed by the end of the European Parliament's term of office should lapse. "A cut-off point of this kind would lend even greater importance to the European Parliament elections", she argued and called on MEPs to support the idea. The Chancellor underlined the value of the triple presidency programme which has been devised by Germany, Portugal and Slovenia to cover the coming 18-month period, as a means of giving much-needed continuity to the EU's business. This led her to stress once again the importance of constitutional reform as a means of enabling the EU "to act in concert". She said an American academic, Richard Florida, had identified three ingredients as crucial to successful development in various parts of the world. These were "technology, talent and -tolerance!" "What good news for Europe!", said Mrs Merkel. Indeed, she added "Europe thrives on innovation, on scientific, technical, economic and social progress" and "Europe thrives on curiosity". Ultimately, "Europe without its outstanding power of innovation would not be the Europe that it is today". With a final quotation from the German writer Peter Prange, Mrs Merkel said "Everything we Europeans have ever achieved, we have done thanks to our internal contradictions, the eternal split in ourselves, the constant to-ing and fro-ing of opinion and counter-opinion, of idea and counter-idea, of thesis and antithesis". Concluding, she asked how Europe had managed, "after innumerable wars and endless suffering" to deal with these conflicts and contradictions within itself and produce something as magnificent as European integration over the last 50 years? Yes, the answer was "tolerance - that is the way we deal with our diversity. Why should it not continue to work for the next 50 years?" President of the European Commission - José Manuel BARROSO 2007 is a crucial year, the European Commission President BARROSO stated at the commencement of his speech to the House. The EU's 50th anniversary, he said, is a time to celebrate past achievements, and to build on those achievements for the benefit of a new generation of Europeans. A generation for whom Europe's original rationale is in the past, but for whom Europe can and does offer so much for the future. It is a happy coincidence, he continued, that the anniversary falls during the German Presidency. Many of the EU's core policies – the euro, cohesion, the internal market, enlargement – owe much to Germany. And after listening to Chancellor Merkel, it is clear that Germany's commitment to Europe remains as powerful as ever. The German Presidency, Mr Barroso stated, offers an opportunity to demonstrate why the European Union matters so much in the age of globalisation. Referring to the forthcoming March European Council, he stated that the Commission's proposals last week on energy and climate change form a central part of the Lisbon agenda for growth and jobs. What must be agreed at the European Council in March, he questioned. Firstly, the strategic goal of agreement by developed countries to cut their emissions by 30% by 2020, essential to ensure that global temperatures exceed pre-industrial levels by no more than 2°C. Europe must continue to lead, he stressed, and to provide an incentive for others to follow. " The leadership comes with the EU commitment now to at least a 20% cut in emissions by 2020; the incentive by making clear that we will go further if others join us. It is, after all, global warming not European warming." Secondly, three pillars to deliver the objectives of sustainable, secure and competitive energy. A single market in practice as well as on paper, to give real choice to EU energy users and to trigger investment. This will require a clearer separation of energy production from energy distribution, and stronger independent regulatory control with a European dimension. The Commission also makes proposals on improved interconnections, on transparency, and on a new Customers' Energy Charter. A 20% target for energy efficiency by 2020, with detailed proposals for how to get there. A new drive for clean energy, through a binding commitment to triple renewable energy use by 2020; a 50% annual increase in the energy research budget; and commitments to advance clean hydrocarbon technology. There is, he said, a role for the European Institute of Technology in this. It is essential to hear Parliament's voice on these issues in the run up to the March European Council. The EU could find no better way to launch its anniversary than by showing its ambitions for the future. Continuing, Mr Barroso stated that the Berlin Declaration is an opportunity for the Member States to commit themselves to the values and aims of the European Union. It must look forward and deliver a political statement about the Europe for the next fifty years. It must fully involve the Parliament and the Commission. It provides an opportunity for the twelve Member States that joined in 2004 and 2007 to contribute, as full members, to the vision of an EU common future. It is appropriate that the Declaration for the future of Europe will be signed in Berlin, the symbol of a reunited Europe. What should this Declaration say? Today's leaders, Mr Barroso stated, should stand on the shoulders of the founding fathers, and look ahead to the next 50 years, to the challenges which could not be imagined in 1957 but which Europe must face in 2007. Put simply, to equip Europeans for globalisation, in a Europe of open economies, open societies, in a Europe which must engage with citizens, not ignore them. A Europe built on citizens' consent has solid foundations. A Europe which does not work for that consent is built on sand. Mr Barroso listed five concrete proposals for the Declaration:
Solidarity. An enlarged and open Europe requires greater cohesion – social cohesion as well as economic.
Sustainability. The fight against climate change, through energy and other policies, should be a defining mission for Europe's future.
Accountability. Transparency and access to information should become not only rights for European citizens but also obligations for Europe's institutions.
Security. Europe must guarantee the security of its citizens whilst preserving fundamental freedoms.
Promote Europe's values in the world, as well as its interests. Sustainability, accountability, solidarity, security cannot, indeed must not stop at Europe's borders.
In conclusion, Mr Barroso stated that what is needed by the end of this Presidency is a common road map towards an institutional settlement, before the next European elections in 2009. But, he stated, a road map is not all that is required.. "We need the settlement; to clear the clouds of doubt which hang over parts of Europe, to show vitality and confidence to our partners, and to make the European Union more transparent, more effective and more democratic. As I have said before, Nice is not enough. We cannot build tomorrow's Europe with yesterday's tools. We have a great opportunity to start changing that in the next six months. Let us go to work." Political group speakers The "pro-European" approach inherent in all Chancellor Merkel's proposals, on everything from climate change to international trade and relations with the USA, was warmly praised by Joseph DAUL (FR), newly-elected chairman of the EPP-ED group. The challenges facing it mean that "Europe must have an effective decision-making mechanism soon", he said, promising his group's support in the search "for a new dynamic that will allow us to acquire the tools we need to move forward". He advised Mrs Merkel to seek a balance between the 18 countries that have ratified the EU's draft constitution and those that have not, pointing out that a long list of ambitions that once appeared illusory, including the fall of communism and the reunification of Europe, have in fact been achieved. "The only lost battles are those that you don't engage" he said. Mr Daul stressed the need for the EU to respect subsidiarity, but at the same time to defend strategic common positions, for example vis-à-vis Russia, with a single voice. He saw the Rome Treaty's 50th anniversary as an opportunity to reiterate the Union's common values, and its reasons to stand shoulder to shoulder. Here politicians - and the media - have a duty to "convey a clear vision of the future", he concluded. Socialist group chairman Martin SCHULZ (DE) had also found Chancellor Merkel's speech "inspiring", and shared her views on tolerance, freedoms and beliefs. However, "freedom from social threats is a prerequisite for all other freedoms". Technology, talent and tolerance are not enough. As "social security is a vital facet of freedom", the EU must do something to guarantee it, he said. On the draft constitution, Mr Schulz cited the 18 ratifications - and President Barroso's reference to the need for a summit on this issue - as evidence of a shared desire to move forward. However, he also stressed the need to focus on the draft's core elements, and to assess the likely social effects of legislation. EU energy policy requires partnerships with supplier countries, but also more effort to save energy, he said, welcoming Germany's decision to abandon nuclear energy and hoping that other EU Member States would do likewise. Mr Schulz voiced the Socialist group's support for Mrs Merkel's proposals on Africa and the Middle East. The spirit of Europe is one of common endeavour, he concluded, noting that though it is often hard to build a sense of common purpose, "the alternative is hate and war". Graham WATSON (ALDE, UK), speaking for the Liberal group, welcomed the "bold programme" of the Presidency and congratulating Chancellor Merkel, he called for more emphasis on steps to improve the competitiveness of the EU's economy. He noted that in the German Presidency's programme "solidarity" appears more often that "competitiveness". Mr Watson went on to say that free markets are the answer to Europe's energy problems. On Justice and Home Affairs issues he said his Group would watch closely, and that he was deeply concerned about the "repressive aspects of your policies" - in particular the mention of "data collection" but not of "data protection". On foreign policy he called for the EU to be "more coherent" and on plans to revive the Constitution he said "I wish you every success" but doubted conditions were right for progress in London, Paris or Warsaw. On the theme of tolerance Cristiana MUSCARDINI (UEN, IT) said that "we have a Charter of Rights, now we need a Charter of duties" for citizens but "above all for institutions". She said tolerance meant looking at things through other people's eyes and that the EU should show greater generosity both "inside and outside". The fact that Angela Merkel is the first President in Office born behind the Iron Curtain was a "good augury" said Ms Muscardini. On the Constitution she said that "political leadership" came from the Council and the Parliament and "we must open this debate in Parliament". On energy she declared herself "alarmed" at developments and warned against bilateral Treaties with suppliers like Russia. On Africa she called for the EU to support legitimate governments and for people to have "more information" so people can see what is happening. Finally, Mrs Muscardini made a plea for action against paedophiles. Daniel COHN-BENDIT (Greens/EFA, DE) began by telling the Chancellor that "we Greens share your youthful romanticism about Europe. Nonetheless, we also have a sort of youthful impatience ..[..].. What happens next?" He went on to agree that the Nice Treaty is not enough, but emphasised that "We don't want another IGC of that kind." He informed the Chancellor that if she was suggesting that the Constitution goes back to "secret huddles in smoke-filled room", that is not what people want. He pointed out that the challenge to be faced by the Chancellor was how to oblige the Governments and the diplomats to make their decisions out in the open. Mr Cohn-Bendit referred to his dream of the Chancellor and Ségolène Royal proceeding "hand in hand, cheek to cheek" as they herald a new age of more diversity, more women. He stated that what Mrs Merkel has brought to Germany, Mrs Royal can bring to France. With regard to the challenges in the Middle East, Mr Cohn-Bendit suggested that a regional conference should be organised on an issue such as water. In this way, a climate of confidence could be built on the basis of specific issues. Mr Cohn-Bendit concluded by saying to the Chancellor that "we share your opinion on Europe but we have to argue about how we're going to take it forward." Francis WURTZ (GUE/NGL, FR) mentioned that the future of the Constitution would be among the many great responsibilities which the Chancellor will have during the German Presidency. He said however "Let us beware of falling into the trap of self-congratulation." He went on to caution against making general sweeping statements about controversial issues, pointing out that "This will fuel the flames of scepticism." At this point, Mr Wurtz stated that "what we need is an open, frank, fair discussion" with all the people of Europe and he pointed out that the current problems facing the EU are not French or Dutch in origin but European. In conclusion, Mr Wurtz quoted Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels in relation to the German Presidency and the future direction of the EU, stating that "the proof of the pudding is in the eating." Nigel FARAGE (IND/DEM, GB) began by stating that "We've witnessed the beginning of a dishonest and downright dangerous German Presidency." He pointed out that the proposals in relation to the future of the Constitution are "an insult to the French and the Dutch". This, he said is "a classic example of the new phenomenon ..[..].. of EU nationalism." Mr Farage suggested that failure to allow the people of Europe to have "the freedom to determine their own future" will breed and create the very intolerance, etc. that the Chancellor referred to in her speech. He concluded by stating "for goodness sake, let the people speak." Andreas MÖLZER (ITS, AT) stated that it is the 'elevated political class' in many EU countries which is in favour of the Constitution and not the 'sovereign people'. He suggested that a return to the Constitution is not possible and that "there is a political deficit to be dealt with first." Mr Mölzer went on to say that "We don't want a Constitutional monster. What we want is co-decision on important things - on things like migration and unemployment." He stated that "What we want to do is prevent the accession of Turkey" and concluded by saying that something must be done about mass illegal immigration into the South of Europe. Hans-Peter MARTIN (NI, AT), speaking on behalf of the non-attached MEPs, said that Chancellor Merkel "deserved a great deal of respect for what you have achieved during your life". He called on Chancellor Merkel to be bold and concentrate on the democratic legitimacy of the EU. As Roman Herzog put it "Europe he said can not function without democratic legitimacy." He ended by calling on Chancellor Merkel "not to bypass the people". British and Irish speakers Timothy KIRKHOPE (EPP-ED, UK), leader of the British Conservative Delegation, began by congratulating Chancellor Merkel on the early meeting with the American President. For too long, he said, there has been an apparent schism between Europe and the United States, and it was time to move things in the right direction. You are, he said, laying some solid ground work for future cooperation. Mr Kirkhope also welcomed some of the key measures outlined in the Presidency work programme – the emphasis on economic reform, the need for less regulation and also the emphasis on the fight to combat climate change. Mr Kirkhope said :"as a British Conservative, needless to say I do not welcome the emphasis on resurrecting the European Constitution. I think that this could reinforce a sense of alienation within Europe and I think that would be unhelpful and would complicate matters at a time when we need to make some progress." Speaking in Irish, Bairbre DE BRÚN (GUE/NGL, UK) said that her group would continue to work to ensure that Irish gained full and equal status. She expressed concern that the German Presidency would focus on the ratification of the Constitutional Treaty which showed "a disregard" for the democratic results in France and the Netherlands. Rather, the presidency should focus on tackling inequality, poverty and racism as well as strengthening the social welfare of Europe. Ms de Brún also stressed the importance of defending civil liberties, human rights, fair trade and working to combat global inequalities. Finally, Ms de Brún called on the German Presidency to listen to the voices of European citizens. Andrew DUFF (ALDE, UK) said that for the German Presidency to succeed in resolving the crisis, it will have to demand and expect the faithful support from all the Member States. He said: "Do you agree that the recent Spanish-Luxembourg proposal to coral the 18 Member States in a separate process will not only accentuate the division between the two camps, but also expose brutally the wide division among the 18 themselves? Will you please discourage such an initiative?" Chancellor Merkel's response Responding to the debate, Chancellor MERKEL said that on the constitutional treaty, Mr Cohn-Bendit was wrong to portray the Council as a dark chamber compared to the bright light of Parliament. MEPs were a vital link in creating public opinion, she said, but people in democratically elected governments also knew how that should act. She was not a great enthusiast for referendums, but she was clear that it was for each Member State to legitimise a treaty in its own way. “The starting point is the existing treaty, I am sceptical about getting consensus on something else,” she said. It was paradoxical that a treaty which increased clarity, participation and subsidiarity had been opposed by the very people who argued in favour of such causes, she said. Those in favour of further enlargement of the EU had to realise that scepticism about the constitutional process would prevent Europe from moving forward with enlargement. She asked the sceptics to think again. On climate change and energy, she said many of Mr Barroso's proposals were absolutely correct, and that she would work to get a specific response to them from the 8-9 March meeting of the European Council. A joint energy policy was, she said, a step in the direction of the constitution's proposals. While the EU had been founded around coal and steel, the key issues now were energy efficiency, energy security and energy foreign policy. With a view to climate change, she called for more support for renewables, energy efficiency and biofuels. She expressed her personal support for nuclear power, while noting that there would be differing views on this. On the whole matter of energy policy, she said: “We need to act together, not go it alone.” Turning to economics and social policy, she said Europe would not be Europe without the social welfare state, but it would take hard work to preserve the achievements in this field. “Our experience in Germany is that the way forward is through reconciling capital and labour, not playing one off against the other.” On justice and home affairs matters, she acknowledged that it was difficult to reach the right balance between data protection and exchange of information. She was not in line with the ALDE group on this, she said, but there it was an essential debate. Regarding bureaucracy and better regulation, she said the Member States knew what they had to do, but also said that the acquis communautaire had expanded over the years, and it was time to see if some of it could be modernised or merged: “Europe must learn from its bureaucratic past and become more attractive,” she said. Commission President Barroso's response In his response to the debate, Mr BARROSO agreed with those who had called for Europe to speak with a single voice on external energy relations, but “to do this we cannot go on speaking with 27 voices internally.” An integrated energy market was essential to have a coherent energy policy. As well as being important in itself, energy was a powerful driver for the European project, as it had been at the time of the Coal and Steel Community or the Euratom treaty. Moreover, “climate change is one of the most important challenges of the 21st century – perhaps the most important.” On constitutional matters, he said no-one was really proposing a centralised European superstate, but “the European dimension is an indispensable one to meet the challenges of the 21st century.” Even the largest European countries alone could not meet these challenges. One area where less should be done was bureaucracy, he said. Better regulation was needed to improve conditions for businesses and citizens. “Working in the spirit of partnership,” he concluded, “we can achieve real results during these six months, and should look forward to the next 50 years with hope and pride.”
20070117IPR02173 German Presidency of the European Union
EN
1
PHOTO
20070117PHT02132.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.eu2007.de/en/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
