EP calls for tougher rules on arms trade
Security and defence
2007-01-18 - 12:06
The Parliament adopted a report with 504 votes in favour, 24 against and 34 abstentions calling for the continuation of the arms embargo against China, a legally binding implementation of the EU's Code of Conduct on Arms Exports, and demanding stronger EU support for an international Arms Trade Treaty. The own-initiative report by Raül ROMEVA I RUEDA (Greens/EFA, ES) "finds it unacceptable that no steps have been taken to adopt the Code as a Common Position."
It also urges Member States "to keep under constant review the human rights situation in arms importing countries," and to "agree on a list of countries involved in armed conflicts to which arms exports should be banned in principle."
Specifically, the House "considers that the embargo imposed on China should not be lifted until there is a clear and lasting improvement in the situation regarding human rights and social and political freedoms." Members also expressed "deep concern at the blatant violation of the arms embargo by all parties to the Darfur conflict."
Seeking to extend the scope of the Code, the report "calls for the EU to consider [...] steps to extend the 1998 EU Code of Conduct so that it covers private security companies," and "calls on the Council and the Commission to include in their further negotiations concerning developments in relation to the European Neighbourhood Policy and the Partnership and Cooperation Agreements the question of adherence to all EU embargoes on trade in arms."
Finally, the European Parliament conveyed its support for more international legislation in the area, by calling "on the EU Presidency and Member States to match their declaratory diplomacy in favour of an international Arms Trade Treaty with assertive and determined action [...] to establish an effective, legally binding international Arms Trade Treaty laying down minimum global standards for arms transfers." Such an initiative is in its beginning stages at the UN General Assembly.
20070112IPR01911
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
