Fighting terrorism while respecting fundamental rights: mission impossible?
Justice and home affairs
2006-12-07 - 15:17
The tragic Madrid train bombings of March 2004 preceded the start of Parliament's sixth legislative term. But new terrorist attacks on London public transport in July 2005 came as a powerful reminder that EU Member States must step up co-operation in the fight against terrorism. Parliament has since voiced its concern at the lack of operational police and judicial co-operation and co-ordination needed to prevent attacks. However, MEPs are also worried about potential threats to citizens' rights caused by the fight against terrorism: personal data protection is arguably already a casualty.
MEPs believe that the fight against terrorism must respect individual liberties, so as not to jeopardise the core values of European democracy. This has been their message on every dossier that they have handled in this area, from the EU-US "Passenger Name Record" (PNR) agreement on the transfer of air passengers' personal data, through call data retention by telephone companies (new directive that took effect in March 2006), to the exchange of bank transfer data (draft framework decision, SWIFT case). In parallel, Parliament agreed to an extension of the money laundering directive to include the financing of terrorism.
20061201TMN00886
Air Passenger Data: not a closed chapter
The European Court of Justice ruled, in May 2006, that a May 2004 EU-US agreement on the transfer of personal data by air carriers to the US authorities was illegal (inter alia because the EU's 1995 Directive on personal data privacy does not empower the Commission to address public and state security issues) and must be replaced by a new one before 30 September 2006. Since this ruling, Parliament has done its utmost to ensure that future agreements properly protect personal information exchanged and reduce the use and storage time of passenger name records (PNR), to what is strictly necessary.
Although the new agreement signed in October 2006 still does not satisfy most MEPs, Parliament managed to persuade the EU Council of Ministers and US Administration that it should be made to expire in July 2007, so they can meanwhile continue working on a wider approach and achieve a final agreement - with better standards of data protection - to replace the temporary one from August 2007 onwards.
The content of the temporary agreement ended up being similar to that annulled by the European Court of Justice this year, except that, in addition, it might enable the US Homeland Security Department "and other agencies" dealing with the fight on terrorism to access personal data, something which does not please MEPs.
Yet MEPs have limited room for manoeuvre: Parliament had already advised against the initial EU-US PNR agreement before its signature in May 2004 but, in accordance with the treaties and the Court ruling, decisions relating to PNR transfers are made by governments, together with the European Commission.
For the long term, the Chamber proposes, in a report adopted in September 2006, a "more coherent approach towards the exchange of passenger data". MEPs want the Council to give Parliament full co-decision rights on such issues, so they can ensure robust protection for personal data. Such a change would mean invoking the so-called "passerelle" clause of the Treaty, which allows the Council, by unanimous decision, to move policy areas from decision making by unanimity in Council and consultation of Parliament to qualified majority voting in Council and co-decision in Parliament. PNR agreement with the USA: EP procedure file
Retention of call data by telephone companies
In December 2005 Parliament agreed with Council on a draft directive on data retention at its first reading. The text aimed to facilitate judicial co-operation in criminal matters by approximating Member States' legislation on the retention of data processed by telecommunications companies. It covers traffic and location data generated by telephony, SMS and internet, but not the content of the information communicated.
The new EU Directive (2006/24/EC, of 15 March 2006), will help national authorities to track down possible criminals and terrorists by granting them access to a list of all telephone calls, SMS or Internet connections made by suspects during the previous few months. The final text includes EP amendments that restrict the use of retained data and ensure that the future law fully respects the privacy of the telephone and internet users.
On the purpose of the Directive, MEPs agreed on the need to retain data for the detection, investigation and prosecution of crime, but only for “specified forms” of serious criminal offences (terrorism and organised crime), and not for the mere “prevention” of all kinds of crime, as originally proposed by the Council. MEPs also added a provision for “effective, proportionate and dissuasive” penal sanctions for the companies who fail to store the data or misuse the retained information. Data retention: EP procedure file Data retention Directive 2006/24/EC
Privacy rights need to be respected by bankers and policemen too
In another report, on a separate legislative proposal, the European Parliament endorsed a Commission plan to extend data protection rules to cover the transfer of information in cross-border police and judicial co-operation. Such transfers are a Member State competence and hence have so far been excluded from the scope of Community data protection rules. MEPs inserted over 60 non-binding amendments aiming to limit access to and the use of personal data to "essential" cases, in which there is a real threat to public security. This proposal, which has yet to be adopted by the Council, reflects one of Parliament's long-standing wishes.
Controversy over how to fight terrorism whilst protecting personal data was rekindled in June 2006, when it emerged that SWIFT, a Belgian company that manages information on bank transfers around the world, had been subpoenaed by the US government in 2001 for data that might be useful in the fight against terrorism. Since then it has been passing data to US authorities. Parliament passed a resolution calling for a public hearing on that issue, which finally took place on 4 October in the presence of SWIFT's Chief Financial Officer. Precisely who knew about this practice and understood its legal implications for Europeans' personal bank data was an issue fiercely debated at the hearing. Data protection rules: EP procedure file MEPs hear of data protection concerns over SWIFT
Money laundering directive to cover financing of terrorism
In May 2005, Parliament gave its backing in first reading to a Commission proposal for a directive aiming to revise the current EU "money laundering" Directive so that it also covers the financing of terrorism.
However, MEPs did insert amendments to define more clearly the responsibilities of financial institutions, lawyers, insurance agents and others involved in money laundering or the funding of terrorism.
Under the new Directive (2005/60/EC, of 20 September 2005), banks, credit companies and other financial institutions will have to check a customer's identity when they open an account or whenever the customer carries out a transaction of €15,000 or more. Anonymous accounts and those opened under false names will be banned. Casinos shall also identify those customers gambling more than €2000. Extending "money laundering" Directive to cover financing of terrorism: EP procedure file Money laundering Directive 2005/60/EC
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5368872
EN
2
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5275032
EN
3
LINK
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/site/en/oj/2006/l_105/l_10520060413en00540063.pdf
EN
4
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5279032
EN
6
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5207062
EN
7
LINK
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/site/en/oj/2005/l_309/l_30920051125en00150036.pdf
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061002IPR11291 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 TMN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 TMN DOC XML V0//EN
