REACH: reducing dangers of chemicals without penalising industry
Environment
2006-12-07 - 18:20
After three years of discussion with the Commission and Member States, the European Parliament finalised one of the most important pieces of legislation in its history in December 2006. The draft regulation on REACH (Registration, Evaluation and Authorisation of CHemicals) was approved at second reading by an overwhelming majority. MEPs had pushed hard to hammer out a compromise with the Council that reflected their main demands. These included the substitution of the most hazardous substances where alternatives exist, recognition of a duty of care by manufacturers and the promotion of alternatives to animal testing.
Modern society needs chemical products and the chemicals industry is crucial to the EU economy. However, the production and use of these substances involve risks for human health and the environment. Chemicals are suspected of being partly responsible for the increase in a range of ailments (allergies, asthma, some forms of cancer and reproductive problems). But information on the subject is inadequate because the substances they contain have not been properly evaluated.
The REACH project, unveiled by the European Commission on 29 October 2003, sought to replace around 40 existing legislative texts. The aim is to gather more data on the safety of around 30,000 substances that were placed on the market before 1981 - the year since which formal applications for authorisation have been required - and are manufactured or imported in quantities of over one tonne per year. Of these products, around 3000 hazardous substances must now be subject to a strict authorisation procedure - with no guarantee that they will be able to remain on the market.
REACH seeks to improve protection of human health and the environment while making Europe's chemicals industry more competitive. It is the fruit of many years of negotiations between the European Parliament, the Member States represented by the Council, and the European Commission. This project has also been the focus of intense lobbying on behalf of the industry's economic and commercial interests on the one hand, and NGOs campaigning in the name of consumers and the environment on the other. In its ambition, scope and technical complexity, REACH is one of the most important pieces of legislation ever examined by the European Parliament. No fewer thatn 10 parliamentary committees were involved and the text, which exceeded 1000 pages at first reading in November 2005, was still 750 pages long at the end.
REACH enters into force by stages from 1 June 2007.
20061201TMN00884
First reading: emerging consensus on registration, no agreement on authorisation
The positions of Parliament and the Council were far apart at the beginning but the gap closed considerably at first reading, although at this stage the two sides still differed over several key points.
The EP voted in November 2005 on the basis of a compromise hammered out between Mr Sacconi and the shadow rapporteurs of the EPP-ED and ALDE groups. The Council, which adopted its common position in June 2006, accepted around 180 of the EP's 430 amendments to the Commission proposal.
The amendments taken on board by the Council chiefly concerned new rules on the registration of chemicals . Under the new regulation, the amount of data to be provided will depend on the hazardousness of the substance, the amount of the substance produced or imported and the degree of exposure to the substance. The principle of "one substance, one registration" (OSOR) will require companies to lodge joint applications for registration and swap information on substances. Opt-outs exist to allow companies not to swap information but these must be properly justified. A more flexible registration procedure was also agreed for substances produced or imported in small amounts (less than 10 tonnes per year), unless they are potentially hazardous. For substances produced or imported in amounts greater than 10 tonnes, companies may be exempted from safety tests if they can show that the risks to health posed by these substances can be "adequately controlled".
The main point of disagreement was the authorisation of the most hazardous substances. Under REACH, a special authorisation procedure must be used for the most dangerous substances, particularly if they are persistent, bioaccumulative and toxic (PTBs), very persistent and very bioaccumulative (vPvBs) or cancerous, mutagenic or toxic to reproduction (CMRs).
The EP adopted a tough stance from the outset, demanding the substitution of these substances where less harmful substitutes exist, as well as limiting authorisations to five years in order to encourage innovation. The Council opted for less strict conditions, providing for dangerous substances (except PTBs, vPvBs and CMRs) to be authorised if they have been subject to "adequate control" and stipulating that the length of authorisations should be decided case by case.
At first reading, Parliament and Council also agreed to beef up the role of the European Chemicals Agency , to be established in Helsinki, particularly regarding the evaluation of applications for registration. However, their views differed over the composition of the agency and its position vis-à-vis national authorities.
Main points of the second-reading compromise between EP and Council
The EP Environment Committee took a firm stance again at its second-reading vote on 10 October 2006. Basically following the recommendations of its rapporteur Guido Sacconi, it voted, by a large majority, to reinstate most of its amendments from first reading which had not been accepted by the Member States. Apart from the substitution of the most hazardous substances, the amendments related to the operators' "duty of care", a compulsory chemical safety report for chemicals in amounts of less than 10 tonnes and the promotion of alternatives to animal testing.
A series of trialogues - EP, Council and Commission - ensued to thrash out an agreement at second reading so that REACH could be implemented swiftly. The talks were successfully concluded on 30 November with a compromise which was accepted by four of Parliament's political groups (EPP-ED, PES, ALDE and UEN) and subsequently approved in plenary on 13 December 2006 by 529 votes to 98, with 24 abstentions. The main points of the agreement were as follows:
- Authorisation of hazardous substances
For the most dangerous substances , producers are required to submit a substitution plan to replace them with safer alternatives. Where no alternative exists, producers have to present a research and development plan aimed at finding one.
Endocrine disruptors must be subject to adequate control. However, u nder a review clause it will be decided after six years, on the basis of the latest scientific data and in the light of an analysis of their socio-economic costs and benefits, whether they should be included in a list of substances which require express authorisation.
- Registration of substances
The Commission must decide in 12 years' time whether or not to recommend extending the requirement for chemical safety reports for substances produced or imported in amounts of less than 10 tonnes per year. This deadline was shortened to seven years for cancerous or mutagenic substances or those toxic to reproduction.
The intellectual property provisions were strengthened, with data protection extended from three to six years.
- Duty of care
As MEPs wanted, the regulation is based on the principle that the manufacture, import and placing on the market of substances must be carried out "with such responsibility and care as may be required to ensure that, under reasonably foreseeable conditions, human health and the environment are not adversely affected".
- Animal welfare
The promotion of alternatives to the animal testing of chemicals, an issue of prime concern to MEPs, is now included among the goals of REACH. To avoid duplication of tests already performed on animals, interested parties will have 45 days to state their views before any new project involving animal tests. Alternative methods must be validated by the Commission, once recognised by the agency, or international institutions. The Commission must submit a report every three years on the use of alternative tests and, if necessary, make fresh legislative proposals.
- Agency
Two members of the Helsinki-based European Chemicals Agency must be appointed by Parliament and the Executive Director must undergo a hearing with MEPs before his/her appointment is confirmed. However, Parliament's demands for guarantees of the independence of the agency's members vis-à-vis industry and the publication of declarations of interest were not accepted.
- Communication of information
A clause was added on the duty to inform the public about dangerous substances contained in products. The distribution chain, including consumers who request it, must be informed of the presence of any chemical in an amount greater than 0.1% of the total product weight. The Commission must examine the possibility of establishing a European quality mark for chemical products. REACH: EP procedure file Act published in the Official Journal: Regulation (EC) No 1907/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 18 December 2006 concerning the Registration, Evaluation, Authorisation and Restriction of Chemicals (REACH)
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=237952&noticeType=null&language=en
EN
2
LINK
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/site/en/oj/2006/l_396/l_39620061230en00010849.pdf
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 TMN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 TMN DOC XML V0//EN
