€54 billion boost for EU scientific research 2007-2013
Research and innovation
2006-12-06 - 11:51
In November 2006 the European Parliament and Council agreed at the second reading on the EU’s Seventh Framework Research Programme (FP7), its main instrument for funding scientific research, which enters into force, as planned, on 1.1.2007. The programme runs for seven years from 2007 to 2013 and has a total budget (European Community and Euratom) of more than €54 billion. The European Parliament strongly backed the programme from the outset and made every effort to speed it through the legislative process, but also insisted on shifting some of the spending towards its own priorities, including research on renewable energy and energy efficiency. It also insisted on encouraging participation in FP7 of small and medium-sized firms (SMEs), and on boosting the position of young researchers and women in science. The proposed creation of a European Research Council - a new instrument to support investigator-driven “frontier research” - was welcomed by the Parliament who wants to guarantee it enjoys real autonomy.
FP7 is designed to build on the achievements of its predecessor programme by helping to create a world-leading European Research Area, the equivalent of a "common market" for research, and carry it further towards the development of the knowledge economy and society in Europe. This demands a clear focus on promoting and investing in world-class research .
Simpler instruments and procedures for funding and participation are a feature of FP7, which will promote collaborative research based on broad research areas, with much continuity from FP6 plus two new topics, space and security. Only projects involving several partners from different countries will be financed. The programme's funds are not general subsidies to research organisations or companies: they may only be used for specific work or research projects.
20061201TMN00896
Parliament's Role
The European Parliament is involved via the co-decision procedure in the elaboration of FP7 and the participation rules and is consulted on the Euratom part and on the different specific programmes.
The second reading compromise put to the plenary vote on 30 November 2006 makes no major changes to the structure, content or operational arrangements set out in the Commission’s proposal. The Commission's first draft of FP7 was nonetheless modified in some respects during the co-decision procedure between Parliament and the Council of Ministers.
Many of Parliament's first-reading amendments were taken on board in the Council's common position, adopted on 25 September 2006, inter alia on encouraging the participation of small and medium-sized firms, boosting the position of young researchers and women in science, and how to deal with stem cell research. The 39 new compromise amendments on which Parliament voted on 30 November 2006 deal with other issues that MEPs still wished to emphasise, including Parliament's priorities, the structure of the European Research Council and the proposed Risk Sharing Facility. Members also stress that no money from FP7 should be used to finance the proposed European Institute of Technology.
Ten key areas - Parliament's priorities
Of the total budget, over €32 billion is being allocated to ten key areas: Health; Food, Agriculture, Fisheries and Biotechnology; Information and Communication Technologies; Nanosciences, Nanotechnologies, Materials and new Production Technologies; Energy; Environment (including Climate Change); Transport (including Aeronautics); Socio-economic Sciences and the Humanities; Security and Space.
Parliament played a crucial role in improving and redefining these categories. In its Common Position the Council accepted Parliament' first-reading amendments, thus ensuring that at least 15% of the funding would be reserved for small and medium-sized enterprises whose participation in FP7 will be encouraged. Secondly, MEPs clarified the programme and extended the scope of certain key areas. MEPs also inserted amendments to improve the position of young researchers and women in science and reduce the "brain drain".
In the compromise put to the vote on 30 November 2006, MEPs seek to shift some of the spending towards Parliament's own priorities, including research on renewable energy and energy efficiency, possible funding for research on children's health, respiratory diseases (including those induced by allergies), plus research into neglected diseases. The compromise states that renewables and end-use energy efficiency will account for the "major part" of the budget of FP7's energy theme - rather than the two thirds proposed in Parliament's first reading.
European Research Council
The compromise also includes amendments concerning the European Research Council - a new body to support investigator-driven “frontier research”.
The European Parliament welcomed the proposed creation of a European Research Council at the first reading, but wanted to be sure that the ERC enjoys real autonomy. On the issue of the extent to which the Parliament should be involved in an interim evaluation of the ERC's structure, it was agreed, that the co-decision procedure would be used if changes in the structure of the ERC become necessary. It was further agreed that the ERC's administration costs should not exceed 5% of its total budget, so as to maximise funding for frontier research.
Ethical principles
Ethical issues were of great concern to all those involved in adopting the programme, with opinions varying sharply. At Parliament's first reading, MEPs adopted a compromise that could in principle be accepted by Ministers in the Common Position (although several Member States opposed it).
Parliament and Council agreed that all research activities under FP7 shall be carried out in compliance with fundamental ethical principles. Certain research fields will not be eligible for Community funding, e.g. research intended to create human embryos solely for the purpose of research or the purpose of stem cell procurement.
Research on the use of human stem cells, both adult and embryonic, may be funded, depending both on the content of the scientific proposal and the legal framework of the Member State(s) involved. As regards the use of human embryonic stem cells, institutions, organisations and researchers must be subject to strict licensing and control in accordance with the legal framework of the Member State(s) involved.
In addition, the Commission has made it clear that it will maintain the practice adopted during FP 6 and excluding the activities of destroying human embryos, including for the procurement of stem cells, from Community financial support under FP7.
Budget
The overall budget planned for FP7 in the Financial Perspective for 2007 to 2013 is €54 582 million at current prices. Of this, €50 521 million is allocated for the European Community programme and €2 751 million for Euratom programme which runs from 2007 to 2011. A further €1 310 million is indicatively planned for the Euratom programme for 2012-2013, but this will need to be confirmed at a later stage.
Participation rules
A first reading agreement was reached on the implementing rules for participation of undertakings, research centres and universities in activity under FP7. The overall aim of this compromise is to simplify the rules. The amendments adopted by Parliament clarify certain concepts and definitions, introduce the main principles and criteria for evaluating proposals and awarding grants, raise the upper funding limit for security-related research and technological development activities from 50 % to 75 %, introduce the idea of a guarantee fund, define the role of the co-ordinator and specify the concept of direct and indirect eligible costs.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 TMN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 TMN DOC XML V0//EN
