Address to MEPs by Mr Traian Băsescu, President of Romania
Institutions
2007-01-31 - 18:16
European Parliament President Poettering welcomed the Romanian President Traian Băsescu to the house. Mr Poettering welcomed the 35 Romanian MEPs, who since 1 January 2007 are full Members of the House, and also welcomed Romania and the Romanian people to the European Union.
President of Romania Mr Traian Băsescu began by congratulating EP President Hans-Gert Poettering and leading Members on their recent appointments, and then thanked Parliament as a whole, and especially outgoing EP President Josep Borrell Fontelles, for its support for Romania throughout the accession process.
Economic and political situation improving
"Since 1998, Romanian citizens have been able to speak freely", and at that time, they freely expressed the wish to join the EU, noted Mr Băsescu. Today, despite a long and difficult accession process, 67% of Romanians still back the EU, and look to its co-operative model to deliver on their goals, he said, adding that their optimism is refreshing at a time of widespread scepticism about the Union.
Yet accession is just the start - Romania's true integration will take sustained effort to deliver economic growth, modern infrastructure, efficient institutions, a reliable justice system, and a clean environment - in short, living standards that are comparable with those of other EU citizens, said Mr Băsescu.
Romania has made considerable progress since the 1990s: judges are independent, ministers accountable, public finances and procurement more transparent, orphanages are improving and Roma people are being integrated, but there is still some way to go.
National average income for Romanian workers is still only €328, rural development is a big challenge (large percentage of workers employed in agriculture), and the small business fabric is not yet strong enough to drive the economy, he said.
Part of the family
Mobilising citizens to drive the integration process will entail a sustained information effort, which includes explaining not only the benefits of integration, but also the difficulties - for example, why Romanian workers may be denied access to other Member States' labour markets, even though they are honest, predicted Mr Băsescu.
The EU has bridged the old East-West divide, but there remains some reluctance to accept east Europeans as members of the European family, said Mr Băsescu, appealing to politicians to ensure that peoples understand each other better, so as to strengthen the unity of the 27. East European countries have reason to be proud too, and cohesion among the 27 is a prerequisite for the Union to act as a global player, e.g. on energy security, he added.
Western Balkans
Europe needs an integrated, overall approach with which to address sensitive issues in Kosovo, Serbia, Bosnia and the Republic of Montenegro. Likewise, the "EU perspective should" apply to Moldova, which shares Romania's hopes and wishes, said Mr Băsescu. 2007 will be a crucial year for the Western Balkans, and the international community must demonstrate that there is a viable solution in Kosovo, he noted.
Black Sea
The Black Sea basin offers great prospects - including answers to some of the EU's energy security questions - but also risks, said the President. The EU needs to make instruments available to halt the spread of terrorism and weapons of mass destruction, and should be open to any partner ready to engage in dialogue, he said, adding that Romania will be an "active combatant" in Common Foreign and Security Policy efforts to settle the "frozen conflict". Romania likewise favours a solid transatlantic partnership and stepping up co-operation between NATO and the EU.
Benefits of integration
Turning to what Romania stands to gain from integration, Mr Băsescu noted that Romania is Poland's second-largest customer, and, with well above EU average growth of 8.4%, a good prospect for investment. In 2006, foreign direct investment in Romania totalled € 8.5 billion. 17 years of restructuring and reform have helped to strengthen Romania's capacity to build, innovate and contribute to the European project. Its geographic position makes it an important geo-strategic asset to the EU, and its accession to NATO makes it a net contributor to EU security. Its Christian faith, strong European culture and traditions of tolerance, diversity and protecting national minorities mean it is well-placed to help build an EU of 27 Member States.
Constitution, energy, neighbours
Mr Băsescu next commented on three policy priorities listed by the EU's German Presidency - the draft EU constitution, energy security and neighbourhood policy. Romania backs the constitution - "we need a solid treaty that provides legitimacy for our activities" he said. On energy, "we need to liberalise markets, foster co-operation among stakeholders, and transport energy more efficiently" he said, adding that we should look to the Black Sea for some of the answers. Finally, EU neighbourhood policy reflects Europe's values, and Romania will back the German Presidency's efforts.
Romania's accession is a milestone. It is now ready to shed the burden of the past, and, true to its basic principles and values, assume its role as a Member State in the best spirit of Community solidarity, concluded the President.
20070130IPR02598 Biography of the Romanian President
EN
1
LINK
http://www.presidency.ro/?_RID=htm&id=4
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
