Parliament's growing role in the institutional set-up
Institutions
2006-12-07 - 18:55
The European Parliament's sixth term of office, which began in June 2004, was also its first term under the newly-expanded EU of 25 Member States. Dealing with the challenges of this unprecedented enlargement and embarking on a broad dialogue with the public in response to the rejection of the draft European Constitution have been the top priorities for MEPs in this period. The "period of reflection" on the Constitution decided by the EU governments did not prevent MEPs pressing ahead on other fronts, for example adopting major legislation such as the services directive. As early as autumn 2004 the new Parliament made its presence felt with a decisive intervention in the appointment of José Manuel Barroso's team of Commissioners. Parliament has also taken important steps to defend the interests of the public, including setting up a probe into the case of CIA flights and secret prisons in Europe. In addition MEPs have spoken up on foreign policy and consolidated their growing influence in the EU's institutional set-up.
20061201TMN00874
A Parliament of 732 Members, without a new treaty
The arrival of 162 additional Members following enlargement raised the number of MEPs to 732 but did not disrupt the workings of the institution. Members from the ten new Member States were integrated smoothly and allocated a number of key posts: 4 committee chairs, 13 committee vice-chairs, 6 delegation chairs and responsibility for drafting many reports. The linguistic challenge posed by a near-doubling of the number of official languages (from 11 to 20) was overcome by using new procedures to rationalise interpretation and translation.
The rejection of the draft European Constitution in France and the Netherlands was a difficult moment for Parliament: it had given overwhelming backing to this treaty, which gave MEPs powers and means of action more in line with their democratic goals. However, despite the legal uncertainty over Europe's future from spring 2005 onwards and the institutional complications of enlargement from 15 to 25 states, Parliament's work was not paralysed - far from it. Restoring public confidence in European integration has now become the key aim of MEPs, who are redoubling their efforts to engage in dialogue with the public (see our note on The Future of Europe). More on the European Parliament, its organisation, powers and political role
Democratic scrutiny of the Commission
At the very start of its term, Parliament signalled its wish to play an active role in the institutional set-up by making full use of its scrutiny powers over the European Commission. In autumn 2004, at the hearings of the 25 candidates put forward by the Member States to make up José Manuel Barroso's team, it quickly emerged that MEPs would not approve this particular Commission. The competence or integrity of certain candidates was formally questioned and Mr Barroso had to reshuffle his team to get it finally approved by MEPs in November 2004.
In a resolution adopted at the time of the investiture, MEPs called for a review of the framework agreement governing relations between Parliament and the Commission. This procedure was completed in May 2005. The new InterInstitutional Agreement, drawing lessons from the turbulent investiture process of 2004, aims to increase the political accountability and legitimacy of the Commissioners as well as strengthening dialogue between the two institutions. It introduces a code of conduct for the appointment of Commissioners, for any changes of portfolio and for any replacement of a Commissioner in mid-term. The agreement also imposes various obligations on the Commission, including one to inform Parliament of the composition of groups of experts which assist it in its legislative work, with the aim of improving transparency. Investiture procedure of the 2004-2009 Commission : Hearings of the commissioners designate Revision of the 2004-2009 general framework agreement between the EP and the Commission: EP procedure file
A decisive impact on legislation
Since the start of this term, Parliament has made full use of its power of legislative co-decision with the Council, sometimes going as far as the conciliation procedure to defend its standpoint. Three issues embody clearly Parliament's decisive impact: the legislation on software patents, which was finally rejected by MEPs for lack of a consensus at European level, the REACH regulation on the registration and evaluation of chemicals and the services directive. In the last two cases, Parliament's first-reading position had a major influence on the position taken by the Council. The services directive, first put forward in 2004 by Frits Bolkestein, the Internal Market Commissioner at the time, aroused much controversy and even boosted the 'No' vote in the French referendum on the Constitution. While Member States were sharply divided between those who supported free movement and those opposed to competition in economic and social systems, the EP overcame its own internal divisions and managed to draft at first reading a compromise which led to an agreement with the Council. The much contested "country of origin principle", which pitted some of the old Member States against the new, was replaced by a clause on the "freedom to provide services", which achieved a far broader consensus.
The REACH project, one of the biggest pieces of legislation in the history of the EP, is about to be concluded after three long years of debate and intense lobbying by industry and NGOs. Here Parliament has shown its ability to deal with highly technical - although also highly political - topics. And here too, MEPs' influence was apparent from first reading, with many of Parliament's amendments being taken up by the Council (see our notes on each of these topics).
Defending citizens' rights: Parliament's input
Parliament has also been active in areas where, paradoxically, it has less power. Initiatives such as the creation of two temporary committees, one to inquire into illegal CIA activities in Europe and the other into the financial crisis at the Equitable Life Assurance Society, show that MEPs will eagerly use whatever tools they have to protect the interests of the EU's citizens (see our notes on these topics).
The allegations of CIA flights and secret prisons in several European countries were in the headlines for several months, partly due to the information revealed week after week by Parliament's temporary committee. Although MEPs have not concluded their work, it has already been established that the US intelligence agency was "directly responsible" for the kidnapping, transfer and detention of alleged terrorists in European countries. MEPs also believe it is "implausible" that "certain European governments" were not aware of such illegal activities taking place on their territory.
More broadly, MEPs were behind a number of measures of everyday concern to the public. Their efforts to ensure that data swapping for terrorism-fighting purposes does not infringe privacy, to guarantee real freedom of movement for workers and to combat all forms of violence against women are just a few examples.
A high profile on the world stage
Parliament has underlined its growing role in the EU's external policies with steady support, in its actions and resolutions, for democracy, human rights and the rule of law.
On EU enlargement, MEPs pushed to ensure that Romania and Bulgaria kept up the pace of reform so as to be ready to take on their new responsibilities as Member States from 1 January 2007. And while they agreed to the start of negotiations with Turkey at the end of 2004, MEPs also showed they would keep a close eye on developments by issuing several warnings to Ankara following the slowdown in reforms noted since 2005 and the "persistent shortcomings" in areas such as freedom of expression, freedom of religion, minority rights and relations with Cyprus. Parliament was also a driving force in the drafting of the new EU neighbourhood policy with the former satellite countries of the USSR which are not members of the enlarged Union.
Parliament has sent delegations to supervise the conduct of elections in various parts of the world, from Congo through Ukraine to Palestine. MEPs have contributed to the development of the partnership with the Mediterranean countries, notably through the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly (EMPA), which met for the first time in March 2005 in Cairo. Chaired by EP President Josep Borrell up to the end of March 2006, this body was amongst the first to call for an immediate ceasefire during the Lebanon conflict in summer 2006. MEPs have also continued to make their voice heard in the fight against poverty in the developing countries, especially the ACP states, which enjoy a privileged partnership through the EU-ACP Joint Parliamentary Assembly. Lastly, the EP has continued to raise awareness about threats to freedom of speech and human rights through the award of its annual Sakharov Prize.
Implementing measures: Parliament now on equal footing with Council
In another sign of its growing influence, Parliament reached agreement in June 2006 with the Commission and the Council on a reform of the "comitology" procedure, which for the first time will allow it to block implementing decisions taken by the Commission. The text also states that Parliament must be officially informed of any such decisions in all EU official languages and that its right of scrutiny shall be extended from one to three months.
The Community's legislative authority - i.e. Parliament and Council in the case of the co-decision procedure - often delegates to the Commission powers which allow it to decide how adopted legislation will be implemented in detail. The comitology system enables the Council to supervise the Commission's work and, in the most important cases, to block its decisions. Comitology procedures have been criticised ever since they were introduced, chiefly because Parliament did not enjoy the same rights as the Council, despite its role as joint legislator. Until now the Commission could, using its implementing powers, push through decisions despite opposition from Parliament, whereas the Council in some cases could block them by a qualified majority.
The new agreement thus puts Parliament and Council on an equal footing with regard to implementing measures arising from all acts adopted under co-decision. New deal on comitology: Parliament can block Commission decisions Council decision of 17 July 2006 amending Decision 1999/468/EC laying down the procedures for the exercise of implementing powers conferred on the Commission
Statute for MEPs and reform of Parliament
Lastly, Parliament has also adapted the way it functions internally. In June 2005 it voted overwhelmingly in favour of a uniform set of rules (or "Statute") for MEPs which had been negotiated with the Council, thereby ending years of discussion with the Member States. This Statute, which will apply from the start of the next parliamentary term (2009-2014), aims to iron out disparities in the pay and conditions of MEPs from different Member States. They will be paid a standard monthly salary of €7000 and their travel expenses will be refunded on the basis of costs incurred, instead of a flat-rate allowance, thus making the system more transparent.
In September 2006 MEPs also agreed an internal reform of Parliament's working methods. The political group leaders will hold an annual debate on the coming year's priority topics, heads of state will continue to be invited to debates on the future of Europe and there will be an option of holding extra plenary sessions in Brussels to debate topics of major European interest. Better representation of the EP outside the EU and steps to improve the efficiency of the work of Parliament's committees are also envisaged. MEPs statute: EP procedure file
EN
1
LINK
/parliament.do?id=146&language=EN
EN
2
LINK
/hearings/commission/2004_comm/result_en.htm
EN
3
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5245672&noticeType=null&language=en
EN
5
LINK
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/site/en/oj/2006/l_200/l_20020060722en00110013.pdf
EN
6
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5254742&noticeType=null&language=en
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060626BKG09280 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 TMN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 TMN DOC XML V0//EN
