Learning the lessons of Equitable Life
Petitions
2006-12-05 - 13:50
In 2000, the Equitable Life Assurance Society found itself unable to meet its obligations to over one million UK policyholders and more than 15,000 policyholders in other EU countries. Policyholders had to accept huge cuts in their savings and pensions. A committee of inquiry was set up after the European Parliament received two petitions from Equitable policyholders alleging that the UK regulatory authorities had failed to monitor the company's behaviour as required by EU law. Starting in February 2006, MEPs have been hearing evidence from interested parties. The committee has yet to reach its conclusions – its mandate continues until April 2007 – but the outcome is likely to include a number of recommendations to improve EU law and policymaking.
A number of inquiries have already been conducted in the UK. Among these, the first report by British Parliamentary Ombudsman Ann Abraham (published 30 June 2003) looked into allegations of maladministration by the prudential regulators but found them not guilty. The wide-ranging report by Lord Penrose (March 2004) examined the circumstances leading to the crisis at Equitable Life. Its findings prompted the Parliamentary Ombudsman to embark on a review of the case in a second report, which has not yet been published. MEPs have said they want to await this report before publishing their own conclusions.
20061201TMN00902
Scope of the European Parliament inquiry
The European Parliament can only investigate the EU-related aspects of the case. The committee's remit is to:
investigate any maladministration or contraventions in the application of the Third Life Directive by the UK authorities;
inquire whether UK regulators supervised Equitable's accounting and provisioning practices rigorously enough;
examine the status of claims and the adequacy of remedies available to policyholders;
assess whether the Commission fulfilled its duty to monitor the transposition of Community law, and identify whether any systematic weaknesses contributed to the situation that has arisen;
make any proposals it deems necessary for the future.
Starting in February this year, the committee has been hearing evidence from Equitable policyholders, the current CEO of Equitable, government officials, regulators, European Commission officials and others. It has received written evidence and commissioned special reports on certain topics. In an interim report adopted in plenary session in July, MEPs decided to prolong the committee of enquiry's mandate (originally one year), by 3 months.
What can the inquiry achieve?
The aim of the inquiry is to shed light on the matters covered by the committee's remit and make recommendations, e.g. on future EU legislation. For example, were the regulators aware of the society's inability to meet its liabilities? If there was any mis-selling of policies, should the regulators have known? Should they have intervened?
And which regulators were responsible? For non-UK policyholders, should it have been their own national regulators or those in the UK? Is the EU's single market functioning properly if EU directives are implemented by Member States in different ways and if consumers then find it hard to obtain redress across borders?
The committee has yet to reach its conclusions - its mandate continues until April 2007 - but the outcome is likely to include a number of recommendations to improve EU law and policymaking, notably on cross-border consumer protection, including redress mechanisms. Its findings may also have a bearing on the Solvency II project, currently in the European legislative pipeline, which will include rules on matching company assets to liabilities. EP Temporary Committee of Inquiry into the Collapse of the Equitable Life Assurance Society
EN
1
LINK
/comparl/tempcom/equi/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 TMN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 TMN DOC XML V0//EN
