Air, land and sea transport: European Parliament drive for safety and efficiency
Transport
2006-12-05 - 18:08
In this legislature, the European Parliament has aimed to make air, land, and sea transport safer, more efficient, and more comfortable. Ensuring that unsafe airlines can no longer operate in the EU, making it easier for disabled people to travel by air, preventing banned drivers from getting a licence in another Member State, seeking to compensate rail passengers for delays and preventing a worsening of working conditions for dockers and ships' crews: these were the key tasks of MEPs in this area.
In the past two years, the European Parliament has played a decisive role in introducing the blacklist of unsafe airlines banned throughout the EU, in effect since March 2006, and also adopted a regulation requiring big airlines to provide assistance for disabled passengers. To reduce the number of road accident victims in the EU, it agreed plans with the Council to prevent banned drivers from obtaining a new licence in another Member State. On the railways, Parliament prepared reports on draft legislation that would liberalise international and national passenger networks and introduce a certification scheme for train crews on the Community rail network. In January 2006 Parliament rejected Commission proposals on market access to port services as a potential threat to lives and livelihoods, and instead demanded legislation on transparency and fair competition among ports.
20061201TMN00894
"Flying coffins" banned from Europe's skies
Since 22 March 2006, 93 airlines that fail to meet safety requirements have been banned EU-wide, largely thanks to the European Parliament. If a carrier is blacklisted after a reservation has been made, passengers will be informed of its identity and entitled to compensation. The list is published on the internet and updated as often as necessary, but at least every three months.
The European Commission proposed the blacklist after more than 500 people died in plane crashes in summer 2005. Parliament amended the proposal to require an EU-wide blacklist, based on common criteria, rather than 25 separate national ones. It also strengthened the provisions on passenger rights.
Unsafe carriers identified by the 25 EU Member States are blacklisted if they show serious safety deficiencies. The list obliges all carriers operating in Europe to meet safety standards, as will no longer be possible for those refused permission to land in one Member State to simply land in another instead.
Passengers must be informed of the identity of the carrier, irrespective of how the reservation is made (internet, travel agency, etc), and have the right to reimbursement or re-routing if a flight is cancelled because a carrier is blacklisted after the reservation is made. List of airlines banned within the EU
Making life easier for air passengers with disabilities
In December 2005 the European Parliament adopted a new regulation that should make life easier for disabled persons and those with reduced mobility travelling by air (around 45 million people in the EU, of whom an estimated 10 million are currently helped at EU airports each year).
Henceforth, disabled passengers may not be refused transport on the grounds of their disabilities and must be given help, free of charge, to meet their specific needs, e.g. to get from the check-in to aircraft, board and transfer to connecting flights. However, these passengers are expected to warn airports of what help they will need at least 48 hours before departure.
EU model driving licence
In December 2006, Parliament and the Council agreed on common EU rules for driving licences. These will facilitate the free movement of EU drivers, prevent those who are banned in one Member State from getting a licence in another and ensure that only experienced riders get access to high-powered motorbikes. A single model licence, in credit card format, will gradually replace the 110-plus different models currently in use across the EU. The new rules also set minimum standards for driving examiners.
Third railway package
In September 2006, the Council published common positions on three Commission proposals aiming to open up the market for international rail passenger services in the EU; lay down rules to protect the rights of international rail passengers, and introduce common procedures for the certification of train crews on the Community's rail network.
These common positions differed from the version that Parliament had amended at the first reading in order to open up international passenger services to competition by 1 January 2008 and national passenger services by 1 January 2012. (The Commission had originally proposed 2010 for international services only). Parliament had also proposed that passengers be compensated as follows for delays:
25% of the fare for a delay of 60 minutes or more;
50% for a delay of 120 minutes or more, and
75% for a delay of 180 minutes or more.
The competition and compensation proposals were clearly more controversial than that on certification, but at the time of writing it looked likely that all three would have to undergo the European Parliament/Council conciliation procedure.
Parliament sinks port service proposals
In January 2006 the European Parliament for a second time rejected Commission proposals on market access to port services (it had previously rejected a conciliation agreement between the Council and Parliament on port services in November 2003). Instead, it demanded legislation on transparency and fair competition among ports.
MEPs criticised the Commission for tabling a proposal that was little changed from the previous one. They argued that it still failed to address Parliament's wishes on cargo self-handling (by seafarers) and pilot services, which meant that the proposals would put lives and livelihoods at risk.
Following the EP decision, the Commission withdrew its proposals. Transport Commissioner Jacques Barrot said he planned to launch a debate with all stakeholders after the adoption of the White Paper on transport.
EN
1
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/transport/air-ban/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 TMN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 TMN DOC XML V0//EN
