MEPs investigate alleged illegal CIA activities in Europe
Fundamental rights
2006-12-07 - 16:10
News reports in November 2005 of secret CIA detention centres in Eastern Europe prompted a series of high-profile investigations by national parliaments, the Council of Europe, and the European Parliament. To investigate these allegations, an EP temporary committee was set up in January 2006. Its interim report, published in July 2006, said that the CIA had in some cases been "directly responsible" for the extraordinary rendition, "illegal seizure, removal, abduction and detention of terrorist suspects on the territory of Member States, accession and candidate countries" - all of which constitute violations of fundamental rights under international law. It is "implausible", said MEPs, "that certain European governments were not aware of the activities linked to extraordinary rendition taking place on their territory". The Committee's final report is due in the first half of 2007.
20061201TMN00888
Violations of fundamental rights
"Extraordinary rendition" is an American extra-judicial procedure which involves transferring untried criminal suspects, suspected terrorists or alleged supporters of groups which the US Government considers to be terrorist organizations, to countries other than the USA for imprisonment and/or interrogation. On 5 September, President Bush acknowledged that the CIA has operated secret prisons abroad for terrorism suspects - but without saying whether these prisons were in Europe.
After 13 MEPs visited Washington in May 2006, EP rapporteur Claudio Fava (PSE, IT) said "senior sources" from the US intelligence community had confirmed "that between 30 and 50 extraordinary rendition operations have been undertaken in the world since 2001." Furthermore, "a first hand source" had confirmed the existence of "seven black sites operated by the CIA in countries of Asia, Europe and Africa". According to this source, "the secret centres in Europe were closed down following the public pressure exerted by the media, but there is a black site still operating in a North African country".
In the interim report, MEPs also determined that the CIA - using aircraft hired by front companies - had illegally transferred terrorist suspects to countries that frequently use torture during interrogations. With that in mind, MEPs called for extraordinary renditions to be "clearly prohibited" in international law.
The CIA, concluded the interim report, has in some cases been "directly responsible" for the extraordinary rendition, "illegal seizure, removal, abduction and detention of terrorist suspects on the territory of Member States, accession and candidate countries" - all of which constitute violations of fundamental rights under international law.
Complicity of EU Member States
It is "implausible", MEPs said in their interim report, "that certain European governments were not aware of the activities linked to extraordinary rendition taking place on their territory". In several EU countries, says the report, rules governing the activities of secret services seem "inadequate". Intelligence co-operation between EU countries and their allies, the EP argued, "should not be confused with the abandonment of sovereignty over European territory and airspace".
These conclusions are based on evidence gathered during the temporary committee's visits and hearings.
"All our [American] guests suggested or confirmed that the extraordinary renditions programme carried out in Europe could only be achieved with the knowledge and support of European national governments" said MEP Carlos Coelho, on his return from a fact-finding visit to Washington on 8-12 May, where Mr Coelho's delegation met, inter alia, former CIA Director James Woolsey.
Spanish Foreign Minister Miguel Angel Moratinos, the first minister to give evidence to the committee, said in September of CIA activities in Spain that "Our government has not authorised any violation of the law" and "no Spanish intelligence service has been involved directly or indirectly with the US on this matter".
The Macedonian authorities were "reticent" about sharing their version of events with the committee, said rapporteur Claudio Fava, after visiting Skopje on 27-29 April, to investigate claims in March by Khaled El Masri, a German resident of Lebanese origin, that he had been abducted by CIA agents in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (FYROM) and then held for five months at a secret prison in Afghanistan. "Some contradictions remain regarding the government's official version" of El Masri's stay in Skopje, added Delegation chair Sylvia Kaufmann.
Irish Foreign Minister Dermot Ahern told MEPs there was "not one shred of evidence" that extraordinary rendition had occurred through Irish airports or territory. Giving evidence to the committee in November, Mr Ahern disputed the conclusions of Mr Fava's draft report with respect to Ireland. Ireland had made its complete opposition to extraordinary rendition clear to the US authorities, he said, and the US had replied that prisoners had not been transferred through Irish territory, and nor would they be without Ireland's permission.
EU Counter-terrorism Coordinator Gijs de Vries (April) and EU Foreign Policy Representative Javier Solana (May) both denied any knowledge of CIA detention centres in Europe. And both came under fire from MEPs. Mr Fava said he was not sure whether the hearing with Mr De Vries had served a useful purpose, and Mr Solana was accused of "washing his hands of responsibility."
Craig Murray, a former British ambassador to Uzbekistan, told the committee in April that, under an intelligence-sharing agreement, the US and UK had taken a policy decision to accept testimonies obtained under torture in third countries. UK Foreign Secretary Jack Straw "discussed the issue with the head of the MI6", claimed Mr Murray, "and reached the conclusion that we should continue to receive intelligence material obtained from confessions under torture and that this would not contravene the UN Convention against Torture".
MEPs nonetheless acknowledged in their interim report that "the work of the temporary committee has so far not revealed any evidence or proof of the existence of secret prisons in the EU". The committee will focus on this question more closely in the months to come. Website of the "Temporary Committee on the alleged use of European countries by the CIA for the transport and illegal detention of prisoners"
EN
1
LINK
/comparl/tempcom/tdip/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 TMN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 TMN DOC XML V0//EN
