Lisbon Strategy: MEPs urge action on labour market, innovation and energy
European Council
2007-02-14 - 16:03
Parliament welcomes the efforts made by the Commission and the Member States to make the Lisbon Strategy a success, and sets out, in a resolution adopted on Wednesday, a range of further action that will be needed.
The resolution, adopted by 438 votes in favour to 103 against with 30 abstentions, sets out MEPs' expectations of the spring meeting of EU Heads of State or Government, which is always mainly devoted to economic affairs. The Lisbon Strategy, first adopted by EU leaders in 2000, is a package of measures aimed at improving the performance of European economies.
Parliament stresses the interdependence of economic, social and environmental reforms, which, along with growth and employment are the prerequisites for success in creating a dynamic and innovative economy and society. MEPs say that the EU should strive to become the most resource- and energy-efficient economic area in the world.
MEPs stress that solving economic and employment problems will require the active involvement of Parliaments at both national and European level. It also wants greater involvement of civil society actors to increase the "ownership" of the Lisbon Strategy by the whole of society. MEPs add that the role of the national "Mr or Mrs Lisbon" - the minister charged with coordination national action under the Lisbon Strategy - needs to be made more effective.
Labour markets balancing flexibility and security
Regarding labour markets, Parliament says reforms must aim to reconcile the demands of industry for greater flexibility with the demands of workers for more security, for example by creating new job prospect and new forms of security. MEPs say a special effort is needed to promote policies of employment training for unemployed workers who are less qualified and to improve the educational system.
Parliament wants action to raise labour market participation among young people, female and older workers. This would include: ensuring employment, training or similar opportunities are offered to every school leaver within six months; improving the employment rate among disabled people; reducing the start-up time for new businesses to at most one week; raising investment in childcare; reducing the tax burden on employment; combating discrimination and social exclusion; raising investment in innovation.
Innovation and trade
On a related point, MEPs stress that enforcement and protection of intellectual property rights is still relatively costly and time-consuming in Europe. They call for EU-wide standards, improved cooperation between national standardisation bodes and simplified procedures in this area. They add that the failure to make progress on European patent policy is “exceptionally regrettable,” and call for a new strategy on this from the Commission.
Parliament says “free and fair trade enhances prosperity in Europe and the wider world.” It calls for Member States to refrain from protectionism, while also noting that international trade can have negative consequences for the most vulnerable and least qualified workers in some sectors. It says it is ready to “consider appropriate trade measures against 'free rider' countries, which do not shoulder their fiar share of the burden of combating global climate change.
Research and energy
Welcoming the adoption of the Seventh Framework Programme, Parliament points out that it has repeatedly stressed the importance of research and development and the increased role of knowledge in fostering economic growth and social and environmental well-being.
MEPs say further efforts to establish a common energy policy are essential to the success of the Lisbon Strategy. The aim should be to create more competition and benefits for consumers. Parliament notes that nuclear power is an important part of the energy mix for some Member States, but it also notes the risks involved and the problem of nuclear waste. The use of nuclear power is a matter for each Member State to decide for itself, says MEPs.
Parliament urges the European Council to endorse the Commission's energy action plan, placing consumers at the heart of energy policy. It says there should be a road map to achieve a renewable energy share of 20 per cent by 2020, a target of 30 per cent reduction of CO2 emissions for all industrialised countries by 2020, with a minimum target of 20 per cent for the EU.
20070208IPR02893 Motion for a resolution - to wind up the debate on statements by the Council and Commission
on the input to the 2007 Spring Council in relation to the Lisbon Strategy
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/motion/last.do?language=EN&startValue=0
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
