Transport, Internal Market, Industry: Committee Chairs speak out
Institutions
2007-02-07 - 09:14
An EP Committee has between 28 and 86 members
Last week saw MEPs elect the Chairs and Vice-Chairs of Parliament's Committees. There are 20 permanent such committees who meet in public twice a month in Brussels. Their role is to draw up, adopt and amend legislation and own initiative reports. They also consider proposals from the Council of Ministers and the Commission. We spoke to some freshly elected Chairpersons to ask their views about the way ahead.
A good Chair of a committee must play several roles. They must draw up the agenda, preside over meetings and help prepare report of the committee. They also speak for the committee in the monthly Strasbourg Plenary session and in regular meetings with other Committee Chairs. They also have frequent contact with the Council presidency and the Commission services. A Chairperson is elected by the MEPs on their Committee for a two and half year term.
Transport & Tourism
At the Transport and Tourism Committee (TRAN) Paolo Costa, an Italian MEP, was re-elected Chair. Speaking after his election he said “it is difficult to resume in few sentences the experience of the committee chair of the Transport committee. It’s a big responsibility but is also gratifying. …it revealed itself very absorbing because of the impact that the transport and tourism policy exercises on society and European economics." He later added that "the different interests at stake imply a hard work of debate and mediation not only with the Council and the Commission but also within the Committee of transport".
Making the EU responsible to citizens
The Internal Market Committee (IMCO) covers such issues as the free movement of goods and services around the EU. It is also responsible for consumer protection. Last year this committee dealt with the Services Directive - one of the most contentious pieces of legislation ever considered by the Parliament.
Re-elected as Chairperson, Arlene McCarthy of the Socialist PSE group described it as an "immense privilege". She said she was looking forward "to taking up the issues that matter to citizens and consumers, ranging from high mobile phone roaming charges to the cat and dog fur trade".
She went on to say that "I am proud to be able to play a part in ensuring that the EU is responsive to our citizens' and consumers' demands and concerns and to continue to make sure the single market works to the benefit of all citizens."
Industry, research, energy
Industry, research and energy (ITRE) - three issues likely to feature high on the agenda in the coming 12 months. German MEP Angelika Niebler of the European People's Party has just been elected chair of this committee.
Speaking on her new role she said that she will "mobilise the whole weight of the committee" when dealing with EU legislation. She went on to say that "colleagues are very engaged and give their best in their specialities - often very critically and controversially".
On how this will affect this atmosphere she notes that "the committee lives from a constructive dialogue. She went on to say that the "cooperation with the colleagues" was the "special attractiveness" of the committee.
The Chairs of all the committees meet once a month in the "Conference of Committee Chairs" to discuss organisational and agenda related affairs. They also occasionally have to settle conflicts over which committee is responsible for which report. This group of Chairpersons often meets representatives of other EU institutions - like the holders of the EU's rotating Presidency for example.
Committees cover everything from foreign affairs, education to fisheries. Every area where the EU and by extension the Parliament is involved in has a committee.
Usually they have between 28 and 86 members with the numbers of MEPs on them reflecting the balance of the overall Parliament.
How is it divided amongst the groups?
Regarding the right to Chair a committee in 2007 it stood like this: the European People's Party - the biggest group - had the right to choose 9 posts.
The Socialist PSE could choose 7 and the Liberal ALDE group 3. The European United Left (GUE/NGL), the Greens and the Union for Europe of the Nations nominated one Chairman each.
20070206STO02779 Parliamentary Committees Conference of Committee Chairmen
EN
1
PHOTO
20070206PHT02787.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/committees.do?language=EN
EN
3
LINK
/members/expert/otherBodies/search.do?language=EN&body=2371
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
