Two Irish petitions succeed at the European Parliament
Petitions
Ireland
2007-02-02 - 16:47
Petition heard on proposal to locate a waste incinerator in Dublin Bay
On 30 January, the European Parliament's Petitions Committee took decisions on two Irish petitions with an environmental focus. Dan Brennan from Kilkenny and former Cllr. Chris Andrews from Dublin travelled to Brussels to hear the committee's deliberations and their ultimate decisions.
The committee decided that, as part of its fact-finding mission to Ireland later this year to examine the implementation of the EU's water directives in Ireland, its delegation would visit the sites relating to the two petitions (see below).
Dan Brennan - alleged impact of emissions from a local factory on his cattle
This petition was submitted on the basis of Mr Brennan's belief that the ongoing (since 1990) ill health of his cattle (weight loss, stunted growth, low milk yields, etc.) is due to the high emissions of fluoride and chloride from the nearby Ormonde brick factory (Roadstone). Mr Brennan listed a number of examples of this in his petition and pointed to his frustration with the Irish statutory agencies who carried out investigations on the basis of his claims but were unable to establish a cause.
Members of the Petitions Committee criticised the failure of the Irish authorities to establish a definitive cause. The European Commission confirmed that it will write to the Irish authorities to request further information and clarification on the matter, on the basis of existing and recent EC legislation which requires that permits should be issued by the relevant authorities to ensure that the emissions of factories such as the Ormonde brick factory are contained and that the best available techniques are employed for this purpose.
The Deputy Leader of the Green Party in Ireland, Cllr. Mary White, who attended Tuesday's meeting of the Petitions Committee and spoke at the hearings together with Dan Brennan and two of his vets, welcomed the decision of the Petitions Committee "to keep this petition open and to come on a fact-finding mission to Dan Brennan's farm in Castlecomer." She went on to say that "anyone who has visited the farm will be shocked at the small size and state of the cattle." Mr Brennan said afterwards that he felt vindicated by the Committee's decision.
Chris Andrews - environmental impact of proposed waste incinerator in Dublin Bay
A former local representative on Dublin City Council and son of the late Niall Andrews (former FF/UEN MEP), Chris Andrews submitted this petition on behalf of his constituents in South Dublin. He was accompanied to Brussels by the Secretary of the Local Concerned Residents Against Incineration group, Ms Frances Corr. The subject of the petition is the proposal to locate a waste incinerator on the already heavily industrialised Poolbeg Peninsula in Dublin Bay. Mr Andrews claims that the Dublin City Manager hired consultants to select a site for the thermal treatment plant and proceeded with a planning application without consulting the elected representatives of Dublin City Council at the time. He points to an EC law that requires that waste is disposed of without endangering human health and without harming the environment and claims that by denying the elected representatives the right to be consulted on these decisions, the health and the quality of life of local residents, together with the surrounding countryside, are being endangered. Mr Andrews points to the existing high level of environmental pollution in the area.
The Petitions Committee announced that its fact-finding delegation to Ireland later this year would visit the Poolbeg/Ringsend site to examine the Environmental Impact Assessment which had been carried out and meet with the relevant Irish authorities. Speaking after the announcement, Mr Andrews stated that "this is a very positive development and is testament to how seriously the EU takes its environmental legislation. The work of the committee represents a very important protection for citizens right across the EU."
Irish MEPs at the Petitions Committee meeting
Irish members of the Parliament's Petitions Committee, Proinsias De Rossa (Labour/PES) and Mairéad McGuinness (FG/EPP-ED) intervened actively in the proceedings.
Mairéad McGuinness (FG/EPP-ED) welcomed the Committee's decision in relation to Dan Brennan's case. She stated afterwards that the hearing "will advance the cause of finding out what went wrong on this farm and how it might be resolved." She went on to point out that this Committee "gives power to every member of the public throughout the EU to petition the Parliament on any subject that falls within the remit of the EU."
Marian Harkin (Ind./ALDE), who also participated in the hearings, stated that "we hear a great deal about compliance where farmers are concerned ..[..].. let us have equivalent levels of compliance and penalties imposed by the Environmental Protection Agency in this case."
20070129IPR02537 European Parliament Petitions Committee All Irish MEPs by region European Parliament Office in Ireland
EN
1
PHOTO
20070202PHT02698.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/committees/peti_home_en.htm
EN
3
LINK
/members/public/geoSearch/zoneList.do?country=IE&language=EN
EN
4
LINK
http://www.europarl.ie/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
