How is the Community budget funded?
Budget
2007-02-22 - 17:01
While the European Community's budget expenditure is already being shifted towards new policies, the revenue side of the budget is based on a system of "own resources" that has not been updated for over twenty years. The European Parliament has decided to look at this issue and, when it votes on a report by Alain Lamassoure, will set out some pointers for the future, including for the review of the budget scheduled for 2008-2009.
The EU's founding fathers believed the Community should derive its revenue from Community policies, for example from customs duties levied on goods imported into Europe. However, when the system was not updated these sources of revenue proved insufficient and gradually gave way to national contributions to the budget, based on the wealth of each Member State.
One of the key problems of the system is the fact that some countries would like to reduce their contribution to the Community budget so as to relieve pressure on their national public finances. These "national concerns" also considerably delayed an agreement on EU spending for 2007-2013. The delays have in their turn highlighted the urgent need to reform the way the EU is financed.
Both expenditure and revenue will be up for review in 2008-2009. But whereas expenditure is already being redirected towards EU policy priorities, the revenue question is proving far more complex. Some people are floating the idea of a European tax, while others do not wish to see the current system change.
At the European Parliament the debate on these matters is already under way. The Budgets Committee and its "own resources" rapporteur, Alain Lamassoure (EPP-ED, FR), are preparing to state their position in a report to be adopted this spring.
20070219BKG03383
The four types of resources of the EU budget
Under the current system the EU budget currently has four main sources of revenue.
Customs duties are levied at the EU’s external borders on imports under the common customs tariff. The Treaty of Rome earmarked customs duties as the principal resource to be assigned to the EEC to finance its expenditure.
Agricultural levies were introduced under the common agricultural policy in 1962. They are charged on trade in agricultural products with non-member countries and vary according to price levels on the world and European markets. Besides agricultural levies, there are also charges on the production and storage of sugar and isoglucose (unlike the levies on agricultural imports, these are internal to the Community).
Customs duties and agricultural levies were the first own resources and became known as "traditional own resources" because they are revenue collected by virtue of Community policies rather than revenue obtained from the Member States as national contributions.
When traditional own resources proved insufficient, two new - and more complex - resources were introduced.
VAT own resources were introduced precisely because the traditional own resources were not sufficient to finance the Community budget. Because of the need to harmonise the VAT base this complex resource did not come into use until 1980. It is obtained by applying a given rate to a base determined in a uniform manner. Thus it is not a true own resource based on a tax levied nationally but simply a way of calculating a Member State's contribution.
The GNI-based own resource is obtained by applying a rate fixed each year under the budget procedure to a base representing the sum of the gross national products at market prices. It is calculated by reference to the difference between expenditure and the yield of the other own resources. It is the "key" resource, as it determines the cap on the VAT base, how the cost of the UK rebate is shared, and the ceiling on total resources under the financial perspective.
Own-resources timeline
1957: a transitional period under the Treaty of Rome
Initially, under the 1957 Treaty of Rome, the EEC was supposed to be financed by national contributions for a transitional period before changing over to a system of own resources.
The principle was set down in Article 201 of the Treaty, which stated: "Without prejudice to other revenue, the budget shall be financed wholly from own resources."
In 1965 a first attempt to transfer customs duties and agricultural levies - the "natural" own resources deriving from Community policies (the customs union and the common agricultural policy) - failed in the face of French opposition. The ensuing "crisis" was resolved a year later by the famous Luxembourg compromise but the 1966 target date for the changeover to a system of financing that would guarantee the Community some measure of independence was not adhered to. It was not until the Hague summit in 1969 that the Heads of State or Government, in an effort to revive the Community after several years of difficulty, finally took the decision to go ahead with the change.
1970: The birth of "traditional" own resources
On 21 April 1970 the Council decided to assign "own resources" to the Communities to cover all their expenditure. This decision marked the end of national contributions, through which the Member States had enjoyed some scope for controlling the policies undertaken by the Communities, and the beginning of an independent system of financing by "traditional" own resources (agricultural levies and customs duties) and a resource based on value added tax (VAT).
The 1970 decision on own resources set the Communities apart from other international organisations, which all rely for funding on contributions from their members.
1985: Correction mechanism for the United Kingdom
In 1984 the Fontainebleau European Council decided to introduce a correction mechanism for the United Kingdom (known as the "rebate"). The cost of financing the UK rebate was shared between the other Member States according to their share of GNP (except in the case of Germany, whose share was reduced by a third). (See below: "The UK rebate in brief".)
1988: Introduction of GNP-based resource and overall ceiling
Since CAP spending remained unchanged and the revenue from traditional own resources continued to decline, in 1988 the Brussels European Council introduced a new own resource based on the Member States' GNP. It also set an overall ceiling of 1.14% percent of GNP to the total amount of own resources which could be called upon to finance the Community's spending.
1994: Deduction of collection costs for traditional own resources
Own resources are collected by the Member States on behalf of the Community. The 1994 decision allowed for the Member States to retain 10% of the traditional own resources they gathered in order to cover the cost of collection.
2005: Review decided but system becomes more complex
On 16 December 2005 the European Council reached a political agreement on the Financial Perspective (the EU's long-term financial framework) for the period 2007-2013. One point which enabled the deal to be reached was the proposal to review the EU budget in 2008-2009 - both the revenue and the expenditure sides.
On the other hand, the own resources system has been made even more complicated by what some have called the "Christmas presents" to Germany, Sweden and the Netherlands, whose contributions to the EU budget have been reduced for the period 2007-2013. These Member States will enjoy reduced VAT call-in rates and gross reductions in their annual GDP contributions. These gross reductions are to be financed by all the Member States, including the three beneficiaries.
The UK rebate remains intact, except for expenditure in the new Member States (which will be excluded from the total amount of expenditure used to calculate the rebate). However, market expenditure on the common agricultural policy in the new Member States will be excluded from this derogation, i.e. it will be part of the total amount of expenditure used to calculate the British rebate.
The UK rebate in brief
The UK correction (or rebate or “British cheque”) - made famous by Margaret Thatcher's reported statement "I want my money back" - was decided at the Fontainebleau European Council in 1984.
The correction was "justified" at the time by two factors: the UK receives very little from the Community's spending on agriculture, as it has a small farming sector; the UK pays a contribution to the financing of the Community budget regarded as too high in relation to its prosperity in the 1980s.
In fact the rebate takes the form of a reduction in the contribution by the United Kingdom to the financing of the EU. It is thus not a transfer of funds to London from the other EU Member States.
The method for calculating the British rebate is complex .
Under the current compensation mechanism, two thirds (66%) of the difference between the United Kingdom's percentage share of VAT payments and its percentage share of allocated Community expenditure, applied to total allocated expenditure, is refunded to the United Kingdom by way of a reduction in its VAT base.
Since 1985 the United Kingdom has thus been receiving a rebate on its yearly contribution to the budget, amounting to a yearly EUR 4.6 billion on average over the period 1997-2003.
This rebate is financed jointly by the other Member States in accordance with their respective percentage of VAT payments. Germany, the Netherlands, Austria and Sweden pay only a quarter of what their shares ought to be, as a result of subsequent agreements.
Over the years, slowly but surely, it has become obvious that the presence of the UK rebate has noticeably reduced the desired correlation between the ability of each Member State to contribute to the EU budget and its own resources payments. Some have called for an end to the rebate, arguing that Britain now has one of the strongest economies in Europe and that the correction is no longer justified.
Changing trends in the financing of the EU budget
A quick glance at the EU budget shows that traditional own resources now represent only a marginal share of the revenue of the Union, the result of a steady decline over the years.
And while revenue from agricultural levies has always been low over the past twenty years, VAT-based revenue has plummeted by comparison with the other sources (from 57.2% in 1988 to 14% in 2004, i.e. by 5 to 1). This fall is due to reforms limiting the tax base of the Member States to 50% of the gross national income.
Customs revenue has also declined, although only by 2 to 1 (from 22.3% in 1988 to 10.2% in 2004). This decline is due to the fact that the percentage Member States are allowed to retain to offset their collection costs increased from 10% to 25% on 1 January 2001.
Consequently, the GNI-based resource has become increasingly important . This development has certainly resulted in greater equity in the level of gross budget contributions made by the Member States, as it tends to produce a closer correlation between each Member State's capacity and its actual contribution. The downside is that the decline in traditional own resources has led to a loss of financial autonomy for the European Union.
Who pays what? Who gets what?
Solidarity is a key feature of the European Union's budget. The two links below lead to data available on-line.
The first shows data for national contributions to the 2005 budget, broken down by Member State and type of own resources.
The second is a presentation by the Directorate General for Budgets at the European Commission. This shows the breakdown of EU expenditure by sector and by beneficiary country.
NB The 2005 financial year, while being representative since it covers the EU of 25 Member States, belongs to the previous Financial Perspective. Some priorities and programmes have changed since then, following the adoption of the 2007-2013 financial framework. Scroll down the page to read table 7, which recaps all revenues per Member State A presentation by the Commission on the breakdown of expenses for the year 2005
EN
1
LINK
http://europa.eu.int/eur-lex/budget/data/D2005_VOL1/EN/nmc-grseq42960935830-3/index.html
EN
2
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/budget/library/documents/revenue_expenditure/agenda_2000/allocrep_slide_2005_en.pdf
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
