Human rights: Tibet, Iraq refugees, Guinea
Human rights
2007-02-15 - 18:00
At the end of this week's session, Parliament adopted three resolutions on human rights topics. MEPs called for a resumption of the dialogue between the Chinese government and the Dalai Lama, they highlighted the need to help the huge number of refugees inside and outside Iraq and they condemned the violent repression by the Guinean government of protests against its misrule.
Dialogue between Chinese government and Dalai Lama
The European Union has taken a close interest in the situation of Tibet in recent months. In this latest parliamentary resolution MEPs urge a resumption of the process of dialogue between China and the Dalai Lama which was launched in September 2002 but has stalled in the last 12 months.
The resolution, adopted by 71 votes to 0 with 1 abstention, opens by "welcoming the commitment of the Government of the People’s Republic of China and His Holiness the Dalai Lama to resolve the Tibet question through a process of dialogue", despite their "differences on substantive issues".
It points out that the European Union adheres to a ‘one China’ policy and also that the Dalai Lama has consistently stated "that he is not seeking independence but a genuine devolved autonomy for Tibet".
Parliament then urges the Chinese government and the Dalai Lama to resume and continue their dialogue "without preconditions and in a forward-looking manner that allows for pragmatic solutions which respect the territorial integrity of China and fulfil the aspirations of the Tibetan people".
While it "welcomes the laws and regulations on regional ethnic autonomy" adopted by the Chinese government, Parliament is "concerned that many of these laws contain conditions that impede or undermine their implementation".
An EU Special Representative for Tibet?
The Council, Commission and Member States of the EU are asked "to actively support the strengthening of the dialogue and, in the absence of tangible results on substantive issues and in consultation with both parties, assess what further role the European Union can play to facilitate a negotiated solution for Tibet, including through the appointment of an EU Special Representative for Tibet", a suggestion Parliament has made before.
Call for Tibet issue to be raised in cooperation agreement talks with China
MEPs point out that the negotiations on a new EU-China Partnership and Cooperation Framework Agreement officially began on 17 January 2007 in Beijing. They call on the Commission "to raise the question of Tibet and the resumption of talks between the two sides during the negotiations on the new EU-China Partnership and Cooperation Framework Agreement and report to Parliament on the evolution of the dialogue" between China and Dalai Lama's envoy in 2007 and thereafter.
In addition, the resolution calls on the Council Presidency to adopt a Declaration indicating "how the EU could facilitate progress towards a peaceful and negotiated solution for Tibet". Parliament also requests that the Council's annual CFSP report include information on progress in the dialogue.
* * *
The plight of refugees inside and outside Iraq
Parliament wants the world to do far more to aid the growing flood of refugees seeking to flee the violence in Iraq. The UN estimates that 1.8 million are displaced internally, up to 2 million Iraqis have fled the country and 50,000 people try to leave every month.
Violence and crime are rife. Some groups are especially persecuted, including professionals, women, Iraqis employed by foreign contractors, the UN or NGOs, and ethnic and religious minorities. The security of third-country nationals and stateless citizens, notably refugees from Palestine, Turkey, Iran and Syria, has also drastically deteriorated.
Conditions are dire, with limited supplies of water, food, fuel and medicines. Humanitarian bodies are appealing for funding to meet the needs in Iraq and its neighbouring countries. However, several states hosting Iraqi refugees are restricting entry and the attitude of most EU Member States - except Sweden - to Iraqi refugees has been equally restrictive.
The international community has a duty to take refugees in
Consequently, in its resolution - adopted by 74 votes to 0 with 1 abstention - Parliament "urges Iraq's bordering countries to abide by their legal duty immediately to admit refugees, particularly those stranded at their borders and belonging to specially targeted minorities".
The EU Member States and the international community are asked "as a demonstration of international burden sharing, to contribute to the resettlement of Iraqi refugees and stateless persons, including the Palestinian refugees from Iraq stranded in the region".
The resolution calls on EU Member States "to swiftly and fairly determine the claims of Iraqi asylum-seekers" and "to fulfil their international and acquis obligations to grant refugee status or subsidiary protection to those who are at risk of persecution or serious harm".
More funding needed
It welcomes the recent UNHCR appeal for extra international support to fund its work and calls on the EU and Member States and other international donors "to respond to the UNHCR appeal". MEPs see it as "a case of extreme emergency" and urge "that a significant part of the EU budget earmarked for programmes with Iraq be allocated to this aim".
The resolution says that many donor countries have been reluctant to face up to a regional Iraqi refugee crisis, and urges them to realise that the Iraqi authorities and neighbouring governments "appear unable to fully cope with the crisis" and hence to review the need to provide "financial assistance to help those host countries".
MEPs also ask the Commission and Member States to assist the UNHCR's efforts "focused on minimum protection from detention and refoulement and non-penalisation for illegal entry; as well as access to education, adequate housing, basic health care facilities and other basic services".
Parliament welcomes the international conference on the Iraq refugee problem, to be held in Geneva on 17 April 2007, and "urges the Council, the Commission, the authorities in the region and the international community to fully participate in that Conference and provide appropriate financial support".
At the end of the debate on the resolution, Commissioner Jan Figel told the House that an aid package of €10.2 million in humanitarian aid for victims of the Iraq crisis was being provided through the ECHO humanitarian aid office. €6.2m would be for those outside Iraq and €4m for those inside the country.
* * *
Repression by government of Guinea condemned
In a resolution on the west African state of Guinea, adopted by 75 votes to 0 with 1 abstention, the European Parliament criticises the repressive measures taken recently by the country's authorities to deal with social and political unrest. The government this week declared a state of emergency giving the army wide-ranging powers and special forces have killed or wounded many civilians.
Since 2005 there have been several incidents in which Guinean security forces have fired on unarmed demonstrators, notably in June 2006, when police and soldiers gunned down at least 13 unarmed demonstrators. A general strike was called on 10 January 2007 by Guinea's trade unions and civil society in support of economic and social demands but a peaceful demonstration held on 17 January in Conakry was violently repressed by the security services. President Conté declared a state of emergency on 13 February, which includes a 20-hour-a-day curfew and a ban on processions, marches, demonstrations and meetings, and gives the army extensive powers to take 'all the necessary measures'.
Stop the killings
The resolution "condemns the disproportionate and excessive use of force by the Guinean security forces during the recent demonstrations in various parts of the country, which resulted in the death of many civilians, the wounding of several demonstrators and the detention of trade union leaders". It "calls on the Guinean authorities to put an immediate stop to the killings".
Change the prime minister
MEPs stress "the importance of appointing a consensus Prime Minister, in accordance with the undertakings given by President Conté" on 27 January to appoint such a figure, who was supposed to have "extensive executive powers for a three-year transition period during which parliamentary and presidential elections would be organised". The appointment of Eugène Camara as Prime Minister on 9 February was not in accordance with this agreement, says the European Parliament.
Investigate abuses, release demonstrators, restore freedoms
The resolution also calls for the establishment of "an independent international commission of inquiry under UN responsibility to investigate the recent killings as well as past human rights abuses, and to identify those responsible and bring them to justice".
The Guinean authorities are urged "to order the immediate release of all persons arrested during the demonstration in the absence of valid legal charges and, if such charges exist, to ensure that such persons are given a prompt and fair trial".
Individual and trade union freedoms must be restored and the "authoritarian abuses which have marked President Conté's regime for 23 years" must cease. Negotiations must be opened with civil society organisations and trade unions. And "a democratic transition towards a system corresponding to the aspirations of the Guinean people" is needed.
Apply the human rights clause
Member States of the EU-ACP Cotonou Agreement are required to respect human rights. Parliament therefore calls on the Commission to "envisage the political dialogue" provided for in Article 96, as a first step in applying the agreement's human rights provisions, "while stepping up its humanitarian aid to victims".
20070209IPR02934 Full text of resolutions
-//EP//TEXT TA 20070215 TOC NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
