Wine reform: MEPs propose caution and protection of vineyards
Agriculture
2007-02-15 - 16:37
MEPs from all sides have backed a report that aims to protect the historical and cultural position of European wine production. The report also calls for cautious reform of the EU's €1.3 billion a year wine regime and proposes the 1.5 billion litre wine lake be "abolished" through a combination of voluntary and compulsory distillation of surplus wine. Roughly €500 million a year is currently spent turning surplus quality wine into either ethanol or vinegar.
The report by Greek Socialist MEP Katerina Batzeli was on the European Commission's proposals to increase the competitiveness and appeal of EU wine. They advocated incentives to root up vines, abolish subsidies for the distillation of surplus wine, simplify labelling and update wine-making practices.
Abandoning wine growing rejected by MEPs
Perhaps the most contentious issue was the proposal of "grubbing up" (giving money to winegrowers to turn vineyards over to other use) 400,000 hectares of land. Wine production occupies 2% of the agricultural area (1.5 million farms) of the European Union with France, Italy and Spain being the biggest producers.
In the debate and vote MEPs rejected the Commission's proposals for such a widespread grubbing-up exercise. The report said that the "permanent abandonment of wine growing" must not be the centrepiece of reform. They suggested a number of criteria should be applied before aid for grubbing-up was granted.
These include amongst others: protecting vineyards in mountainous, coastal and island regions, protecting vineyards with geographical indications and preserving traditional regions of historical importance. Given the scope, it is unlikely that many vineyards would fall outside these categories.
Debate: protect "history, culture and tradition" of European wine
In the debate Christine de Veyrac for the European People's Party spoke against grubbing-up saying it seems that "European viticulture has become a variable in the need to adjust the market economy".
The need to respect and protect the "history, culture and tradition" of European wine-making was made by Italian MEP Sergio Berlato of the Union of Europe for the Nations Group (UEN).
For the Greens Marie-Helene Aubert agreed with the Commission on the need to remove bad habits like distillation and wine lakes. However she appealed to fellow MEPs saying "please, fight with us to promote the good quality wines....and to make known to the entire planet this alchemy that is European wine for at least two millennia".
The European Commissioner for Agriculture Mariann Fischer Boel said she would "study attentively" the MEPs' remarks.
When is wine wine?
The report also calls for the power to approve new wine-making practices within the EU to lie with the Council of Ministers and the Parliament. The definition of "wine" and the right to use the word on a bottle has been a source of controversy for some time as different techniques are developed and "New World" wines have entered the European market. The report also wants EU members to harmonise the languages used on the labelling of wine and the need to better protect geographical designations of wine so that the label and region match.
20060712STO09761 Wine reform: more
EN
1
PHOTO
20060711PHT09759.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208IPR02894 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
