CIA report: MEPs reflect on the controversy a week on
Fundamental rights
2007-02-20 - 14:36
Rendition victims were often not identified says report
Last week saw Parliament adopt a report by MEPs on the CIA's activities in Europe. It found that the Agency had flown over 1,245 flights across European airspace and that some of these flights were used for the "illegal transportation of detainees" - the practice known as "extraordinary renditions". It also said many countries had turned a blind eye to the practice. As the impact of the report sinks in, we talk to some MEPs on their views.
Arrest warrants issued
Thus far the "rendition" charges have led to judicial investigations in Italy, Germany, (where arrest warrants for CIA agents have been issued) Spain and Portugal. Several national Parliaments across the EU have indicated their intention to set up their own committees of enquiry.
The report called for the Council of Ministers to collectively put pressure on the governments concerned and start investigations and hearings if necessary. It also wants the powers of the EU's ant-terrorism coordinator to be stepped up and for the EU to make a joint declaration to the US Administration asking them to stop extraordinary renditions.
CIA report: MEPs who supported it
The MEPs who chaired the committee, Carlos Coelho of the European People's Party said that "we cannot fight against terrorism without respecting human rights". He called for greater cooperation between EU members and institutions.
The rapporteur for the committee, Claudio Fava of the Socialist group, declared himself satisfied that "the report was approved by the majority, only a third rejected it". He said it reflected "the importance of the Parliament" and the "autonomy of our institution from national governments".
Sarah Ludford of the Liberal ALDE group called for Europe to look at what had happened and "ask if we have delivered on our human rights obligations". She noted that "this report says there's been active collusion or passively turning a blind eye" and therefore "responsible MEPs cannot let that go - we owe it to citizens".
"The report has shown that the allegations were proved, they are serious, they point to the USA" was the view of Cem Özdemir of the Greens. He said that "Europeans have not only been spectators, but we were involved, and, in some cases, supported the injustice".
Giusto Catania of the European United Left was stinging in his criticism. He remarked that "you cannot deny the facts that this US strategy could take place thanks to the collaboration of the EU governments, EU secret services and European institutions..."
MEPs who rejected it
The spokesman of the European People's Party Jas Gawronski MEP said that "the temporary committee has found precious little evidence to support the long list of allegations and suppositions of wrongdoing by Member States…". He went on to say that "the wording of the report strongly implies that countries in Europe were massively involved in extraordinary rendition activities and illegal detention. This is unfortunately not a true interpretation of the facts". He said that amendments by his group to "balance the wording of the resolution" were rejected and concluded saying "we therefore had no alternative but to vote against the report".
Konrad Szymanski of the Union for Europe of the Nations group said his group could not support the report as "there's too little to blame half of the Member States and to make a statement about the general lack of control of the secret service or lack of control of air control space.."
The Independence and Democracy group's Gerard Batten called the report "anti-Americanism" and a "grab for more power for the EU". He dismissed much of it as "speculation" and thanked the US for leading the fight against "fundamentalist Islam". For the newly formed Identity, Tradition and Sovereignty group Luca Romagnoli called the report "tenuous" and "based on media reports" - and said the matter should be "thrown open" for further scrutiny.
In their final vote last week, MEPs approved the report with 382 votes in favour, 256 against and 74 abstentions.
20070216STO03274 EP press analysis Temporary Committee Resolution Final report
EN
1
PHOTO
20070220PHT03389.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/activities/expert/committees/presentation.do;jsessionid=CBB55D95269FDDD7336A739EA289D04E.node1?committee=2073&language=EN
EN
5
LINK
/comparl/tempcom/tdip/pe382246.pdf
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070209IPR02947 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2006-0316 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
