Euro-Mediterranean relations - MEPs stress the importance of dialogue between cultures
External/international trade
2007-03-15 - 13:48
MEPs adopted a joint resolution on Euro-Mediterranean relations stressing the importance of dialogue between cultures and religions by reaffirming the need for respect for common values and the development of the rule of law, democracy and human rights.
The House considers that no terrorist act can be justified in any circumstances and terrorist acts cannot be justified by the pursuit of political or religious objectives and that the fight against terrorism cannot legitimise the stigmatisation of any particular culture, civilisation or religion. MEPs call on all countries to abide by their legal obligation to respect human rights and international humanitarian law in the fight against terrorism.
The European Parliament call on the Commission to do everything possible to bring about the setting up of democracy and human rights committees with all countries signatory to the ENP action plans and calls on the partner countries to respect their undertakings in this connection, particularly with regard to individual cases.
Parliament reiterates its call to all contracting parties to the Euro-Mediterranean association agreements to translate the human rights clause into a programme for action to enhance and promote respect for human rights and to put in place a mechanism for the regular assessment of compliance with Article 2 of the Association Agreement in order to make it more effective and more binding.
The House highlights the necessity to address women’s rights within the EuroMed Dialogue and stresses the importance of legislative reforms to support gender equality. MEPs underline the importance of women’s participation in political, economic and social life as well as in the media. The House calls for improvement of women’s access to education and healthcare especially in the southern states of the partnership.
MEPs call on the Council and Commission and the governments of the partner countries to give prime importance to environmental problems and in particular to tackle the consequences of urban concentration and industrial and commercial activities on both sides of the Mediterranean.
The House calls on the Commission and the Member States to promote respect for social and trade union rights when implementing financial and technical aid to the partner countries.
MEPs call for a major development of investments in the region as part of the European strategy with regard to financial policies and resources in the regional and intra-regional dimension of the Partnership, which would constitute value added for this strategy. The House invites the Commission, as was decided when the EU budget for 2007 was adopted, to ensure that, when drawing up the relevant strategy papers and related programmes, total resources for regional and multilateral activities are maintained at the level achieved in the 2000-2006 period; taking account of the fact that, according to the Commission, this level has reached 20 % of the total amount.
Finally, the European Parliament stresses the need to strengthen cooperation on security of energy supply in the Mediterranean region by measures involving the diversification of domestic energy resources, especially at local and regional level, the promotion of energy efficiency, particularly at decentralised level, conservation methods, the development of new technologies that present no public or environmental risk, research and development activities and the strengthening of financial options for sustainable energy projects.
An own-initiative report by Kader ARIF (PES, FR) on the creation of a Euro-Mediterranean free trade area regrets the fact that Barcelona's three main objectives (establishment of a common area of peace and stability; creation of an area of shared prosperity through an economic partnership and the creation of a FTA; cooperation in social, cultural and human affairs to promote a dialogue between cultures in the region) are still far from being achieved.
The House stresses that customs duties still account for a substantial share of the SEMCs' (the Southern and Eastern Mediterranean countries) tax revenue. The House considers, therefore, that it is necessary for the timetable for any subsequent reduction to be carried out to take into account the economic progress made by the SEMCs and the time needed to implement equitable tax reforms designed to offset the reduction in customs revenues.
Financial and technical assistance
MEPs regret the fact that the EU has been unable to make available funding which is commensurate with the objectives of the Barcelona Process, this being one of the causes of the accumulated delays in creating the FTA. The resolution notes that the lack of financial attractiveness is a major brake on FDI in the SEMCs, with negative effects on the region's economic growth.
The House recalls that investments have a very important impact in terms of subcontracting, propagation of know-how and meeting training needs in a region which as a whole is under-industrialised, and in terms of job creation.
Agriculture
The report considers that the opening-up of agricultural markets should be defined jointly and implemented progressively and asymmetrically, while providing for the possibility of a certain number of exceptions and time schedules and taking into account the EU's and the SEMCs' joint prospects for this sector and the differences between, and individual characteristics of, the agricultural sector in different countries.
The textile sector
The House reiterates its concern about the consequences of the end of the Multifibre Arrangement on 1 January 2005 and the abolition of quotas for the performance of the textile and clothing sector in the SEMCs and the EU. The resolution points out that this sector plays a crucial role in the economies of many SEMCs and some European countries. Parliament stresses that implementation of a programme aiming to improve the sector’s competitiveness, with Commission support, would serve a useful purpose. The House considers that the major difficulties faced by the textile sector could inevitably have adverse consequences for the economy of EU countries and the SEMCs and, indirectly, the establishment of the FTA. The European Parliament considers that, when the EU's new commercial and investment strategy with regard to China and, more generally, European commercial policy towards Asia are formulated, their possible impact on SEMCs and EU countries should be taken into account.
Lebanon
MEPs d eplore the systematic destruction of Lebanon's economic system and infrastructures during the recent conflict with Israel, which will cause delays in the country's development and the establishment of the FTA. The House notes the results of the conference of 25 January 2007 on the reconstruction of Lebanon and supports the efforts to organise international aid to that country in the long term. MEPs calls for the EU, in the context of the current peace process, to continue to provide sufficient financial support to help the Lebanese to cope with the challenges of the economic and social reconstruction of their country following the conflict of July 2006. The House expresses its strong concern about the situation of the Palestinian territories and consequently calls on the Council and the Commission, in cooperation with the international community, to provide the Palestinian population with essential humanitarian aid. MEPs note that Israel has transferred part of the Palestinian tax and customs revenues which it was holding, and calls on the Israeli Government to pay the remainder of these frozen sums as a matter of urgency. The House urges the Commission to insist on compliance with the clauses relating to the Barcelona Process, in particular the human rights clause included in the Association Agreements and the various action plans, in order to achieve a true area of freedom and security in the region.
20070309IPR04014 Construction of the Euro-Mediterranean Free Trade Area Joint motion for a resolution on Euro-Mediterranean relations
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5362902
-//EP//TEXT MOTION P6-RC-2007-0080 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
