The Week Ahead - 19 - 25 March 2007
Institutions
2007-03-16 - 10:29
Committee Week - Brussels
The Rome Treaty: 50 years on. European Parliament President Hans-Gert Pöttering will attend the summit of Heads of State or Government taking place in Berlin on 25 March to mark the 50th anniversary of the Treaty of Rome, the EU's founding treaty. He will also take part in the signing ceremony of the Berlin Declaration, which will review the EU's achievements and lay down pointers for the future (Sunday) .
Visit to Italy. President Pöttering makes an official visit to Italy (Monday-Friday) during which he will meet President Giorgio Napolitano and Prime Minister Romano Prodi. Mr Pöttering will than attend the Youth Summit being held in Rome from 23 to 25 March as part of the 50th anniversary celebrations of the Rome Treaty.
Racism. At a public hearing the Civil Liberties Committee will examine the best ways of combating racism and xenophobia, in line with the framework decision launched by the German Presidency in January (Monday) .
ECB. Following the decision by the European Central Bank on 8 March to raise interest rates to 3.75%, ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet will appear before the Economic Affairs Committee for the quarterly monetary dialogue (Wednesday) .
Counterfeiting. The Legal Affairs Committee is expected finally to adopt a report on protecting intellectual property through criminal sanctions against those responsible for piracy and counterfeiting (Tuesday) .
AIDS. The Environment Committee will vote on a report on the Commission's plan for fighting the HIV virus as well as a report on biodiversity (Thursday) .
Pensions. A report on the portability of supplementary pensions, a key issue for worker mobility within the EU, is scheduled for adoption at the Employment Committee (Wednesday) .
Juvenile delinquency. The social aspects and possible solutions to juvenile delinquency are the main topics on the agenda of a hearing being held by the Women's Rights Committee (Tuesday) .
Europe and the sea. With sustainable management of fishery resources an ever more pressing concern, five EP committees hold a joint public hearing on ""Towards a future maritime policy for the Union: A European vision for the oceans and seas" (Tuesday) .
20070316IPR04270 The Agenda
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071200AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
