Juvenile delinquency - prevent and rehabilitate, says Women's Rights Committee
Women's rights/Equal opportunities
2007-03-20 - 18:14
Prevention is the key to solving the problem of young offenders, MEPs and experts agreed at a public hearing on juvenile delinquency on Tuesday. Family, school and society all have important roles to play in educating and re-educating young people, said participants in the hearing, which was held by the Women's Rights and Gender Equality Committee in preparation for a forthcoming own-initiative report on the same subject.
In her opening speech the chair Anna Záborská (EPP-ED, SK), voiced a broad consensus that juvenile delinquency is a "major problem, which influences an increasing number of young people both as perpetrators and victims". This view was backed by rapporteur Katerina Batzeli (PES, EL), who stressed the need first to take stock, then to tackle the problem with policies at EU level.
Causes and extent of juvenile delinquency
Machi Lazaridis, an NGO worker from Greece, explained that the factors contributing to delinquency include social exclusion, migration, racism, gender inequality, violence (societal and domestic), breakdown of the family, lack of positive role models and the influence of media. She stressed that all these factors need to be addressed if we are to contain crime.
Statistics on the extent and severity of juvenile delinquency vary from country to country. Psychologist Dr Rudolf Hänsel from Germany said the Youth 2006 study had found that whilst the number of crimes committed by young people had fallen, their brutality had increased. By contrast, Dr Laurent Mucchielli, a French sociologist, noted that in France juvenile delinquency had increased by 70% over the last 10 years but that the most serious crimes had become less frequent. He also noted that perceptions of crime are changing - for example, the initiation rites that used to be a normal part of university life are now banned.
Prevention is better than cure
All participants agreed that what matters is preventing juvenile delinquency. In this, family, school and the peer group have the most important role, said Dr Mucchielli. It was noted that families should be given proper support when taking care of a child, for example by giving them allowances to enable one parent to stay at home and also by extending parental leaves. Christa Klass (EPP-ED, DE) wanted to know whether it would be possible to tie such allowances to an obligation on the family's part to participate in general upbringing courses, since "many women do not know how to be mothers".
Concepcion Bravo Ibanez from Spain explained that it is important to train teachers to act as mediators in conflict situations at school, in order to create a culture of dialogue and also to teach them to identify cases where a family may need help. She pointed out that it is important that family and school should use the same set of rules, so as not to confuse young people.
Rehabilitation rather than punishment
Bravo Ibanez stressed that problematic young people need "support, counselling and rules, rather than punishment". Machi Lazaridis explained that in the Canadian prosecution system "the understanding is that protection of society is best served by the rehabilitation of young people". To that end, the least restrictive approach is adopted in punishment, starting with alternative measures and probation and finishing with either open or closed custody. She also noted that the perpetrators themselves are often also victims of, for example, marginalisation and racism and that in these cases, rehabilitation and support is especially important.
What can the Women's Rights Committee do?
María Esther Herranz García (EPP-ED, ES) believed that in addition to adopting the own-initiative report, the committee could design a pilot project on preventing and dealing with juvenile delinquency. Ms Herranz García also thought the committee should make a proposal to include juvenile delinquency programs in the Daphne and European Social Fund programs. Ms Batzeli saw a need to create an observatory in order to collect statistics and get a better overview of the situation.
2007-03-20 Committee on Women's Rights and Gender Equality Chair Anna Záborská EPP-ED SK
Hearing on juvenile delinquency
20070319IPR04285
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
