MEPs expect a Berlin Declaration worthy of today's EU
Institutions
2007-03-14 - 12:45
The debate on the Berlin Declaration, to be signed on 25 March to mark the 50th anniversary of the signing of the Rome Treaty, was introduced by Parliament's President Hans-Gert Pöttering, who has been mandated by the EP political group leaders to represent Parliament in the discussions on the text, which will be a joint declaration of Parliament, Council and Commission.
The declaration, said Mr Pöttering , would consist of sections on the EU's achievements since 1957; on issues such as the equality of the Member States, transparency and subsidiarity as "cornerstones of the Community method"; a key section on the fundamental values of the EU (notably, said Mr Pöttering, "the inviolability of human dignity", which was clearly "the political starting point and objective"); and another on future challenges facing the EU, with the emphasis on "energy policy and climate change, the European common foreign and security policy, internal security and civil rights, and a socially responsible approach to society entailing strong economic success".
Regarding the Constitution, he added that the European Parliament still "firmly supports the constitutional treaty" and he stressed that this would not be simply an intergovernmental declaration but one involving the Parliament and Commission too.
Concluding, the President said "the achievements of the last 50 years have been extraordinary. Fifty years on, however, Europe needs a fresh start. Together we need to muster the courage and the will to meet the challenges of the 21st century".
Council President Steinmeier
For the Council, German foreign minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier emphasised that the EU had "a true success story" to celebrate, in which MEPs had "played a decisive role". Now, he said, "if we want to win the trust of the people of Europe, we must show that the European Union makes sense for them". Last week's summit had been a great success, showing that "the EU can act where the people expect action from us", for example on climate change and energy. It was important to build on that success in the Declaration.
On the key areas of the Declaration referred to by Mr Pöttering, Mr Steinmeier said the part on the EU's achievements would emphasise peace, stability and prosperity, including "overcoming the division of our continent". He pointed out that the EU's core principles had "become a model for integration in other parts of the world". The section on values would refer to "human dignity, freedom and responsibility, mutual solidarity, diversity and tolerance", since the EU "is more than an economic entity: it is a community of values". The part on future challenges would cover "energy, climate change, a viable common foreign and security policy, organised crime and terrorism, and solutions to illegal immigration".
A key message would be the importance of Europe's "social model", showing that "economic competition can be reconciled with social and environmental responsibility". He concluded: "Let's highlight what brings us together".
Commissioner Margot Wallström
Commissioner Wallström said the Berlin meeting will be an important occasion not only "to highlight all that unites us and emphasise our common values and principles", but also "to put forward our shared objectives and ambitions, underline our mutual respect and solidarity and reiterate our determination to build a better and stronger Union for the benefit of all citizens".
The German Presidency has been working hard to make the Berlin Declaration text "short and accessible", an "easy read with a shelf-life of more than a few days or weeks", she continued, adding that we should "look ahead to inspire Europeans for the future". Yet "stating what we value is not an easy task", she acknowledged. This meant that the decision to involve Parliament and the Commission was fully justified.
The text should be "concrete without being too specific", she said, and should reflect the EU's "genius": its ability to balance the particular with the general, the individual with the collective, by promoting growth and economic development within a strong social framework".
The EU of 27 is "just as strong and bold" as its earlier incarnations, opined Ms Wallström, adding that "enlargement has added dynamism to our work". The EU is "not 'obsessed with navel-gazing' and 'detached from citizens' concerns'", stressed Ms Wallström, adding that "if we are concerned about our institutions, it is because we want them to work well".
Ms Wallström concluded by predicting that the Berlin Declaration would bring "a momentum and urgency to efforts to settle the constitutional and institutional debate", and will "show a European Union united in its commitment to meet the aspirations of our citizens and bring to the future work of the Union the same dynamism and achievement that we have enjoyed for 50 years of the European adventure".
Speaking in the name of Parliament's Constitutional Affairs Committee, Jo Leinen (PES, DE) said it should not be difficult to reach agreement on three of the five areas in the Declaration. The section on past achievements was "straightforward". The part on values should also be simple: in addition to the "standard" values of democracy, human rights and the rule of law, solidarity and equality were important to Europeans, so the "European social model" should be mentioned. The section on future challenges was obvious too: "we face a handful of mega-problems" he said, such as climate change.
He thought it might be "harder to describe what is special about the EU" and he urged a reference to the "Community method", which "sets the EU apart from all international organisations", notably through the role of a directly elected parliament. Lastly, he wanted to see an acknowledgement that the current treaties are not up to the task and that "we need a new foundation, new methods and options". In other words, "we must commit ourselves to the new treaty".
Political group speakers
EPP-ED leader Joseph Daul (FR) recalled that his group had always striven for a more integrated, deeper Europe, "united in defence of its freedoms", including those of "entrepreneurship and the freedom to work".
Thanks to the Rome Treaty, "war is no longer a reality" in Europe, but that "we have not all been equal in this successful adventure. Whereas we have all striven to acquire freedom, peace and prosperity, some of our countries were subject to restriction, censorship and uncertainty, oppressed as they were by communist dictatorships. Some of our citizens suffered under the Communist yoke, but they are now back in the EU family, and the EU is breathing with both lungs", he said.
Mr Daul recalled that 2007 is also the 60th anniversary of the Marshall Plan: "Without the help from our American friends and without their decisive commitment to Europe, neither the Schuman Declaration nor the Treaty of Rome would have had such an easy birth".
Mr Daul listed Europe's key challenges today as "demography, globalisation, polarisation, energy supplies and climate change", and also "the fight against international terrorism". A prerequisite for the success of Europe's future generations, in an unstable and increasingly borderless world, is their confidence in their ability to adapt, without delay or hesitation, to the rapidly changing reality, he said, concluding that what is required of our generation is "level-headedness and political courage".
For the Socialist group, Martin Schulz (DE) began by stating "I don't think we ought to talk about the text but rather the context of the declaration." He commented that "expectations [about this text] are high ..[..]..We all get the feeling that this is a watershed moment ..[..].. Maybe we will continue with success or else we might end up moving away from integration into an uncertain future."
Mr Schulz pointed out that the Berlin declaration is called upon to deliver a very strong message of hope and that we cannot just sit back and say that we have been very successful over the past 50 years. He spoke of the danger of intolerance, of "things that we thought we'd overcome." He said that to stop this, a message should be delivered to young people, saying "yes, we've achieved all this but you have to do something too." Mr Schulz spoke of the importance of looking after the world's climate, providing decent opportunities for young people and their children to "grow up in peace and have prospects." He concluded by saying that "we need new methods ..[..].. we're launched on a new track for the future."
For the Liberal group, Graham Watson (ALDE, UK), pointed to this "significant birthday [as] a good occasion to take stock." He stated that "the Berlin Declaration must reflect less our pride in the past, more our determination for the future." Commenting on the proposed Declaration, he stated that "to debate a Declaration without even a draft is bizarre ..[..].. Don't be surprised if many of us have doubts."
Mr Watson went on to say that "we want a declaration which will bring our citizens back on board the European project" and that "an enlarged and open Europe needs greater solidarity between its nations and its citizens." He spoke of the current global challenges and of the "opportunity to explain to citizens why now more than ever integration is important."
Lastly, Mr Watson advised the German Presidency to "keep it short ... the kind of text one might nail on to the door in Wittenberg".
On behalf of the UEN group, Cristiana Muscardini (IT) quoted Robert Schuman who said that "Europe will have to be built together if built at all." She pointed out that a Union of 27 cannot work with rules which were set for a union of 15 and went on to say "our historical roots ...need to be clarified for the future ..[..]..if we're to deal with others, we need first of all to know ourselves."
Ms Muscardini added "we need to recognise that our future is different from our past" and make extra efforts on dialogue and ensuring the security of our external borders. She stated "there is no real culture unless there is a recognition of the dignity of the individual". She also spoke of the importance of respecting trade rules and of the dangers of fundamentalism. Ms Muscardini concluded by quoting Robert Schuman when he said that "world peace cannot be safeguarded without creative efforts."
For the Greens/EFA group, Daniel Cohn-Bendit (DE) began by calling for a more inclusive approach to the drafting of the declaration. A celebration of prosperity and the rule of law must not overlook poverty and those who have no rights. If the declaration is to be "something that the people will notice", there ought to be more specific objectives, e.g. on climate change: a target of no more than 2 degrees of global warming, resource-efficient use of materials and 100% use of renewable sources of energy within the next 50 years.
Turning to immigration, he stated that the debate on this issue should acknowledge the 50m legal immigrants living in Europe today. "Immigration should not be regarded as a threat to Europe". The immigrants who are here legally and have rights are too often "bundled into the same box" as illegal immigrants. "We can and should be proud", he said, of what has been achieved in terms of human rights and freedom for minorities.
On behalf of the GUE/NGL group, Francis Wurtz (FR) stressed the need for consultation. However, he said, the Berlin declaration could be useful for adopting an honest and critical approach towards the EU, to address what might be seen as "a crisis of confidence" among the peoples of Europe. The declaration needs to look at the day-to-day realities of ordinary people, he said, in order to make relevant to them the "Europe that is being created". The legitimacy of the social and economic model is being questioned, Mr Wurtz added, and the Berlin declaration offers the opportunity to "breathe...new meaning into this wonderful European adventure."
For the Independence and Democracy group, Nigel Farage (IND/DEM, UK) mocked the optimism of earlier speakers and reflected that there were present those who seemed to think that the Berlin declaration "may even be able to control the weather in the future." Contrasting EU levels of GDP and R&D investment with those of the US, Mr Farage emphasised the economic challenges that needed to be addressed in a practical and constructive manner. Lastly, he urged the House to "Please please please...ask the peoples of Europe" about the declaration.
Bruno Gollnisch (FR), the leader of the Identity, Tradition and Sovereignty group, argued that the declaration should focus upon the young people of Europe, to tackle the unemployment and poverty that still exists. It should not be difficult, he stressed, for young people to be able to find a job to enable them "to start a family and buy a few possessions." This should be the minimal, crucial objective for a declaration that is to set out the future of Europe.
British and Irish MEPs
Roger Helmer (UK) for the non-aligned MEPs, told the House "This Berlin Declaration fails to recognise that the EU is making us poorer, less democratic and less free". The "elephant in the room" was the Constitution, which "should be dead" but which EU leaders were determined to bring back somehow, despite the No votes in two referendums. They would use every procedural trick to avoid further referendums, but "when the backlash comes" from the people of Europe, he said, "it will sweep away this failing European project".
Proinsias De Rossa (PES, IE) made a very specific point about the content of the Declaration, saying "I want to draw attention to the fact that not a single speaker referred to the non-sectarian nature of the European Union and how important it is that the Declaration make clear that the European Union respects all religions, that it is a secular organisation and that it must maintain its democratic and secular nature if it is to maintain its cohesion. "
Council and Commission responses
In his reply for the Council, Mr Steinmeier said the debate had shown "it is not easy to agree on the values to include" in the Declaration. It would "be hard to fit in all the topics" that everyone wanted. He stressed, though, that the aim was not just to "produce a declaration" but "genuinely to take stock" of the past and present.
He rejected Mr Cohn-Bendit's reaction to his original comments on illegal immigration, saying he had simply emphasised the need for a joint approach on this issue.
To the rest of the House, he said that 90% of their concerns matched the Council's discussions last week, so there was no need to fear that the Council would overlook anything. Ultimately, however, a key aim must be "to formulate our views in a manner that is widely comprehensible" to the people of Europe. For this reason he was sceptical about the idea of using terms such as "Community method".
For the Commission, Ms Wallström made two additional remarks.
First, she said, "the European construction is not 'ready' and will never be 'ready' - we are constantly adding another piece to this puzzle or architecture of Europe. How do we illustrate our vision of the future to the 20 year-olds of today?" she asked, rhetorically.
Secondly, "we shall not be able construct Europe if the people are not behind us, and so we must be open with the public", she said, pointing out that "we can't negotiate the contents of a 2-page document with 450 million people". "Let's put together what we are proud of, and formulate a vision for the next 50 years", she concluded.
20070309IPR04013
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
