Climate change fears lend urgency to Conference on Northern Dimension Policy
External relations
2007-03-01 - 13:10
The special vulnerability of the Arctic region to climate change was the main topic of discussion during the first Parliamentary Conference on the Northern Dimension, being held this Wednesday and Thursday at the European Parliament. Participants emphasised that urgent concerted action was necessary, and that they needed to put pressure on Member States and the Commission to take the necessary steps.
The Northern Dimension Policy (NDP) brings together relevant actors around the Baltic Sea and the Arctic to foster cooperation and increase the welfare of this region of Europe. The new policy, which entered into force on 1 January 2007, makes reference to a parliamentary forum, the establishment of which is the reason for the conference held on Wednesday. Participants included MEPs and Members from several regional Inter-Parliamentary bodies, such as the Baltic Sea Parliamentary Conference and the Nordic Council. The European Commission and Council were also represented.
In her keynote address, Diana Wallis (ALDE, UK) noted that the NDP was "no longer just an EU policy, but a partnership." She stressed that " there's no need to create a new parliamentary body in the North, but we need to deliver a clear message on what we want from the new policy." Echoing her sentiments, the EP's rapporteur, Alexander Stubb (EPP-ED, FI) noted that not much has happened in the Commission since the adoption of his report on a Baltic Sea Strategy late last year, and that "high-level political support" was urgently needed.
Climate change and protecting the environment at the top of the agenda
The conference focused on specific measures that needed to be addressed in the Northern region. Although several different areas were mentioned, such as cooperation in search-and-rescue operations, or educating people about the dangers of alcohol abuse, environmental questions topped most speakers' list of concerns.
Jónina Bjartmarz, Icelandic Minister for the Environment and Nordic Cooperation, judged the Environmental Partnership (NDEP) as "by far the largest and most important achievement of the Northern Dimension." Commission Vice-President Margot Wallström warned of "disastrous consequences for arctic ecosystems" if action were not taken to tackle the causes of global warming. Almost all speakers spoke of their personal encounters with the effects of this phenomenon. Parliamentarians hoped that the International Polar Year (to be launched on 1 March) would push the issue even more into the spotlight.
The parliamentary dimension - a political role?
Despite the dominance of environmental questions, conference participants also noted the value of addressing a wide variety of sensitive political topics, as well. As Liv Monica Stubholts, State Secretary, Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, put it, "we should not underestimate the importance of the Northern Dimension as a political arena. It is essential that we come together regularly to discuss the political challenges and opportunities found in this vast and diversified geographical area." Andrei Klimov, from the Russian State Duma, asked what will happen if the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement (PCA) between Russia and the EU is not renewed before it runs out 9 months from now. Danuté Budrekaité (ALDE, LT), meanwhile, suggested that an independent group of experts was needed to ascertain if the Baltic sea-bed was safe for the construction of a pipeline.
Conclusions
In her concluding speech Diana Wallis (ALDE, UK) introduced the Conference Statement as outcome of the conference. She said that it is suggested to hold Northern Dimension Parliamentary Forum every two years "to give democratic parliamentary input to the Northern Dimension".
The participants of the Conference welcomed the updated Northern Dimension Policy that came into force on 1 January 2007 and support the suggestion to hold a Northern Dimension Parliamentary Forum which could improve the role of the parliamentarians of the Northern Dimension region in the implementation of the ND policy.
The Parliamentary Conference:
calls for the arranging of the Northern Dimension Parliamentary Forum to be held every two years in order to discuss issues of common concern and examine the evolution of the new Northern Dimension policy. This Forum should have a flexible structure and ownership to promote the coordination and exchange of views between different institutions for regional cooperation in the North.
underlines the economic significance of the Baltic Sea region with its high growth rates, strong science base and high innovation potential to Europe as a whole and supports the work for a Baltic Sea Strategy for the Northern Dimension. It calls attention to the fragile environmental status of the Baltic Sea.
calls on closer cooperation regarding marine security, especially regarding search and rescue matters.
believes that it is important that the Northern Dimension aims at filling the four EU/Russia Common Spaces with concrete content, while at the same time focusing on other issues of specific relevance in the North such as its fragile environment, indigenous peoples' issues, cultural diversity and health and social well-being.
underlines the role of the Arctic as an early warning area for global climate change and stresses that rapid Arctic warming is likely to have major implications for the whole planet and needs to be addressed globally.
Parliamentary Conference on the Northern Dimension
2007-02-28 In the Chair: Diana Wallis ALDE UK
20070226IPR03581
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
