Parliament adopts report on social services of general interest in the European Union
Social policy
2007-03-14 - 13:23
In its report on "social services of general interest in the European Union (SSGI)" the European Parliament welcomes the Commission's initiative to provide a specific conceptual and legal framework for this sector. MEPs state that health services, which were not included in the Commission's communication on the subject, are also SSGI. The report by Joel Hasse Ferreira (PES, PT), which was adopted by a large majority.
According to MEPs, social services of general interest (SSGI) form one of the pillars of the European social model and "play an essential part in securing civic peace and the European Union’s economic, social and territorial cohesion". SSGI should not be seen as "a burden on public authorities", as they contribute to economic growth, prosperity, employment and social cohesion. Consequently, MEPs consider it a mistake to set up "a false opposition" between rules on competition, public aid and the market on the one hand, and concepts of public service, general interest and social cohesion on the other. Rather, positive synergies between the economic and social aspects should be promoted. Nevertheless, the rules on competition, public aid and the internal market must be compatible with public service requirements.
Although the House favours the establishment of public-private partnerships, the report stresses that the Member States’ public authorities are free to decide whether SSGI should be provided by mutual associations, other forms of social organisation or private businesses. Yet, public authorities should also be able to check at any time that the service providers are abiding by certain principles and values.
Adequate budgetary resources and vocational training for staff
MEPs criticise that, in some Member States, regional or local authorities are not allocated "sufficient budget resources to enable them to deliver services of the highest standard in terms of quantity and quality". Member States should therefore guarantee that any transfer of powers to regional and local authorities for the purpose of delivering SSGI is accompanied by "adequate budgetary resources". Moreover, the Commission, the Member States, and service providers should develop vocational training initiatives which enable the staff of social services to cope with circumstances such as stress, shift work or night work, and certain dangerous or demanding activities.
20070309IPR03998 Social services of general interest in the EU
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5354052
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
