2008 budget to focus on "boosting confidence in EU institutions"
Budget
2007-03-29 - 13:53
The 2008 budget will focus upon making communication more efficient in the European Parliament in order to raise awareness among EU citizens and to "inform effectively the EU citizen on its activities and contribution to European construction", according to a report adopted by MEPs.
A focus on enhancing the exchange of information is needed to raise the profile of the 2009 elections to the Parliament, according to the report, written by Ville ITÄLÄ (EPP-ED, FI). Existing channels of communication can be improved, and a particular focus placed upon informing the local and regional media.
Greater efficiency in this area, the House suggests, would help "address the shortcomings related to the image of the European Union" and be "highly profitable for the European project."
Obstacles to more efficient information exchange
The budget will look at factors which hinder the general flow of information, including in particular the fact that the European Parliament is located in three places. The European Parliament expresses concern over "the additional costs that this implies in terms of running costs and in particular when travelling from one place to another." The budget can be used to improve this situation, according to the report, through investment in "new technologies in order to limit the negative impact of the European Parliament’s geographical layout such as the synchronisation of computers with mobile phones or the use of video conference rooms."
There are, however, problems which still exist in terms of successfully implementing this new technology, and MEPs call for a specific section of the budget to be dedicated to evaluating "IT projects launched in the past five years with indications regarding the provisional costs, the starting and provisional delivery dates, the delivery dates and the final costs."
European Parliament staff
The House is particularly concerned about "the costs related to geographical dispersion", in particular "the number of missions undertaken by staff within the three places of work", and will "examine the possibilities to rationalise them better."
Services for MEPs
The report also draws attention to services available to MEPs, for example for meetings and access to library resources, including calling for the establishment of "an extensive single document and information repository of all existing texts and expertise (Knowledge Management System)." The report also calls for "a more personal level of service to members, under transparent and clearly defined conditions" to facilitate for MEPs the "accomplishment of their role and [to] enhance the quality of EU legislation."
Assistants' statute
The House notes the plenary's decision to fully support the adoption of a real and meaningful statute for Members' assistants. MEPs expect the Council to take a final decision on this issue by the beginning of September 2007 in order to permit the allocation of the necessary funds for it; calls on its Bureau to push forward the issue of the statute for Members' assistants vis-à-vis the Council. The House is convinced that such a statute will contribute to improving the quality of Members' activities.
20070326IPR04620 2008 budget: orientations, other sections Final text, as adopted by the European Parliament, will be available here in due course
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5433642
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
