Community action on the provision of cross-border healthcare
Public health
2007-03-15 - 13:48
In adopting a resolution on community action on the provision of cross-border healthcare, MEPs welcome the Commission initiative to launch a consultation procedure on the best form of Community action with a view to providing a framework for cross-border aspects of health-care.
MEPs point out that the aspects of cross-border healthcare cover both patient mobility, the mobility of healthcare professionals and the provision of healthcare from another country. The resolution also points out that the ECJ rulings specifically address the problem relating to patients' rights to seek treatment abroad and subsequently get reimbursed by their national health insurance schemes. The House considers, therefore, that ensuring legal certainty as regards the reimbursement of the costs for cross-border healthcare is one of the priority issues for both patients, national health insurance systems and healthcare providers. MEPs underline the need to clarify procedures and conditions for reimbursement in various cases.
MEPs urge the Commission to develop common principles and basic guidelines for healthcare in order to guarantee patient safety. The House takes the view, also, that the development of harmonised health indicators (such as blood test standards) at Community level is very important for the development of exchange of best practice, particularly between health professionals. MEPs consider that the EU must play an important role in improving the availability of information for patients on cross-border mobility by coordinating cooperation between Member States in this field. Parliament considers that patient mobility must always be a matter for free patient choice and that no pressure must be brought to bear on patients' freedom of choice.
The House stress the need to ensure patient safety in all circumstances regardless of where and how healthcare is provided. MEPs call for clarity on the responsibilities between authorities in supervising healthcare providers and for effective information exchange between national authorities on the registration and disciplinary status of health care professionals. Parliament considers it necessary to create a mechanism for appeals on malpractice in cross-border healthcare. Parliament points out the necessity for common classification of the health services in the EU.
The House points out that, in almost all cases, healthcare and medical treatment require follow-up, which may take a long time. MEPs recognise the need for clear rules on the division of tasks and responsibilities between healthcare providers during the different stages of treatment and care. MEPs consider the introduction of a legislative framework at Community level as the best way to ensure legal certainty for patients, national healthcare systems and for private healthcare providers. The House believes that it is also the best way to enhance the optimal use of healthcare resources and speed up access to treatment.
MEPs consider it necessary to incorporate in the legal framework a mechanism for data collection and exchange of information between national authorities on healthcare providers, their registration and disciplinary status, and available expertise. Parliament believes also that the creation of a network of European Centres of Reference would bring considerable benefits to the treatment of diseases. The House appeals to the Member States to introduce a one-stop shop approach for complaint procedures for patients. The House considers it necessary, for patient safety, to incorporate into the legal framework a duty that national authorities exchange registration and disciplinary information about healthcare professionals engaging in cross-border healthcare.
The House calls on the Commission to pay special attention to the provision of information to patients on their rights and obligations and introduce appropriate provisions in its legislative proposal. Finally, the European Parliament believes that the forthcoming Community framework can provide an opportunity to empower European citizens as patients as well as encourage Member States to develop their healthcare systems.
20070309IPR04003 Motion for a resolution on Community action in the provision of cross-border healthcare
-//EP//TEXT MOTION B6-2007-0098 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
