Local authorities "under-estimated and under-exploited" in development process
Development and cooperation
2007-03-15 - 12:55
Local authorities in developing countries should be given a much broader and more powerful role in the process of managing aid from European funds, according to a report adopted by the European Parliament.
The report, drafted by Pierre SCHAPIRA (PES, FR), says that the role of local authorities in development has "so far been under-estimated and under-exploited", due to a lack of sufficient political dialogue on the allocation of EU aid. The House emphasises the need for "direct, appropriate funding", stating that local authorities should be involved in "each phase of the cooperation process".
Lack of genuine involvement
The importance of involving local authorities in the cooperation process, through effective political dialogue, was acknowledged in the Cotonou Agreement (2000). Yet despite clear guidelines set out by the European Commission, the report finds that "local authorities in developing countries have only been involved in the implementation of projects and not in the elaboration of development policies".
Part of the problem concerns the lack of a clearly defined role for local authorities in the development process. Local authorities should be identified separately from non-State actors, and consideration should be given to "their sphere of competence, legitimacy and democratic control, experience in management of local affairs and involvement in the implementation of public policies".
The report adds that local authorities have "added value in terms of implementing sectoral programmes", such as those involving health, education and essential public services, but are at present "often excluded from this process."
Decentralisation and local authority action
The focus of EU aid should be decentralisation, the report suggests, and that this aid should be transferred directly to local authorities. The European Parliament also emphasises that recognising and harnessing local authority action are issues which should inform the revision of the coming development instruments in 2008/2009.
Furthermore, MEPs call for the creation of an international monitoring centre for local democracy and decentralisation, in partnership with local authority organisations, in order to enable and regulate the measures which will allow local authorities to play a much more significant role in the development process.
20070309IPR04020 Local authorities and development cooperation
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5386642
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
