How can the fruit and vegetable sector be made more competitive?
Agriculture
2007-03-22 - 17:09
Producer organisations should be strengthened and competitiveness increased, while maintaining flexible support suited to various products and situations in the Member States: such was the general consensus which emerged at a hearing on the reform of the rules on fruit and vegetables organised by the EP's Committee on Agriculture on Wednesday. However, Members and experts were more lukewarm in their opinions about the place of 'decoupling' of aid from crisis management mechanisms.
Declining consumption in the EU, rising imports and pressure from large distributors to cut prices are depressing the EU fruit and vegetable sector. In January the European Commission proposed a reform to strengthen producer organisations, combine the various existing aid schemes into a single area payment scheme (SPS, independent of the quantity produced), in accordance with the principles of the CAP reform of 2003, step up environmental constraints and promote consumption, particularly by young people, while maintaining budgetary 'neutrality'.
Improving the Commission proposal
Presenting her draft report at the hearing, the EP's rapporteur, Isabel Salinas García (PSE, ES), said that she 'agreed with the Commission's objectives but not its proposals'.
In particular, she called for greater flexibility in the implementation of decoupling, allowing those countries which so wished to apply total decoupling, while others should have the option of transitional periods or aids per hectare to enable producers in various sectors to adjust to the changes.
Mrs Salinas García is particularly concerned that the abolition of processing aid which is to accompany the introduction of the single area payment scheme may jeopardise dual-use production (fresh/processed), which applies to such products as citrus fruits, tomatoes, grapes, pears, plums, etc. She proposes that Member States should have the option of partial decoupling, replacing the single area payment scheme with an area-related aid scheme analogous to that which currently applies to nuts. She also recommends raising the Community ceiling for aid to the operating funds of producer organisations from 4.1% to 6% of the products marketed and increasing the Community contribution to these funds from 50% to 60%. In order to manage serious crises, Mrs Salinas García calls for Member States to be allowed to create a Security Fund which could be used by all producers, irrespective of whether they were members of producer organisations, and which would be funded in equal proportions by the Union, Member States and producers. Member States could moreover use part of their national reserves, up to a ceiling of 0.5%, for this fund, as a budget-neutral measure. Lastly, she proposes the creation of a prices monitoring centre in order to anticipate crises better.
Producer organisations should be strengthened, but not at all costs
Most speakers supported the rapporteur's view that aid to producer organisations should be increased to enable them to act as a more effective counterweight to large distributors and to competitors in third countries. Pointing out that only 13% of Greek producers were members of producer organisations, Tzanetos Karamichas, President of the Pan-Hellenic Confederation of Agricultural Cooperatives (PASEGES) expressed the fear that it might have an adverse impact on the citrus fruit, tomato and fig sectors if processing aid were reduced. Esther Harranz García (PPE-DE, ES) considered that raising the ceiling for aid to producer organisations by 5% would be more realistic in view of the budgetary constraints.
A number of participants, like Hans van Hes, Chairman of the Fruit and Vegetable Committee of COPA-COGECA (Committee of Agricultural Organisations in the European Community/ General Committee for Agricultural Cooperation in the EU), were concerned about the new requirements which the Commission intended to impose on producer organisations, particularly the requirement to devote at least 20% of expenditure under operational programmes to environmental measures. Eduardo Baamonde, Director-General of Spain's Confederation of Agricultural Cooperatives, warned against a 'one size fits all' approach to very heterogeneous sectors.
Decoupling, crisis management and imports
With the exception of Luis Alenquer, of the Confederation of Portuguese Producers, who favoured complete decoupling of aid from production in order to give producers real freedom of choice and the chance to diversify production more, most participants favoured a more flexible approach with transitional periods or specific systems for different situations.
While experts and Members were generally agreed as to the need to improve crisis management, their opinions were more divided as regards the best type of instrument for the purpose.
The problem of competition from low-price fruit and vegetables imported from third countries and the forthcoming arrival on the market of Chinese products such as apples and tomatoes was mentioned in particular by Claude Rehlinger, Chairman of the National Section for Apples (France), who stressed the need to harmonise social and plant health standards in third countries, to step up health checks on imported products and to maintain the existing Community system of import certificates.
The need to avoid penalising producers in the new Member States
A number of speakers considered it necessary to find appropriate solutions for the new Member States, where production receives less support and where producer organisations have greater difficulty in developing in a situation where their countries have abolished the old socialist cooperatives. Poland, where fewer than 1% of producers belong to producer organisations, is 'excluded ' from the Commission proposal, although of the 10 million tons produced in Europe, 2.5 million is produced by Polish farmers, said Bodgan Golik (PSE, PL). Bozena Nosecka of the Agro-Economics and Food Economics Institute of Warsaw supported the proposal for specific aid for soft fruit put forward by Mrs Salinas García, taking the view that the single payment scheme was liable to destabilise the industry in Poland, which was responsible for 50% of Community production. According to the rapporteur, this aid, which would cost € 20 million per annum, would constitute the only budget increase as compared with the Commission proposal.
Figures on European fruit and vegetable production
In the EU-27, fruit and vegetable production accounts for 3.1% of the EU budget and represents 17% of total production in the EU.
The EU-27 is the third largest producer of fruit and vegetables in the world (8.3% of the total), behind India (10%) and China (35%). Italy is the biggest producer in Europe, the next biggest being Spain and France. The Mediterranean countries, where this industry accounts for more than 30% of farm production, are most at risk from fluctuations in production.
2007-03-20 Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development Chair Neil Parish EPP-DE UK
Public hearing on reform of the common organisation of the market in fruit and vegetables
20070319IPR04293
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
