MEPs concerned about illegal bird hunting in Malta
Petitions
2007-03-15 - 12:55
In adopting a resolution on illegal bird hunting in Malta with 300 votes in favour, 253 against and 35 abstentions, MEPs takes note of the report on the fact-finding mission of the Committee of Petitions during which the facts were examined in situ from 9-12 May 2005, and supports the recommendations in the report.
The European Parliament has received several petitions against the practices of spring hunting and trapping of migratory birds in Malta, including a petition from the Belgian Royal Society for the Protection of Birds, signed by 300 000 Europeans, more than 4000 of whom from Malta. 115 000 Europeans, notably from the UK, petitioned the Maltese Government in February 2007 in protest against the spring hunting. The Committee on Petitions has examined the allegations made in the petitions and dispatched a delegation to Malta to establish the facts of the situation in situ.
The report on the fact-finding mission concluded that, although certain efforts had been made by the Maltese authorities responsible seeking to bring national legislation and its application into compliance with Community law, the sustainability and survival of populations of several species of migratory birds still face serious threats from illegal and indiscriminate hunting and trapping when birds of these species pass through Malta during their spring migration.
The House shares the concerns expressed in the report on the fact-finding mission, in particular in respect of the authorisation of spring hunting of resting migratory birds and trapping and illegal hunting of protected species, including in areas protected under Community law. MEPs condemn all types of illegal hunting in all Member States. The EP calls on the Maltese Government and the Commission to publish their full technical positions on the subject.
Parliament welcomes the Commission's decision to investigate the compliance of Maltese legislation and its application with Directive 79/409/EEC on the protection of wild birds and strongly urges the Commission to redouble its efforts to persuade the Maltese authorities to comply fully with Community law.
The House Calls on the Maltese Government to fully comply with the EU Wild Birds Directive, the relevant Community law and the terms of the Accession Treaty as signed by the Maltese Government. Parliament welcomes the decision by the Maltese Government to address cases of abuse by, inter alia, increasing fines to a maximum of €14 000 and providing for terms of imprisonment of up to two years and the permanent revocation of hunting licences in the case of recidivists. MEPs welcome the decision by the Maltese Government to ban the capturing of finches and the hunting of birds at sea during spring.
20070309IPR04004 Motion for a resolution - illegal bird hunting in Malta
-//EP//TEXT MOTION B6-2007-0119 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
