Islands and natural and economic constraints
Regional policy
2007-03-15 - 12:55
The Commission should consider allowing state aid to be granted to island regions "where fuel and energy costs clearly adversely affect the competitiveness of the communities living on them" says an own-initiative report adopted by the European Parliament with 473 votes in favour, 26 against 35 abstentions.
State aid for single market access
Given that fuel cost fluctuations can make transportation between island regions and mainland Europe "significantly more burdensome", the European Commission's next regional state aid guidelines should include a "regime allowing operating aids", says the report, which the House endorsed by a large majority.
State aid policy needs to be implemented more flexibly, notably as regards transport links such as sea and air ports, so as to give islands access to the single market on equal terms with mainland regions, adds the report, which also calls on the Commission to think about how the "market investor" (state aid eligibility) test could be adjusted to reflect the realities of life on islands that may lack such investors.
Ultraperipheral, or just insular?
Whereas measures to assist the EU's outermost, "ultraperipheral" regions have a strong legal basis in EC Treaty Article 299, the equivalent rules for islands (EC Treaty Article 158 and the Amsterdam Treaty Declaration on Islands), "have never been the subject of implementing provisions", notes the report.
Sustainable development
The report encourages island communities to use the EU financial and management facilities JASPERS and JEREMIE in order to foster the growth of micro, small and medium-sized enterprises, as part of a drive to diversify island economies and promote sustainable development. It also calls on the Commission to carry out a cross-sectoral study of opportunities to support sustainable tourism within the regional strategies of islands that are far from centres of population.
Data for policymakers
To help policymakers to take account of islands' special characteristics, the report urges EU Member States to establish specific mechanisms for gathering and sending local data to the European Spatial Planning Observation Network (ESPON). It calls on the Commission to update the island statistics last gathered in 2003, to define new statistical indicators better suited to measuring economic development, and to report on them regularly, including "best practice" examples.
The report also asks the Commission to set up, within the Directorate-General for Regional Policy, an administrative unit for the islands, like the outermost regions unit, to ensure that policy developers take systematic account of the special needs of islands and their permanent and seasonal populations.
20070309IPR04019 Regional policy (islands and natural and economic constraints)
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5341452
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
