Arlene McCarthy says Internal Market must work for citizens, consumers and businesses
Institutions
United Kingdom
2007-03-05 - 17:30
Arlene McCarthy - Chair of the Internal Market and Consumer Protection Committee
Arlene McCarthy (Labour, North West, PES UK) is Chair of the European Parliament Internal Market and Consumer Protection Committee (IMCO) of the European Parliament. Mrs McCarthy outlines the importance of the committee in ensuring the internal market works for citizens, consumers and businesses. In particular, Mrs McCarthy points out the work being done by the committee on a ban on the trade in cat and dog fur across Europe.
How will your past experience assist you in chairing this committee?
AM. I have been an MEP for 13 years. During that time I have been the Party of European Socialists (PES) and Labour spokesperson on regional policy and Labour spokesperson on the internal market for the last six years. As such I have always been actively involved in cross-party and cross-national negotiation on policy issues, an essential qualification in chairing a committee.
What are the priorities for the Internal Market and Consumer Protection Committee in 2007?
AM. Our priority has to be to ensure the internal market works for citizens, consumers and businesses. The Committee is stepping up its work on transposition and implementation, ensuring that existing law is efficient and can be enforced. Consumers need to be more aware and better informed of their rights in the internal market. To this end the Commission's review of the consumer acquis is critical in ensuring we focus on the issues that impact on consumers, notably the need to amend laws on timeshare.
Do you and your committee believe the European Commission is bringing forward the right blend of proposals?
AM. We welcome the fact that the Commission is paying more attention to the need to explain and justify new legislation and in particular to carry out impact assessments on the benefits and consequences of EU law. The Commissioner needs to be stronger on checking enforcement, as this is vital to make the single market work and ensuring consumers have rights and redress.
Of particular interest is the report on banning the placing on the market and the import of or export of cat and dog fur and products containing such fur, what are your thoughts on the proposal?
AM. I am very proud of the fact that it was our Committee who maintained the pressure on the Commission to come forward with a ban on the trade in cat and dog fur across Europe, which gives the EU the legal power to act. This is an issue which is important to our citizens, I have received a petition signed by a quarter of a million people. My Committee and our rapporteur (Eva-Britt Svensson, GUE/NGL, Sweden) are determined to ensure that there are no derogations to this law. The law has to be tough and there must be effective criminal and civil penalties in place to be a genuine deterrent to the traders.
How has enlargement impacted on the IMCO committee?
AM. Enlargement has been a positive asset to the work of the Committee. We have active MEPs from the new member states who bring a new and fresh perspective t our debates. We also have the challenge of rolling out the internal market to the new states and making sure their consumers enjoy the same rights and protection as the rest of the EU.
How will you ensure your own impartiality?
AM. The job of the Committee Chair is to set the policy agenda and to lead and manage the work of the Committee. In the final analysis it is the political groups and their individual Members who determine the outcome of the deliberations with their votes. It is my role to ensure that process is fair and transparent.
The Internal Market and Consumer Protection Committee is responsible for:
1. coordination at Community level of national legislation in the sphere of the internal market and of the customs union, in particular:
(a) the free movement of goods including the harmonisation of technical standards,
(b) the right of establishment,
(c) the freedom to provide services except in the financial and postal sectors;
2. measures aiming at the identification and removal of potential obstacles to the functioning of the internal market;
3. the promotion and protection of the economic interests of consumers, except for public health and food safety issues, in the context of the establishment of the internal market.
Arlene McCarthy is one of two UK MEPs who chair a committee in the EP, the other is Neil Parish (Conservative, EPP-ED UK) who chairs the Agriculture Committee (see link )
20070305IPR03804 European Parliament Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection Profile of Arlene McCarthy MEP - Chair of the committee More information on proposed ban on the placing on the market and the import of or export of cat and dog fur and products containing such fur. Neil Parish - New Chairman of EP Agriculture Committee speaks out on the committee's priorities
EN
1
PHOTO
20070305PHT03806.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/committees/imco_home_en.htm
EN
4
LINK
/members/public/geoSearch/view.do?country=GB&partNumber=1&zone=North+West&language=EN&id=2173
EN
5
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5413232
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070226IPR03601 EN NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070226IPR03601 EN NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
