The Week Ahead – 12-18 March 2007
Institutions
2007-03-09 - 10:34
Plenary Session, Strasbourg
Berlin Declaration and European Council. The German Foreign Minister will update MEPs on preparations for the Berlin Declaration to mark the 50th anniversary of the Treaty of Rome and join a second debate on the outcome of the EU summit in Brussels on 8-9 March. (Wednesday)
Aviation. MEPs will debate a Commission statement on the ‘open skies’ agreement with the USA (Tuesday) and a first-reading report on the European Aviation Safety Agency (debate Tuesday, vote Wednesday). Amid concern over job losses at Airbus, there will also be a debate on the future of aircraft construction in Europe. (Wednesday)
Equal opportunities. In the week after International Women’s Day, MEPs will consider a report from the Women’s Rights Committee on the “road map” for equality between men and women over the coming years. (debate Monday, vote Tuesday)
Online music. A report critical of the Commission’s plans to open the music copyright field to competition will be put to the vote. (debate Monday, vote Tuesday)
Euromed. Ahead of the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly meeting in Tunis on 16-17 March, MEPs will debate Euro-Mediterranean relations with the Commission and Council, and consider a report from the Trade Committee on a Euro-Med free-trade area. (debates Wednesday, vote on report Thursday). EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering is among those participating in the Tunis meeting, with intercultural dialogue high on the agenda. (Friday - Saturday)
Committee meetings. Away from the plenary, the Budgets Committee will vote on a report on the future of the own resources system for funding the EU budget. The Foreign Affairs Committee meanwhile is set to adopt a report on Kosovo. (both Monday)
European Day for Victims of Terrorism. Before the official start of the plenary, Parliament will mark the annual day in memory of victims of terrorism with 500 young people joining President Pöttering and Commissioner Vladimir Spidla among others for a debate in the plenary chamber. (Monday)
20070307IPR03828 The Agenda
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071100AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
