Post-Briefing - 28-29 March 2007 - Brussels
2007-03-29 - 18:24
Statement by Parliament's President
President Hans-Gert Pöttering issued a statement following recent events in Zimbabwe where the political situation has escalated and there have been violent attacks from government-controlled forces.
MEPs debate Berlin Declaration with Chancellor Merkel
MEPs debated the Berlin Declaration which was signed on 25 March to mark the 50th anniversary of the EU with Chancellor Merkel and Commission President Barroso. The declaration, signed by the three Presidents of the European institutions, was widely welcomed by the major groups, although some MEPs criticised the way it was negotiated. Chancellor Merkel suggested that the EP hold an event with civil society to formally contribute to the June European Council.
MEPs debate foreign policy for 2007 with Solana
MEPs debated the outlook for the EU's Common Foreign and Security Policy with High Representative Javier Solana. Issues from the captured British navy personnel, Darfur, the situation in the Middle East, the final status of Kosovo and the possible US anti-missile shield to be installed in Europe were all raised in the extensive debate.
Legal status of football should be clearer / Reconciling data protection and security at football games: a winning draw
Parliament adopted an own-initiative report on the future of professional football in Europe. Parliament calls on the Commission to clarify the legal status of football, and recommends efforts to be made to assure greater transparency and good governance in the European professional football. Parliament also calls for solidarity in the selling of TV rights, and protection of minors against human trafficking. Parliament also gave its support for an Austrian initiative to improve police security at football matches. However, security can never be ensured at the expense of data protection rights, warned MEPs.
MEPs call for tougher rules to improve safety at sea
Parliament adopted two reports designed to raise standards of maritime safety. The first looks at the duties of "flag states" (the state where a ship is registered), the second at the question of civil liability. These reports are part of a group of seven reports known as the "third maritime safety package". The other five will come before Parliament's plenary in April.
MEPs strongly back Martti Ahtisaari's proposal on Kosovo, call for it to be put under "supervised sovereignty"
Parliament gave its full support today to the Ahtisaari proposal for a status settlement, stating that "sovereignty supervised by the international community is the best option" for securing the objectives of a peaceful, self-sustaining Kosovo. The report also reaffirmed the European perspective of both Serbia and Kosovo, and called for the EU to play a central role in the current international negotiations for a settlement.
Member States struggling to reap full benefit of CAP, say MEPs
The European Parliament adopted a report calling on the European Commission to take more account of the needs of the new Member States in its decisions on the Common Agriculture Policy. The low level of direct aid received by these countries is creating unequal conditions of competition, according to MEPs.
Proposed rules on organic food products sent back to Agriculture Committee
MEPs voted for stricter rules on organic food products by calling for the maximum allowable figure for accidental contamination by GMOs to be reduced to 0.1%. However, they decided not to vote on a final resolution winding up the matter since the European Commission refuses to grant Parliament the right of co-decision on the legislation. The report was therefore sent back to the EP Agriculture Committee for reconsideration.
New own-resources system by 2014
MEPs adopted a report with 458 votes in favour, 117 against and 61 abstentions proposing a reform of the own-resources system which would above all emphasise equality between Member States. There would be a second stage, starting in 2014, based on a yet-to-be-determined system of levies, although this would not be a real "European tax".
2008 budget to focus on "boosting confidence in EU institutions "
The 2008 budget will focus upon making communication more efficient in the European Parliament in order to raise awareness among EU citizens and to "inform effectively the EU citizen on its activities and contribution to European construction", according to a report adopted by MEPs.
Parliament adopts written declaration on Hepatitis C
Following the announcement in the minutes of 14 March the House formally adopted a written declaration on Hepatitis C with some 470 MEPs signing the declaration. The written declaration calls on the Commission and Council to respond to the recommendations of its June 2006 report on protecting European healthcare workers from blood-borne infections due to needlestick injuries and facilitate further research on treatment for Hepatitis C patients co-infected with HIV and/or Hepatitis B under the 7th Research Framework Programme.
Adopted texts can be found here :
Agenda for the Strasbourg plenary 23-26 April 2007 can be found here : 20070326BRI04615
EN
1
A
/activities/expert/ta.do?language=EN
EN
2
A
/sides/indexPartSession.do?language=EN&reference=2007-04
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
EP President Pöttering condemns situation in Zimbabwe
2007-03-29 - 18:24
At the beginning of the session in Brussels, President Hans-Gert Pöttering issued the following statement in connection with recent events in Zimbabwe: "In the past weeks the political situation in Zimbabwe has escalated. There have been violent attacks from government-controlled forces.
On 11 March, a gathering in the suburbs of the capital Harare was disrupted by armed police. In this attack a member of the opposition, Gift Tandere, was shot and numerous protestors were injured.
Forty leading members of the opposition, including the Chairmen of the main opposition party, MDC (Movement for Democratic Change), Morgan Tsvangirai, and Arthur Mutambara, were arrested and suffered serious mistreatment by the police.
On 18 March, a member of the opposition party, Nelson Chamisa, was severely beaten and was taken into hospital with serious injuries. He was travelling to the ACP-EU joint parliamentary assembly. This attack prompted the Bureau of the ACP-EU joint parliamentary assembly, in agreement with other African members, to condemn this incident. The Bureau called on the government of Zimbabwe to put an end to the ongoing violence in the country and to respect human rights and the rule of law.
We condemn all forms of violence and repression by the government of President Mugabe. The Council and the Commission should co-operate with all international, regional and national forces in order to find a transitional solution to turn it from the current regime to a real democracy."
Glenys Kinnock (PES, UK), Co-President of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly said: "I wanted to tell the House that one hour ago Morgan Tsvangirai was again arrested by the police and security forces in Harare. He and his staff were about to have a news conference to discuss the events which you described in your speech.
I would like this House, therefore, to condemn that re-arrest of Morgan Tsvangirai and to say that the brutality against the opposition has to stop and the southern African community has to react in their meeting in Tanzania this week."
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
MEPs debate Berlin Declaration with Chancellor Merkel
2007-03-29 - 18:24
MEPs debated the Berlin Declaration which was signed on 25 March to mark the 50th anniversary of the EU with Chancellor Merkel. The declaration, signed by the three Presidents of the European institutions, was widely welcomed by the major groups, although some MEPs criticised the way it was negotiated. Chancellor Merkel suggested that the EP hold an event with civil society to formally contribute to the June European Council. President-in-Office of the EU Council
Chancellor Angela MERKEL told MEPs that with the mid-term of the German presidency approaching, two important goals had already been achieved. There was the agreement on energy and climate change at the Spring Council: "We used Commission proposals to get agreement in Council on far reaching conclusions. We are all aware that the EU is only in a position to play a pioneering role. If it succeeds in setting ambitious objectives a lot of work is still needed to flesh them out - but that is how politics works." The aim to reduce CO2 emissions by 20 per cent by 2020, with binding renewable energy targets would "make the EU well placed in international negotiations." Mrs Merkel thanked Parliament for its support on this issue.
The other important step, said the President-in-Office of the EU Council, was taken last weekend. "The Berlin Declaration underlined the enormous success the EU represents and the enormous challenges still facing us. I wish to thank President Pöttering and leaders of Parliament's political groups for their support. We have succeeded thanks to combined efforts of the European Parliament, Commission and all the Council members." The signing, she said, underlined the consensus on need for such a declaration, which underscores a commitment and promise to work together for the future of Europe. A large part of the text was on shared and common values. "We share an ideal of society for EU, founded on freedom, security and justice."
Mrs Merkel said she was grateful that the EP session had started by addressing the situation in Zimbabwe. "We in Europe, I said at the Berlin informal Council, cannot turn our backs on the situation in Darfur. We have done our utmost to push for more hard line UN resolutions on this issue. In EU we also have a duty, if it proves impossible for UN to adopt sanctions, to consider them within the EU. We have a duty to act.
"I also made clear that all of us were aware that 25 March was Independence Day for Belarus," she added, saying the EU would support the people of Belarus in their aim to play a full part in Europe.
Mrs Merkel said: "The EU finds it fully unacceptable that 15 British troops have been captured and detained by Iran. We stand in absolute solidarity with Britain on this issue. Our strength lies in a united approach. We need to feel a sense of shared responsibility and try to find a common position on such matters."
She said the Berlin Declaration had adopted a forward looking stance with the objective of a renewed basis for the EU by 2009. She was grateful for EP support on this point too: "We don't want to have to tell the people of Europe in the parliamentary election campaign that we are unable to further enlarge EU, or to say energy policy is not one of the EU's core competences, or that on domestic security issues we are unable to work on basis of majority decisions, which is vital. Such a campaign must not be allowed further to widen the gap between EU institutions and people." On this issue, she said the German presidency would come up with a "road map", not ready made solutions, but "we will set out our objectives and will to all we can to achieve them."
Mrs Merkel stressed recent political progress on issues including mobile phone roaming, banking and payment transactions, agricultural spending and the "open skies" agreement. All of these, she said, were "questions of great practical interest to the people of Europe."
She spoke of three forthcoming summits during the German presidency. There was the EU-US summit at the end of April. In this regard, the Open Skies agreement had been a good omen. There was much that could still be freed up between the EU and US. Energy policy and climate change would also be high on the agenda: "We have ambitious aims and will encourage others to share them. Developing and threshold countries will only sign up if industrialised countries set stringent goals for themselves." The summit would also prepare the ground for the G8 meeting in June, also under German chairmanship, with preparations taking in representatives of major emerging markets like China, Mexico and Brazil. Finally, there was the EU-Russia summit: "The EU's relationship with Russia is of paramount importance. The Commission has been working feverishly on Partnership and Cooperation Agreement," she said, saying that energy security would be a major part of it. A step change in economic cooperation was needed.
Finally, the German Chancellor reflected that "the people of Europe will measure the performance of leaders on their success in strengthening Europe as a community providing people with prosperity and social cohesion. As I said in Berlin, the world won't wait for Europe. We must ensure we bring Europe to the forefront of events on basis of shared values and objectives." She warned against navel gazing, saying we needed "to openly promote our objectives and values, we cannot be too caught up in our own problems. We need to be able to act decisively to satisfy hopes and needs of people of Europe, for a secure and prosperous future."
European Commission President
Commission President José Manuel BARROSO began by welcoming Parliament's statements of support on Zimbabwe and Darfur, strongly condemning the human rights violations and appealing to the authorities there to respect human rights.
Achieving 50 years of peace, freedom and solidarity was beyond the dreams of Europe's founding fathers, said Mr Barroso, explaining that Berlin had been a symbolic venue for a Union of 27 Member States and almost 500 million citizens. The European spirit that prevailed there had shaped the collective commitment, set out in the Declaration, to common values fit for the 21st century.
Mr Barroso congratulated Chancellor Merkel on her personal dedication which, he said, had been decisive in creating the European spirit among Member States in Berlin, and noted that the European Parliament's presence there had borne witness to the Union's democratic maturity.
Mr Barroso looked forward to the success of the "twin-track strategy", i.e. the Spring Council commitments on energy policy and climate change together with the Berlin Declaration commitment to agree on an institutional settlement before the European Parliament elections in 2009.
"By delivering results we create political momentum", he continued, stressing that Europe needs a "treaty settlement" to enable it to face up to the challenges of coming years, such as climate change, energy security, migration and global competition.
The Commission also wants a rapid constitutional settlement to clear the "permanent shadow of doubt" cast by Euro-pessimism - the EU cannot claim to be serious about solving the major issues of the day if it can't agree on its own working arrangements, he said.
"We can never take the achievements of peace, freedom and solidarity for granted", said Mr Barroso, stressing that "to protect the values set out in the Declaration, we need to reform our community of law".
"Europe is not a foreign power - it is not 'them', but 'us'" said Mr Barroso, urging EU Member States to resist the temptation to "blame Brussels" and instead work together constructively in support of the German Presidency's efforts to find a solution.
Mr Barroso hoped that a "precise mandate" for settling the institutional impasse could be arrived at by June 2007. "This is the sort of test that a generation of leaders faces once in a lifetime". We should take pride in the past, but also have confidence in the future, he concluded.
Political group speakers
Fifty years - two generations - is but a blink of the eye of history. Yet notions such as "stability" and "prosperity" no longer speak to our young people, because they take them for granted, observed EPP-ED Chairman Joseph DAUL (FR).
Yet surely the terrorist bomb attacks on London and Madrid suffice to illustrate the threats to peace and stability, he continued, expressing sympathy for the UK service personnel held in Iran.
Placing himself in the shoes of a young European, Mr Daul listed educational and sports exchanges, freedom of movement and the single currency, and twinning programmes (which an outgrowth of prosperity) among the things that Europe has done for us.
Europe is not a panacea, but it can help us to meet new challenges, such as globalisation, he continued. Europe needs to open up to other countries - we have our own role to play, our own social model to promote. "We must rise to meet the tide of history" as we have in the last 50 years, he said.
The Declaration is a strong text and an easy read - it "puts us back in the saddle", said Mr Daul, underlining that Ms Merkel's honesty and human touch do credit to Europe.
Martin SCHULZ (PES, DE) said: "We are seeing some inflation in the use of the term 'historic', but this is a genuinely historic moment", said Socialist Group Chairman Martin Schulz (DE). He praised Chancellor Merkel for "achieving the best that could be achieved in the circumstances", but stressed that the "truly historic phase starts now".
The constitutional treaty is "moribund", and "we shall not have the treaty that we wanted - but this does not mean that we shall not have one at all", he continued. "Some say 'no more revision of the treaties', or 'Nice has gone far enough', but we say 'no' - without reform, there can be no further enlargement", said Mr Schulz-
Europe is small compared to China, India and the USA. "If it dissipates its strength by fragmenting itself, it will founder. This would be the death knell not just for the treaty, but for the ideal itself", he said.
"We have defeated intolerance. Integration and inclusion have been used to oppose territorial demands. But hatred and intolerance are still out there, and will flourish if we destroy the integration process".
Mr Schulz concluded by calling on Member States to join Chancellor Merkel in working with the Commission to "set our own house in order and carry out reforms". "You, Chancellor Merkel, have succeeded in getting Socialists on your side", he said.
Graham WATSON (ALDE, UK) congratulated the Chancellor on her achievements "Text and consensus." The celebration of the Union's success was both timely and appropriate. It is, he said, largely due to the European Union that we owe the security, prosperity and opportunity which our citizens enjoy.
Mr Watson said "As we sat in Berlin's Historiches Museum on Sunday morning, two things struck me:
The first was your inspired move to engage the European Youth Orchestra for the occasion. It is first class and it deserves better financial support. The second was that of the 31 people on the platform - Heads of State and Government, Presidents of the institutions et al - You were the only woman. It brought to mind a verse of the poet Robert Burns:
'While Europe's eye is fixed on mighty things
The fate of empires and the fall of kings
While quacks of State must each produce his plan
And even children lisp the Rights of Man
Amidst this mighty fuss just let me mention
The Rights of woman merit some attention'
Continuing, Mr Watson stated: "What I cannot congratulate you on is the procedure you chose. A text drafted in the catacombs of the Bundeskanzleramt and signed by the Presidents of the three main institutions should not have the temerity to open with the words 'We, the citizens of the European Union'. For it is the citizens of the European Union who need to be re-engaged in the task of building Europe."
"And nor does it help, Chancellor, for the European Peoples Party, your party, to claim all the credit for building this Union. The drafters of this vainglorious EPP Declaration rightly praise Monnet and De Gaspari and Kohl: but their memory is selective at best. Thatcher, Chirac, Berlusconi - they were all EPP Leaders too, but you seem to have overlooked their contribution. The Union is not the project of one political party. It belongs to us all. We hope, Chancellor, that the Berlin Declaration will herald a new departure. We look to the intergovernmental conference you have secured to put in place the institutional building blocks of the Union's future. The new Europe, should be one where democracy has the upper hand. And our values have the final word."
Cristiana MUSCARDINI (UEN, IT) said that the Berlin Declaration was "a great emotional moment", recalling the historic events of 1989 and the subsequent fall of the Berlin Wall. Ms Muscardini stressed the importance of recognising differences saying "it is our strength". She stated that her group was disappointed that the Berlin Declaration "did not recognise fully Europe's roots". She said that Europe was now both multi-cultural and multi-ethnic but each community should be able to hold a fruitful dialogue. Ms Muscardini "warned against the dangers of theocracy but also excessive secularism". Europe, she said, must be more than a marketplace.
Monica FRASSONI (Greens/EFA) began by referring to the praise of female leadership in the previous speech by Graham Watson (ALDE, UK), suggesting that a system of co-presidencies would make it much easier to have more female leaders. The Berlin Declaration, she continued, contained nothing "world-shattering or original", but was instead "a fair description of our reality." What is needed now, she explained, is continuing in the "right direction", to deal with situations such as Darfur, which we cannot solve together as the European Union "because we stand divided".
Uniting the EU through a constitution, she said, was necessary, for the "method of the Berlin Declaration will not suffice." If the constitution is to succeed, we must be "brave enough to risk democracy, to open up the IGC [Inter-Governmental Conference]" and, above all, "bring in the public" on the debate.
The Berlin Declaration was "neither a dream nor a reflection of reality", said Gabriele ZIMMER (DE), speaking for the GUE/NGL group. It was instead, an "extension of reality", one that made no reference to the poverty and social exclusion that exists in the EU today, nor what Ms Zimmer referred to as the "disintegration and renationalisation" of Europe. The Berlin Declaration, she declared, was representative of "governments, not people". A future constitution, she warned, would be a "threat to civic society and its participation in Europe."
Jens-Peter BONDE (IND/DEM, DK) began with reference to the secrecy surrounding the Berlin Declaration, warning the Parliament not to "sign up to a text that its members don't have sight of." On the constitution, attempts to revive it will, he said, merely be "window-dressing." Instead, he insisted, "democratic forces must unite to demand a referendum on the future treaty, in every single country." We have to "give people more power, not take power away from the people", through a system that is "more Montesquieu, less Machiavelli."
Bruno GOLLNISCH (ITS), the French chairman of ITS, commenced by criticising that "community preference has taken a backseat" and that it had given way to products from outside the EU. In opening up its borders, the EU had imported poverty as well as given rise to "casual and precarious" employment. He then went on to say that there was "no mortal or spiritual" power left in the EU, which was why the festivities surrounding the signing of the Berlin Declaration were "an entirely cynical celebration". Mr Gollnisch also accused the German Presidency of still wanting to promote the Constitution by any means, although it had been kicked out the front door, "and you are trying to drag it in through the back door."
Jim ALLISTER (UK), representing NI group, lamented the fact that the Berlin Declaration "peddled much of the same old nonsense." It is "NATO not the EU", he said, which can "take most credit for the defence, return and promotion of freedom and democracy in Europe." He concluded by stating that, while Eurosceptics support mutual co-operation, they reject the "grasping, centralising EU" in its present form.
British speakers
Timothy KIRKHOPE (EPP-ED, UK) said "I shall begin by acknowledging the historical importance of the 50th anniversary of the signing of the Rome Treaty. Whatever our view of the kind of Europe we want to see, I think we must all welcome some important achievements of Europe in the past five decades. We have indeed contributed towards the development of friendly relations between those Member States who until recently in historical terms were enemies. It has provided a forum where democratically elected governments can take decisions based on dialogue. We have seen the development of a single market in Europe, which has offered new economic opportunities for our peoples, and the enlargement of 2004 healed remaining divisions. I believe that these and other achievements are something all of us can welcome.
However, it is the future we must now look to. The European Union today is viewed by many, not least in my own country, as a distant bureaucracy. They see us still as an over-regulated body that is encroaching on too many matters that should be the preserve still of nation states. People want to see cooperation in Europe, but they do not understand why politicians in this Parliament spend so much time on constitutional and institutional issues. People ask what we are going to do to combat global climate change, to fight the scourge of global poverty and to make our continent more competitive in the face of globalisation. They want us to deliver on the substance and not dwell too much on processes. There may well be a requirement for improving the institutional workings of the EU through treaty changes, but this does not necessarily mean a complex new Constitution.
In the 21st century we need more flexibility and more decentralisation to enable our economies to win in international markets. We do not need more regulation: we need less. We do not necessarily need more majority voting to fight climate change or global poverty; we need more effective intergovernmental cooperation. Constitutions and institutions do not themselves generate prosperity, they do not make our economies more competitive, they do not reduce CO2 emissions and they do not feed hungry people in the developing world. I urge all governments and the Presidency now to get on with the job. They have started well by delivering on policy substance."
Andrew DUFF (ALDE, UK) questioned "Would you please confirm that the presidency is now firmly in favour of improving rather than impoverishing the Constitutional Treaty to ensure its speedy ratification?
Will you firmly chose a 'constitution plus' rather than a mini, tiny or even a teeny treaty? Will you not tolerate an IGC that has the sole purpose of extricating Member States from pledges to promote referenda? Remember the unfulfilled challenges of Laaken. The IGC should not be allowed to pull apart the comprehensive package agreed between the institutions and the Member States. Its focus instead should be on reforming the common policies so that they become more response to contemporary concerns and future challenges.
And, to all those that are asking you to open up the first and second parts, please tell them to be patient. Let us first bring the treaty into force, to try things out in practice before returning to tampering afresh with the agreed balance of power. Sometime, the historic first amendment will surely come but it should not be attempted now."
Stephen HUGHES (PES, UK) said "In looking to the future development of Europe, the Berlin Declaration quite rightly underlines the importance of solidarity and social cohesion in a European model combining economic success and social responsibility. It reminded me of another declaration entitled Enhancing Social Europe adopted by nine EU governments shortly before the Spring Summit this year. That declaration is aimed at rebalancing the policy mix in favour of action in the employment and social fields. In response, the Spring Summit conclusions included a clear reference to decent work, workers’ rights and participation, equal opportunities, safety and health protection at work and the need for a family-friendly organisation of work and the importance of social cohesion was underlined and the need to fight poverty, particularly child poverty. The importance of the social dimension was, therefore, highlighted in the clearest terms. The conclusions also recalled the social provisions of the Treaty and, in particular, its attachment to the improvement of employment and improved living and working conditions. That is part of Article 136 of the Treaty which was celebrated on Sunday and it serves as a preamble to the very clear legal bases available to the Commission to make proposals to improve employment and living and working conditions.
I think that is a timely reminder from Berlin and from the Spring Summit that the Commission needs to relaunch a social agenda with content because looking at the Commission's work programme at the moment it seems to have forgotten that it has any legal bases to allow it to act at all. Let us have fresh legislative proposals to tackle exploitive forms of atypical work. Let us see flexo-security be given positive meaning for the millions of workers who currently see it as a cloak for exploitation. Finally, I hope the German presidency will keep social Europe centre stage in the approach to and beyond the June Summit and in that way the Berlin Declaration will retain credibility."
Response to the debate
Responding to the debate, Chancellor MERKEL thanked Parliament for its contribution. She said that Europe was moving forward based on a Europe of projects with practical consequences. Europe is more than decision-making processes. Europe was taking decisions that affected people's lives. Referring to how the Declaration was drawn up, Chancellor Merkel said: "The Berlin Declaration involved the 27 Member States and the European Commission. You could not always guarantee success on the open market." The public must be key stakeholders in the EU. Chancellor Merkel suggested the European Parliament could hold an event involving civil society in May which would feed into the June European Council.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External relations
MEPs debate foreign policy for 2007 with Solana
2007-03-29 - 18:24
MEPs debated the outlook for the EU's Common Foreign and Security Policy with High Representative Javier Solana. Issues from the captured British navy personnel, Darfur, the situation in the Middle East, the final status of Kosovo and the possible US anti-missile shield to be installed in Europe were all raised in the extensive debate. Javier SOLANA began his statement by informing MEPs that he had just returned from the Arab League summit in Riyadh, where he said the EU had played a role of some importance.
He noted that a few days ago the Berlin Declaration had marked 50 years of the EU. "It sets down marks for the future development of the European Union in all fields and the common foreign policy is one of major challenges EU needs to face. The rest of the world has major desire for the EU to have an ever clearer role in foreign policy. People are asking us to be present in the most disparate places and conflicts. They want things done in a European way and with an effective European foreign policy. We want that too" - and so did European citizens, said Mr Solana, according to Eurobarometer surveys. "We need to be up to people's expectations of us in the EU."
Middle East
Mr Solana said that the current Arab League summit in Riyadh could be one of most significant in the League's 60 year history. A new feature was that clear leadership has been exercised throughout by the King of Saudi Arabia. The kingdom, he said, had not in past been active in foreign policy, but: "King Abdullah has started action of some importance to solve problems of Arab world as a whole. The Arab League is important and was talking about important subjects. The most important one is the revival of Arab League initiative on peace process." This had originated in the 2002 Beirut offer to recognise Israel in exchange for withdrawal to the 1967 border. It was now back on the table "with energy and determination. We got that initiative into the famous road map as an element of a comprehensive peace process," between Palestine and Israel but also including Lebanon and Syria.
On the Middle East, Mr Solana said, "the EU is convinced the Arab Israeli conflict is at heart of region's problems, which is why we supported the Mecca agreement as a contribution to ending conflicts between Palestinians and as a way of achieving the end of the occupation which began in 1967. We support the indefatigable efforts of President Abbas, who is trying to achieve the objectives of Palestinian people. There are three principles he has invoked: mutual recognition, renunciation of violence and achievement of peace through negotiations. EU has not abandoned Palestinian people and it won't. We have new opportunity to solve the conflict."
Regarding the new Palestinian Authority government, said the CFSP High Representative, "we will have to decide how to deal with that government and how to finance it. My position [...] is that there are some people in government we know well, and some we don't know, since they are from Hamas, which is on the list of terrorist organisations, so we don't talk to them." He said the new Finance Minister and Foreign Minister were both people the EU had been talking to for years. "It would be a mistake to cut off all contact with the people in this government with whom we have worked for many years. On financing, we should not change policy from one day to next, but if you listen to the new Finance Minister, that would be a good start in learning how to make our aid as effective as possible," both in humanitarian terms and in helping the peace process. "Deeds are more important than words: we need to see how new Palestinian government behaves and react on that basis. We could be able to move from crisis management to conflict solution." The Quartet, he said, had met several times this year, and he hoped before the summer to get Quartet together with countries such as Egypt, Saudi Arabia, the UAE and Jordan with the parties to the conflict. This would, he said, by Israel's first meeting with the Quartet as such.
Iran
Mr Solana said that he had met the Iranian Foreign Minister while he was in Riyadh. He had made very clear, he said, that "the EU cannot accept the abduction of 15 British naval personnel. The EU must show solidarity in getting these people freed." On the nuclear issue, he noted that the UN Security Council had now issued its third unanimous resolution on Iran, calling on them to meet its obligations arising from the IAEA resolutions. That is was a unanimous vote was very important, he said, in particular given the current make-up of the Security Council including some major Islamic and non-aligned countries - and five European states. "It sends a clear and obvious message to the Iranian government that its nuclear programme must meet the conditions set out in Security Council resolutions." He also made clear that the aim was a political solution: "no other solution is available." Following his meeting with the Iranian Foreign Minister, he said he thought the message had been "clearly understood."
On non-proliferation in general, he warned that this was an issue which could divide world. "Every effort must be made to explain properly and share our concern," he said. For too long, he added, the disarmament part of the non-proliferation treaty has been left aside. "The treaty says nuclear powers have to start thinking about how to disarm in order that such weapons can disappear from the planet," and the issue of technology transfer of technology made some countries think there was a double standard. "A serious negotiation on this with third countries led by EU would be a serious contribution to creating a world where problems solved by dialogue not by arms."
Kosovo and Serbia
Turning to the Balkans, Mr Solana referred to the proposal developed by Martti Ahtisaari on the final status of Kosovo. The former Finnish President had warned that it would be extremely difficult, even impossible, to find a solution both sides can agree to, and that the international community might need to impose a solution. This, said Mr Solana, would need all the UN Security Council members behind it - and there may be problems in getting the support of Russia and China. The EU now needed to decide whether to support Mr Ahtisaari's final position and then see how things turn out in Security Council. "When there is a final status for Kosovo decided, we will face enormous responsibilities in representing international community. As well as economic matters, there will be CFSP mission for the police and judiciary - will be largest mission EU has ever had in Foreign Policy terms [...] We cannot afford to fail. If EU fails in Balkans stability, it will be a major failure and will reduce our influence elsewhere."
Serbia, said Mr Solana, was a great country of the Balkans to which the EU owed every support. "We need to help Serbia where we can, we should be as generous as possible with this major country." There was a good relationship with President Tadic, and "we need to support him so that new government can be a pro-European one, which can bring Serbia towards its destiny of a European perspective." He praised Mr Tadic's commitment to complete and effective cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal. "It is important that people so clearly implicated in crimes, be brought to court."
"Will be discussing Kosovo and Serbia every week till summer. The European presence in Kosovo is ready and when UN resolution passes, we will be ready to be operational, but we need to worry about how long it will last and where to find resources," said Mr Solana.
Eastern Europe
Mr Solana said he had recently met both the President and Prime Minister of Ukraine. The new government there had been an unexpected coalition, but it was now starting to work, though the questions of reform and constitutional stability remained of concern. Attention should also be paid to the frozen conflicts in region, including the Transnistria problem, in cooperation with Russia. There was a new plan for this, with both sides more committed that before, with active support from the Ukrainian government. Regarding Belarus, Mr Solana said he fully supported the comments made by Angela Merkel the previous day.
Africa
The "unhappily old problem of Darfur", said Mr Solana, had both an African Union and an Arab League dimension. "We Europeans cannot be proud of what has happened, but can at least be satisfied that from the start we have been involved in finding a solution. We worked hard for the Abuja agreement and have financed the AU force." He had spoken the previous day to the Sudanese President about a UN role in Darfur, and while "we did not achieve complete agreement, I have hopes that we will get steps in right direction." He warned that Sudan's north-south conflict was also not fully resolved, since the settlement was still subject to a referendum. Any break-up of this oil rich country would be a disaster for everybody. "China and India get a lot of their oil from Sudan and their contribution is fundamental," he added.
Missile defence
After reporting on progress in setting up one of the world's most modern crisis management structures, bringing together civilian and military actors, Mr Solana turned to the proposed anti-missile defence system: "There is no decision by EU on this, the EU is not a defensive alliance, but does have external and security policy and can and should debate this subject. We are not the ones to decide on this - that belongs to defensive alliances, but we can talk amongst ourselves in the most open way possible. Any such system can affect our relations with Russia. The treaties in force allocated sovereignty over this issue to the Member States, but this must be compatible with EU's general interest in security," he said, indicating he would be happy to see this discussed in the Atlantic structures.
In conclusion, he said that "the EU was born as peace project 50 years ago; it should be a peace project on world stage as well. If we not able to play full part that will be a failure, and we all want it to be a success."
Meglena KUNEVA, European Commissioner
"In a world of growing challenges, individual Member States can do little alone", said Consumer Protection Commissioner Meglena KUNEVA. But collectively, as part of the EU - a global player with a population close to half a billion across 27 countries, accounting for one-quarter of the world's income over a fifth or world trade and some 60% of global development assistance - "we have the means to play our role in world affairs", she added.
It is the EU's internal market that provides the main source of strength for its peace efforts (including its own enlargement - "the most successful peace and security initiative ever carried out in Europe"), she continued.
The EU needs a "fully joined-up foreign policy", to tackle long-term challenges including in particular the fight against terror and arms proliferation, poverty and disease, organized crime and illegal migration, climate change and threats to our energy supply. This policy must start with greater coherence in the use of our own instruments, she continued, as “the overall effectiveness and therefore the global influence of the EU depend on optimal use of all available leverage in support of external goals.”
The EU is present in almost all the “hot spots”, and will remain a major player in Afghanistan, where it has spent more than a billion euros over the last five years; in the Middle East, where it is using the Temporary International Mechanism (TIM) to support the Palestinians, and in Iraq where it is preparing for a "long term engagement", she said.
Yet in Ms Kuneva's view, "the biggest challenges for CFSP are still before us: it is much easier to agree to set up mechanisms to address instability in the developing world and to support effective multilateralism than to take common decisions which affect Member States’ vital bilateral relationships outside the EU".
"The risk of splits is always present. We need to have faith in our own strength. The more consistent we are, and the clearer we speak with one voice, the stronger we shall be" concluded Ms Kuneva.
Political group speakers
EPP-ED group Chairman Joseph DAUL (FR) stressed the importance not only of ensuring stability on our own continent, but of encouraging citizens elsewhere to throw off the yoke of totalitarianism.
Europe must continue to defend human rights, he said, citing the examples of human rights violations in Darfur, which amount to "genocide", and in Zimbabwe, which he predicted would "collapse into chaos" if Europe did not come to its aid.
Mr Daul described Iran's detention of 15 British sailors as "worrying and unacceptable", and said that the UK's EU partners should do all they could to get them freed rapidly.
He concluded by calling for a stronger EU-US partnership to provide more aid for the world's poorest nations, and by expressing his confidence in Mr Solana.
For the Socialists, Martin SCHULZ (PES, DE) supported Mr Daul's wish for Croatia to be an EU member in time for the 2009 elections but said this would mean telling the Czech and Polish leaders that they "must budge on the constitutional debate".
He urged Iran to "release the British military personnel" as a sign that it is genuinely "ready for constructive dialogue in international politics". On Palestine, he agreed with Mr Solana that "We cannot refuse dialogue with the new national unity government in Palestine" just because it includes Hamas.
Looking at the many problems around the world mentioned by the High Representative, he wondered "Which of these could be solved by an anti-missile defence system in the Czech Republic or Poland? Not one!" In fact such problems were often caused "because we don't spend money on eradicating poverty and disease". He concluded "Any missile defence system will only create problems, cause an arms race and spend money we don't have".
On behalf of the Liberal group, Graham WATSON (UK) backed Mr Solana's focus on the Middle East and urged him to "take the initiative" with the new Palestinian government so as not to "lose the opportunity to secure a lasting peace".
On the British military prisoners in Iran, he revealed that "HMS Cornwall is from my constituency. Most of these people are my constituents". He asked Mr Solana to use the Union's influence on their behalf and also to press Libya to release the captive Bulgarian nurses.
"At the top of our agenda", however, must be Darfur, he stressed. "Our inability to prevent the first genocide of this century would send the wrong signal about Europe's role and potential within the world". He backed the idea of bringing in UN troops.
He also supported Mr Solana's emphasis on nuclear non-proliferation, saying "If the United Kingdom and France renew their nuclear weapons, if the USA builds a missile shield, then the message we are sending to the Russians and others is that we are engaging in a new arms race". Again he urged the High Representative to "take the initiative and set the agenda" as otherwise "the agenda will be set for you" by the individual Member States. It was crucial that "we have a common response to the development of this missile defence shield".
Speaking for his group, Konrad SZYMANSKI (UEN, PL), took a different view, saying there was "a danger if the Member States adopt the Russian view" on the missile defence issue as this is "based on false arguments" designed to "divide the EU". He maintained that, "paradoxically, deploying elements of the shield would speed up facilities for NATO".
Daniel COHN-BENDIT (Greens/EFA, DE) expressed his solidarity with the captured British navy personnel and the Bulgarian nurses held in Libya. He stressed the importance of nuclear disarmament, but said this could only be achieved by first completing civil nuclear disarmament. On Darfur, Mr Cohn-Bendit said that the EU must take a lead working through the UN to protect refugees and insist on a no-fly zone. China had to be told that a solution must be found to this crisis "human beings must never be sold for barrels of oil". Regarding the potential US anti-missile shield, he said that this would do nothing to prevent Iranian suicide bombers from attacking the US or Europe.
Francis WURTZ (GUE/NGL, FR) limited his comments to the situation in the Middle East. The situation, he said, a few weeks ago could not have been much worse with the possibility of civil war in the Palestinian territories. However, he criticised the EU for not rescuing the situation, it was the Palestinians themselves and the Arab countries in the region that saved the situation. Israel, he said, was not respecting its commitments, and the international community needed to support and recognise the new Palestinian government.
Speaking for the IND/DEM, Bastiaan BELDER (IND/DEM, NL) said Europe's security would not be enhanced by debating the potential US anti-missile shield, it would only serve to antagonise allies. He too warned against the dangers of Iran, who, he said, was developing ballistic missiles capable of hitting Europe. China and Russia play a role in this by offering Iran the necessary technology.
Daniela BURUIANĂ-APRODU (ITS, RO) began with a reference to the "advent of new challenges like energy and the environment" In addition to these challenges, there are, what Mrs Buruiană-Aprodu referred to as "asymmetrical threats", threats which no longer target one country, but have instead become global issues. Such issues, such as terrorism, the environment and poverty, "necessitate collective answers". A dramatic rethinking is needed, along with a consideration of "human and material resources which might be redirected to other sectors."
For the non-attached Members, Jana BOBOŠÍKOVÁ (NI, CZ) emphatically welcomed the words of Javier SOLANA when he said that it is "up to individual states to decide whether or not to take part in a US defence missile system." A US missile defence system is, she said, "the only sensible option right now." Mrs Bobošíková ended with a message to those who feared that an anti-missile system would divide Europe, urging them "to reflect on just how the EU was divided in the past and who was responsible."
British and Irish speakers
Gerard BATTEN (IND/DEM,UK) said: "Mr Solana, I understand that you are looking for a new job. On a personal basis, I wish you well in any new career that you may choose but I am pleased that the role of European Foreign Minister is no longer viable because of the rejection of the proposed European Constitution in 2005. The idea has always been a non-starter. There can never be a common European foreign policy because we all have different histories international commitments interests and allies. take Britain for example. We do not necessarily share with our European neighbours the same perspectives on the international crises we face today. As you will be well aware, Britain faces a very grave situation in Iran which has illegally detained British troops. It would be ridiculous for an EU Foreign Minister to try and negotiate the release of Members of Her Majesty's Armed Forces. However, Britain is also now in an equally ridiculous position as a result of our membership of the European Union. If diplomatic efforts fail to obtain the release of the British troops, then Iran's illegal actions may have to be met with sanctions. But Britain could not enact sanctions against Iran even if it wanted to because Britain no longer has control over its own trading rules. Trade policy is now under the control of the European Union. This is yet another example if one were needed of why Britain must leave the European Union and restore control of her own affairs."
Ashley MOTE (ITS, UK) said: "Mahatma Gandhi, that brave, peaceful and utterly determined father of Indian independence, once walked into the Governor-General's office during the days of the Raj and accused him to his face of being masters in someone else's house. We Brits now know how he felt and some of you might even find a smug satisfaction at the very thought. However, when we see the European Union and its officials throwing their weight about the globe, like Johnny-come-latelies strutting on an ever bigger stage, we know the end game. We know where such self-appointed self-importance ultimately leads.
I ask you three questions, Who told the EU it could impose fines on foreign companies with no regard for the consequences on commerce, wealth creation and the protection of jobs in countries that do not even belong to the European Union? Then there is the EU's economic partnership agreements doing so much damage to real families in Third World countries and whilst their leaders grow fat on the back of these agreements, local producers and traders struggle to compete with cheap imports. The same applies to the fishermen off the coast of Africa: while local government ministers grow fat, their coastal waters have been decimated by our trawlers and local fishermen can no longer make a living. Gandhi was right. The EU has no business posturing as a master in other people's houses."
Roger HELMER (NI, UK) said "I was born in 1944 in the dying months of the Second World War. For the whole of my lifetime it has been NATO and the Transatlantic Alliance which have kept the peace in Europe. It was not the European Union or the Commission that defeated the USSR and brought down the Berlin Wall; it was the courage and determination of leaders like Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher. The CFSP and its military posturing threaten to undermine the Transatlantic Alliance. It is born out of jealousy and resentment and anti-Americanism. It is overweight with strategies and planning papers and staff colleges but desperately light on men and ships and tanks and guns and aircraft. The CFSP threatens the very foundations of security and leaves us all dangerously exposed in an unpredictable world. This is yet another reason why my country would be better off out of the European Union."
Seán Ó NEACHTAIN (UEN, IE), speaking in Irish, said that the EU of 27 Member States should play a role of an "honest broker" in the Middle East. The EU also needed to keep a close eye on Iran where developments were "worrying". The EU, he said, also needed to support the Balkan States to enhance and develop them economically. Finally, the EU must do all in its power to achieve the Millennium Development Goals.
Charles TANNOCK (EPP-ED, UK) said: "I welcome Mr Solana's reference to Africa and Darfur and the lack of human rights in Darfur, but he regrettably missed out on Zimbabwe. The Arab League in Riyadh, which he visited only yesterday, promised a new initiative on the Arab-Israeli conflict, but it still insists on the right of return of all Palestinian refugees – so nothing new as far as I can see. On Kosovo, I fear that snatching it away unilaterally from Serbian sovereignty – a country still digesting the partition from Montenegro – will create further instability in the region and generate a precedence which Russia will play out to the maximum over the frozen conflicts in the South Caucuses. But even over Crimea. Ukraine is a country that now needs more support and is it not now high time that it be granted by the Council the status of potential candidate, like the Western Balkans.
On the Middle East, I would urge caution over resuming direct aid to the Palestine New Unity Government before Hamas explicitly accepts the three conditions, including recognising the right of the State of Israel to exist. I should also like to thank all those in this House – the President of this Parliament in particular – who have shown solidarity with the ambushed 15 British service personnel who were snatched from Iraqi territorial waters where they were fully entitled to be under both UN resolutions and the explicit consent of the Iraqi Government.
Iran remains a serious problem as it defies the international community in its determination to acquire nuclear weapons and will openly dissemble on this issue as it has done recently over its claim of the exact position of the whereabouts of the British servicemen when they were captured. Is it not now high time that the EU, with the USA, apply serious economic sanctions against this brutal regime, which publicly executes people for sexual misdemeanours and whose President Ahmadinejad has vowed to wipe Israel off the face of the earth. Ending the export credit guarantees by Germany would be a very good start."
Response to the debate
Responding to the debate, Javier SOLANA stated: "I am ready to continue discussing important issues. We must condemn in a clear manner and demand immediately the liberation of the UK soldiers taken by Iran." The Middle East was one of the most important issues and "Something may happen before September if we work in good cooperation with US, Arab countries and between ourselves. I would have liked some of you to be in Riyadh to see EU foreign policy in action: we are effective and we count. I hope to see some of these topics operational in coming days."
On Lebanon he said "the government of Prime Minister Siniora is the legal government of Lebanon and we need to continue helping them. The recent conference on reconstruction is proof of our commitment. We need government that is not blocked and can achieve results, and we need to get international tribunal on the assassinations, first of all that of Rafik Hariri."
"We have an intense agenda up to summer," he concluded: "I will be happy to keep following up with you this intense agenda for peace and stability in world and for our neighbourhood."
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External relations
MEPs strongly back Martti Ahtisaari's proposal on Kosovo, call for it to be put under "supervised sovereignty"
2007-03-29 - 18:24
Parliament gave its full support today to the Ahtisaari proposal for a status settlement, stating that "sovereignty supervised by the international community is the best option" for securing the objectives of a peaceful, self-sustaining Kosovo. The report also reaffirmed the European perspective of both Serbia and Kosovo, and called for the EU to play a central role in the current international negotiations for a settlement. Members voted to fully support the UN-led drive to determine the final status of Kosovo, and to the Ahtisaari Proposal in particular. Martti Ahtisaari, former Finnish President, was the UN Special Envoy charged with devising a plan for the status settlement of Kosovo. His proposal, released early last month, would give Kosovo some of the trappings of sovereignty, such as rights to membership in international organisations, but does not advocate outright independence. The own-initiative report by Joost Lagendijk (Greens/EFA, NL), adopted by an overwhelming majority in the House on Thursday 29 March (490 in favour to 80 against with 87 abstentions) spelled out several desirable aspects of a settlement:
-access to international financial organisations
-an international presence in Kosovo, with a clear definition of its role and mandate
-clear provisions on decentralisation which grant substantial autonomy in key areas
-full respect for human rights
-retention of Kosovo's multi-ethnic character, with protection for cultural and religious sites
-the establishment of a limited, internal, multi-ethnic Kosovar Security Force
-international guarantees for the territorial integrity of all neighbouring states
International implications
Addressing fears, especially in Russia, that granting Kosovo any form of independence would exacerbate other separatist tensions around the globe, the report "underlines that the solution in Kosovo will set no precedent in international law, as Kosovo has been under UN rule since 1999 [...and] is in no way comparable to the situation in other conflict regions which are not under UN administration."
In addition, the House is of the view that "in the long run, the solution regarding the future status of Kosovo lies also in the fact that both Serbia and Kosovo are due to become part of the EU, together with their neighbours, since the future of the Western Balkans lies in the European Union."
The EU's role
The report emphasises that the EU Member States should speak with one voice on the Kosovo issue, by adopting a common position in Council, and maintaining it in international fora, especially the UN Security Council. The Parliament also argued that "the European Union should have a decisive say on the final terms of the settlement." MEPs also called for a visa facilitation agreement for Kosovo, to ease access for travel into the European Union.
Finally, the report stated that "the EP is prepared to make available the additional resources required in order to finance the future EU involvement in Kosovo with a view to implementing the status settlement." The report also expressed the Parliament's support for the establishment of an ESDP (European Security and Defence Policy) mission to Kosovo.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Sport
Legal status of football should be clearer / Reconciling data protection and security at football games: a winning draw
2007-03-29 - 18:24
The European Parliament adopted an own-initiative report about the future of professional football. Parliament calls on the Commission to clarify the legal status of football, and recommends efforts to be made to assure greater transparency and good governance in the European professional football. Parliament also calls for solidarity in the selling of TV rights, and protection of minors against human trafficking. The House also gave its support for an Austrian initiative to improve police security at football matches. (See below)
In the own-initiative report drafted by Ivo BELET (EPP-ED, BE), the European Parliament supports the sports governing bodies - especially UEFA - in their efforts to improve self-regulation, for the benefit of the entire football sector. Football rules and procedures need to be guided by good governance principles such as transparency, representativeness and accountability.
EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering said: "By adopting these reports the European Parliament contributes to combating violence and hooliganism in football and to intensifying the fight against racism and xenophobia in this popular sport. We ask for stricter sanctions against any kind of discriminatory acts and to strengthen the coordination of preventive measures and sanctions concerning hooligans. We must eliminate violence from football and keep it a safe and enjoyable activity for all."
The report looks into governance in sport, employment rules, the economic importance of media rights and support for local young talent, underlining the social and cultural role of football and football clubs. The report highlights the need for action to combat crime, corruption, violence, racism and doping.
Commission should draw up action plan for football
The Belet report calls on the European Commission to draw up an "action plan" for European sport in general and football in particular. Parliament wants the Commission to specify under which conditions legitimate and adequate self-regulation is supported.
Parliament backs the UEFA club licensing system, which aims to ensure a level playing field for clubs and contribute to their financial stability. MEPs are calling on UEFA to further develop this system in order to guarantee financial transparency and proper management.
Collective insurance for players
In order to assure that clubs are not penalised if a player is injured during a match for the national team, Parliament wants UEFA and FIFA together with the European clubs and leagues to reach an agreement on a system of collective insurance to be put into place
Parliament also support the collective selling of TV-rights, and points out that it is vital for professional football, that the revenues from television rights is distributed in a fair way that ensures solidarity between professional and amateur games. MEPs welcome a public debate on the issues, and ask the Commission to do an investigation into whether this model should be adopted across Europe for both pan-European and domestic competitions.
Fans should play a greater role
The social and democratic role of football is important, and Parliament calls on Member states and football governing bodies to actively promote the role of fans who support the principle of fair play, by supporting the creation of Supporters Trusts which could be involved in the ownership and management of the clubs, and though the appointment of a football ombudsman.
Young players should be educated and protected
MEPs also back measures to promote young local talent, such as the UEFA "home-grown players" rule, that requires a minimum of own-educated players per team (four players in the 2006-2007 season, six in 2007-2008), but wants to assure that the home-grown player initiative does not lead to child trafficking.
With regard to clubs which are giving contracts to children below 16 years of age, the Parliament insists that immigration law must always be respected in relation to the recruitment of young foreign talent. The EP calls on the football governing bodies and the clubs to engage in the fight against human trafficking by subscribing to a European Charter for Solidarity in football, and to create a solidarity fund to finance prevention programmes in countries most affected by human trafficking.
Young players, says the EP, must be given the opportunity for a general education and vocational training, in parallel with their club and training activity, so that they do not entirely depend on the clubs.
Action is also needed to prevent the social exclusion of young people who were ultimately not given contracts by clubs.
Finally, with regard to racism, the Commission, the Member States and all those involved in professional football are asked to step up the fight against racism and xenophobia, inside and outside stadiums. UEFA and national football associations and leagues should apply disciplinary rules in a firm and co-ordinated manner, without neglecting the financial situations of clubs, say MEPs.
A proposal to play the European Hymn and raise the EU flag before finals in the Champions League and in the European Championship was withdrawn before the vote.
Reconciling data protection and security at football games: a winning draw
Parliament also gave its support for an Austrian initiative to improve police security at football matches. However, security can never be ensured at the expense of data protection rights, warned MEPs. The original decision by the Council in 2002 called for the establishment of national football information points in each Member State, "responsible for co-ordinating and facilitating police information exchange", in connection with international football matches. Members widely agreed to reinforce the role of national information points as the contact point for the exchange of police information in connexion with violence in international football matches but required that any transfer of personal data must be protected by existing privacy laws and can never be used for other purposes.
MEPs adopted few non-binding amendments to the current revision of a Council decision from 2002, on which they back the need for national football information points to have access to personal data on particular supporters who pose a risk or high risk to the security of the match. Yet this data should be exchanged "in accordance with the domestic and international laws applicable", among the national football information points and the police.
Furthermore, "such data shall be handled exclusively in connection with football matches and may not be used for any other activities", MEPs emphasised. As the rapporteur Giusto CATANIA (GUE/NGL, IT) said in his explanatory statement, "it is essential to prevent abuses in the treatment of law-abiding citizens who, simply because they are football supporters, run the risk of being classified as potential criminals and, at the same time, to avoid a situation where offences committed inside or around football stadiums are treated merely as the product of over-excitement on the part of supporters and thus effectively 'decriminalised'".
The revision of the national information points is an initiative proposed by Austria to the Council, which called for greater efficiency through the production and circulation of "regular generic and/or thematic national football disorder assessments." Austria and Switzerland are due to jointly host the UEFA European Championship in 2008.
In recent years, football matches - especially those with an international dimension - have attracted an ever growing number of supporters and have, at the same time, developed into a major international entertainment and sporting business. Due to the competitive atmosphere of a match, there have frequently been violent clashes between rival fans or clashes with the police. The exchange of relevant information aims to help national police forces combat such violence and maintain law and order when a football event takes place.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Transport
MEPs call for tougher rules to improve safety at sea
2007-03-29 - 18:24
The European Parliament adopted two reports designed to raise standards of maritime safety. The first looks at the duties of "flag states" (the state where a ship is registered), the second at the question of civil liability. These reports are part of a group of seven reports known as the "third maritime safety package". The other five will come before Parliament's plenary in April. Maritime accident numbers may be falling, but the threats stemming from failure to comply with safety standards remain. Even though, in the wake of the Erika and Prestige oil-spill accidents, the EU introduced legislation to improve maritime safety, further measures are needed to prevent accidents and pollution and to deal with the aftermath of accidents. The recent accidents off the UK coast and in the Messina straits further underline the need for more robust safety rules.
Boosting the effectiveness of existing safety measures is the key aim of the European Commission's "third maritime safety package", upon which the committee approved its seven reports - all almost unanimously - on 27 February.
Flag state obligations - Rapporteur Marta Vincenzi (PES, IT)
This report is one of the key elements in the package. The Commission is proposing that the various International Maritime Organisation conventions on flag state obligations should be turned into binding legislation and that the EU Member States must be required to monitor compliance with international standards by ships that fly their flags. The Council strongly opposes this directive, believing that the Community is not competent to take action in this field and arguing that these matters should be left into international law.
The Transport Committee urged broad support for the Commission proposal and saw a great number of amendments adopted aimed at even strengthening the proposed legislation. The general principle is that the safety of Community shipping and of citizens using it, and of operators providing shipping services, and the protection of the environment should be ensured at all times.
Members think that the Codes of Safe Practices for Ships Carrying Timber Deck Cargoes and for Safe Practice for Solid Bulk Cargoes should be incorporated in all the seven directives in the third maritime package because of their special risks for maritime safety. Bulk carriers, for instance, have proved to be one of the most dangerous types of vessels and timber cargoes were prone to shift in rough seas.
Each Member State should ensure the training of flag State surveyors and investigators and should develop a capability for reviewing, approving and authorising ship construction and equipment designs.
Parliament would make it a requirement for the first registration of a ship in a Member State that this Member State should ascertain whether this ship complies with the applicable international rules and regulations and ensure that this is confirmed by documentary evidence. If the ship is not newly built, it shall liaise with the previous flag State and request it to pass on the necessary documents and data. MEPs also want the Member States to develop data exchange systems to help prevent and resolve accidents and deficiencies.
Member States should develop or maintain a fleet database for their ships, with the main technical details of each ship. Parliament took the view that ample information should be included in these databases such as classification and certification, outcome of the Port State control inspections, on casualties and on infringements of IMO conventions, in particular on ship-source pollution. Finally, amendments were adopted regarding appropriate corrective measures for those companies which did not comply with Community standards and international rules.
Civil liability - Rapporteur Gilles Savary (PES, FR)
At present, for most damage by ships to third parties, civil liability regimes for ship-owners in Europe are not harmonised and no compulsory insurance scheme exists. The draft directive seeks to put in place "core" rules, common to all Member States, governing civil liability, insurance for ship-owners and the liability of any person responsible for operating a ship. It would do this by incorporating the IMO Convention on the Limitation of Liability for Maritime Claims (LLMC) into EU law.
At the vote this morning, Parliament took the view that protecting European costs involved the dual aspects of preventing accidents by ensuring that only safe ships sail and of providing that victims can, in as short a time as possible, receive fully commensurate with the damage caused by an accident. (am 2). Member States and third countries should ratify also the international convention on bunker oil convention, the convention on hazardous and noxious substances by sea (the HNS convention).
With the recent maritime disasters in mind, Parliament also gave a definition of gross negligence: this means conduct showing an unusual lack of due care and a consequent disregard of what should in principle have been clear to everyone in a given situation. Parliament deliberately wanted this definition to keep simple, in order to ensure its enforceability in practice.
The House adopted proposals which said that Member States should monitor compliance with the rules laid down in the directive and should establish penalties for the infringement of these rules. Members also suggested the setting-up of a solidarity fund to cover damage caused by ships without a financial guarantee. This fund should be set up to compensate third parties that have suffered damage caused by ships which have sailed in EU territorial waters without being covered by a financial guarantee certificate. Finally, a Community Office should be established which is responsible for keeping a full register of certificates issued, monitoring and updating their validity and checking the existence of financial guarantees registered by third countries.
Previous EU maritime safety legislation
Under the previous two maritime safety packages (known as ‘Erika I’ and ‘Erika II’), the European Union adopted a range of legislation on maritime security and safety, including inspections of ships in port and a ban on using single-hull vessels to transport oil, and the creation of a European Maritime Safety Agency.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Agriculture
Proposed rules on organic food products sent back to Agriculture Committee
2007-03-29 - 18:24
MEPs voted for stricter rules on organic food products by calling for the maximum allowable figure for accidental contamination by GMOs to be reduced to 0.1%. However, they decided not to vote on a final resolution winding up the matter since the European Commission refuses to grant Parliament the right of co-decision on the legislation. The report was therefore sent back to the EP Agriculture Committee for reconsideration. The House voted by 585 votes to 35, with 38 abstentions, for the regulation to be made subject to the EP-Council co-decision procedure since it covers the production and distribution of processed food in the single market (which comes under co-decision) and not just agricultural produce (which comes under the consultation procedure).
Faced with the Commission's refusal to change the legal basis of the regulation, Parliament decided to give itself more time to convince the Commission by referring the matter back to its Agriculture Committee (an option available under Rule 53 of the EP's Rules of Procedure). Under the consultation procedure, the Council cannot adopt its position until Parliament has decided on its own stance through a plenary vote.
Nevertheless, MEPs were keen to send a strong political message by voting today on a number of amendments that significantly strengthen the Commission's proposal in various ways, notably on the question of GMOs.
" No" to contamination by GMOs
The Commission's plan is not to allow any food products to be legally sold as "organic" if they contain GMOs, unless they have been contaminated accidentally and even then only up to the current Community threshold of 0.9% of GMOs allowed for conventional food.
However, by 324 votes to 282, with 50 abstentions, MEPs today backed an amendment seeking to reduce the threshold to 0.1% in the case of organic products. They also called, by a narrow majority, for the Commission to propose by 1 January 2008 a directive providing for precautionary measures to prevent GMO contamination throughout the food chain, with clear rules on liability and application of the "polluter-pays" principle.
Parliament also voted to spell out more clearly the fact that there is a ban on "GMOs and products produced from or with GMOs" in organic farming, and that there are no exceptions, even for veterinary medicinal products. MEPs also say that only organically produced seed and propagating material which has been proved to be GMO-free should be used and that operators should "take all appropriate steps to avoid any contamination with GMOs" and "supply evidence that no contamination has taken place".
Stricter standards and limited derogations
Members adopted amendments laying down stricter rules for the use of plant-health products and veterinary treatments as well as national derogations thereto. They also want Member States to be allowed to apply stricter national rules if they wish.
Logos and labelling particulars
Parliament believes the European logo (to be used for food where 95% of the ingredients are organic) should be compulsory on such products, not just an option, so that consumers throughout the EU can recognise products which comply with Community standards.
However, MEPs voted to drop the letters "EU" from the term "EU-ORGANIC", which the Commission wanted to make compulsory. They argue that this term may be confusing for consumers, leading them to believe that the product originates in the EU, whereas it may come from a third country. For similar reasons Parliament calls for labels to indicate the country of origin of a product.
Tightening up controls, including those on imports
Parliament stresses that national control bodies should be accredited in line with European standards. In addition, Member States must ensure that their inspection systems enable products to be traced through all stages of production, preparation and distribution, so as to guarantee consumers that organic products have been produced in line with the new rules.
An up-to-date list of control authorities and approved control bodies must be made available to interested parties. Moreover, operators from non-EU countries must be in a position to provide importers or national authorities with documentary evidence issued by a competent Community control body.
Rules must apply to catering industry too
MEPs argue that the regulation should cover the catering industry (take-aways, canteens, restaurants and similar service providers). And, in addition to the production, processing, packaging and labelling of products, the new rules should cover "conditioning", manufacture and storage.
However, Parliament backed a number of amendments seeking to exclude fisheries products from the regulation, saying that special legislation should be introduced for products from organic fish farms.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Agriculture
Member States struggling to reap full benefit of CAP, say MEPs
2007-03-29 - 18:24
The European Parliament adopted a report calling on the European Commission to take more account of the needs of the new Member States in its decisions on the Common Agriculture Policy. The low level of direct aid received by these countries is creating unequal conditions of competition, according to MEPs. In an own-initiative report by Csaba Sándor TABAJDI (EPP-ED, HU), the House describes the challenges faced by the new Member States in living with the CAP. These include major efforts to comply with Community health and hygiene rules, higher production costs and difficulties in implementing rural development programmes.
Parliament also argues that the long phasing-in period (9 years), with a low starting level (25 %) for the direct payments in the new Member States, means that farmers in these states are not competing on a level playing field with other European farmers on the European internal market and even their domestic markets.
These countries have also been obliged to top up EU farm support from their national budgets. This virtually amounts to "renationalisation" of a Community policy and, by imposing a burden on national finances, has caused political and economic difficulties in some new Member States.
The countries which joined the EU in 2004 have thus benefited from enlargement "only partly" in the areas of farming and food production. The House, therefore, calls on the Commission to take account of their situation in its application of the CAP, for example, by extending certain derogations regarding EU environmental standards which were laid down in the accession treaties.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Budget
New own-resources system by 2014
2007-03-29 - 18:24
MEPs adopted a report with 458 votes in favour, 117 against and 61 abstentions proposing a reform of the own-resources system which would above all emphasise equality between Member States. There would be a second stage, starting in 2014, based on a yet-to-be-determined system of levies, although this would not be a real "European tax". With the European Commission due to publish its initial proposals for the revision of the budget in a few months' time, MEPs express their views on the "revenue" side of the Community's finances in an own-initiative report drafted by Alain LAMASSOURE (EPP-ED, FR). The budget review, scheduled for 2008-09, will deal with both revenue and expenditure. MEPs in the committee believe the current system is complex, utterly incomprehensible to the public and not transparent - hence the need for reform.
Stage one: equality, simplicity and solidarity
In the first, transitional, stage the system would be based on the GNI resource, as proposed by Finland in 2004. This resource is less visible to the general public but is more equitable in relating contributions to the general level of prosperity. The British rebate would be abolished by 2013. Through the abolition of the VAT resource, the United Kingdom would "benefit" from the loss of its rebate. As to the Common Agricultural Policy, MEPS stress that the link between revenue and expenditure should form an aspect of the considerations concerning the changeover to a new system. The House rejects any attempt to renationalise the Common Agricultural Policy.
MEPs are aware that such an outcome is likely to be acceptable only as part of a global negotiation process which also covers expenditure.
A number of principles would underpin the system in this initial stage. The first of these, "equality between Member States", should ensure that no Member State enjoys any budgetary privileges. Another principle - "solidarity and equal dignity" - would ensure that bargaining and privileges are eliminated.
This initial stage could enter into force as soon as an agreement is ratified, guaranteeing the transitional nature of the system, which would remain in force until a genuine own resource is created.
Stage two: an own resource for the European Union
The new system will, under no circumstances, grant the European Union the right to levy taxes. Fiscal sovereignty will remain with the Member States who might, however, authorise the Union for a limited period (to be revoked at any time), to benefit directly from a certain share of a tax, as happens with regional or local authorities in most Member States.
The new system "must not increase overall public expenditure nor the tax burden for the citizens". If it directly allocates part of a tax to the European Union, "an equivalent reduction would have to be made elsewhere".
MEPs in the committee are calling for the new system to be introduced from 2014, with a "transition period" to guarantee "a smooth phasing-out of the old financing system".
Here too a number of principles would underlie the new own resource, the declared aim being "to revive the letter and spirit of the founding treaties". These principles would be: full respect for the fiscal sovereignty of the Member States, fiscal neutrality, no changes to the order of magnitude of the EU budget etc.
British rebate
The House stresses that the current system, with its four different resources and its several different rebate mechanisms, be they general ones in favour of one Member State such as the British rebate, or special ones such as rebates in financing other rebates, is excessively complex, lacks transparency and is completely incomprehensible to European citizens; underlines that it does nothing towards fulfilling the requirement of establishing a direct link between the Union and its citizens. The Budgets committee deplores the fact that the 2005 Brussels European Council, instead of creating a simpler and more transparent system, made it even more complicated and obscure by leaving the UK correction, the "British rebate", in principle intact and adding further derogations and corrections benefiting other Member States.
No EU tax
The report states that the time for a new European tax may not yet have come, although the Member States could decide to grant the EU such a tax in future.
However, the new own resources system should be based on a tax already in existence in the Member States, the idea being that a certain percentage of an existing tax would be fed directly into the EU budget as a genuine own resource, thus establishing a direct link between the Union and the European taxpayer.
Among the taxes envisaged for this purpose are:
- VAT
- excise duties on motor fuel for road transport
- excise duties on tobacco and alcohol
- taxes on corporate profits
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Budget
2008 budget to focus on "boosting confidence in EU institutions"
2007-03-29 - 18:24
The 2008 budget will focus upon making communication more efficient in the European Parliament in order to raise awareness among EU citizens and to "inform effectively the EU citizen on its activities and contribution to European construction", according to a report adopted by MEPs. A focus on enhancing the exchange of information is needed to raise the profile of the 2009 elections to the Parliament, according to the report, written by Ville ITÄLÄ (EPP-ED, FI). Existing channels of communication can be improved, and a particular focus placed upon informing the local and regional media.
Greater efficiency in this area, the House suggests, would help "address the shortcomings related to the image of the European Union" and be "highly profitable for the European project."
Obstacles to more efficient information exchange
The budget will look at factors which hinder the general flow of information, including in particular the fact that the European Parliament is located in three places. The European Parliament expresses concern over "the additional costs that this implies in terms of running costs and in particular when travelling from one place to another." The budget can be used to improve this situation, according to the report, through investment in "new technologies in order to limit the negative impact of the European Parliament’s geographical layout such as the synchronisation of computers with mobile phones or the use of video conference rooms."
There are, however, problems which still exist in terms of successfully implementing this new technology, and MEPs call for a specific section of the budget to be dedicated to evaluating "IT projects launched in the past five years with indications regarding the provisional costs, the starting and provisional delivery dates, the delivery dates and the final costs."
European Parliament staff
The House is particularly concerned about "the costs related to geographical dispersion", in particular "the number of missions undertaken by staff within the three places of work", and will "examine the possibilities to rationalise them better."
Services for MEPs
The report also draws attention to services available to MEPs, for example for meetings and access to library resources, including calling for the establishment of "an extensive single document and information repository of all existing texts and expertise (Knowledge Management System)." The report also calls for "a more personal level of service to members, under transparent and clearly defined conditions" to facilitate for MEPs the "accomplishment of their role and [to] enhance the quality of EU legislation."
Assistants' statute
The House notes the plenary's decision to fully support the adoption of a real and meaningful statute for Members' assistants. MEPs expect the Council to take a final decision on this issue by the beginning of September 2007 in order to permit the allocation of the necessary funds for it; calls on its Bureau to push forward the issue of the statute for Members' assistants vis-à-vis the Council. The House is convinced that such a statute will contribute to improving the quality of Members' activities.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Public health
Parliament adopts written declaration on Hepatitis C
2007-03-29 - 18:24
Following the announcement in the minutes of 14 March (see below), the House formally adopted written declaration on Hepatitis C with some 470 MEPs signing the declaration. The declaration calls on the Commission and Council to recognise Hepatitis C as an urgent public health issue and identify priority actions in programmes of future Council presidencies. It also calls for the adoption of a Council recommendation on Hepatitis C screening, ensuring early diagnosis and wider access to treatment and care.
The written declaration calls on the Commission and Council to respond to the recommendations of its June 2006 report on protecting European healthcare workers from blood-borne infections due to needlestick injuries and facilitate further research on treatment for Hepatitis C patients co-infected with HIV and/or Hepatitis B under the 7th Research Framework Programme.
12 millions persons in Europe are infected with the Hepatitis C virus (HCV). HCV is an urgent issue, being a disease which attacks the liver and leads to chronic hepatitis C causing cirrhosis, liver failure or liver cancer, thus increasing the need for transplantation. HCV is often seen as a 'silent killer' and 'sniper' disease, HCV is often not detected so that many patients remain undiagnosed while the diagnosed patients frequently suffer from stigmatisation.
John BOWIS (EPP-ED, UK) said: “According to the British Hepatitis C Trust, only 1 in 10 people with Hepatitis C have been diagnosed. Extended and reinforced screening efforts are therefore essential to guarantee early diagnosis and treatment, and to prevent a further spreading of the virus.”
Stephen HUGHES (PES, UK) said: “In particular for health workers, the risk of infection for Hepatitis C through needlestick injuries is enormous. I am therefore pleased that the European Parliament once more underlined the need for urgent EU action to prevent such fatal injuries.”
Frederique RIES (ALDE, BE) said: “Hepatitis C is also the first cause of liver transplant in the EU, as there is still no vaccine, screening and organ donations remain the most efficient medical practices to stop the disease. It is therefore crucial to reinforce European cooperation via the 7th Research Framework Programme and the European Registry on Organs, Cells and Tissues (EUROCET).” Written declaration on hepatitis C
-//EP//TEXT WDECL P6-DCL-2006-0087 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Adopted texts
2007-03-29 - 18:24
Texts adopted during this session can be accessed via the link hereunder. Final texts adopted. Latest texts adopted
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta.do;jsessionid=38106B6D5ADA324BA68EDDDC726B7C6C.node1?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Agenda for 23-26 April Plenary in Strasbourg
2007-03-29 - 18:24
Draft Agenda for the April Plenary in Strasbourg can be accessed via the link hereunder. Draft agenda - 23-26 April 2007. Draft Agenda for 23-26 April plenary in Strasbourg
EN
1
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?language=EN&reference=2007-04
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-FULL DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-FULL DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
