Fresh boost needed for fight against AIDS
Public health
2007-03-22 - 12:24
Have the therapies that prolong the lives of AIDS patients (but still fail to cure them) led Europe to become complacent? Anyone might think so, as least so far as gay men are concerned. In recent years there has been an upturn in the number of infections in Europe. Half the new cases are people under 25 years old. So Environment and Public Health Committee MEPs firmly support a new action plan proposed by the European Commission.
In an own-initiative report by Georgs Andrejevs (ALDE, LV) adopted on Wednesday by 44 votes to 2, with no abstentions, MEPs stress the need to renew efforts to combat AIDS, not only within the EU but in neighbouring countries, too.
Epidemic
Europe's figures are low compared with those of sub-Saharan Africa, where two-thirds of the world's 40 million people with the infection are to be found. However, the numbers in Europe are still worrying given our potential for prevention and information.
In 1998, western Europe diagnosed 42 new infections for every million inhabitants. In 2006 the proportion reached 74 - nearly double - or 26,000 new cases a year, in addition to the 700,000 already infected. However, the resurgence is even more spectacular in the neighbouring countries of eastern Europe and central Asia, where around 270,000 new cases were recorded in 2006 alone, of which 90% were in Russia and Ukraine.
Received ideas…
According to a Eurobarometer survey in February 2006, 45% of EU citizens still believe that the disease can be caught by drinking from the glass of a person who has AIDS or is HIV-positive. This shows how much information work still needs to be done, both to spell out the real risk factors and to combat discrimination.
Fifty-six per cent of new cases in the EU are of heterosexuals, of whom three quarters are immigrants or migrants, often infected in countries where the disease is widespread. The number of new cases among intravenous drug users is declining, which seems to confirm the effectiveness of programmes to provide sterile syringes and needles. However, new cases are growing among men who have had sexual relations with other men.
Multi-targeting information campaigns
MEPs in the committee are calling for information and prevention campaigns targeted at high-risk groups, notably migrants and immigrants, and sex workers and their clients. They want to see measures to promote condoms, drug substitution treatments, sterile needle and syringe supplies, voluntary screening, health programmes for women, simultaneous programmes to combat AIDS and tuberculosis (a third of HIV-positive patients die of tuberculosis) and programmes to fight homophobia and stigmatisation.
The report reiterates that every human being has a right of access to health care. They argue that palliative care should be expanded, along with social integration programmes for people infected with the virus, and that sex education should be available to all citizens.
More funding for research
AIDS research gets too little funding, say MEPs, who want to see more development work done on microbicides and female condoms. They object to the high cost of new medicinal products, and say that small changes to them should not lead to a proportional prolongation of licences.
The committee also advocates better access for NGOs to Community funding and better co-operation with civil society through a future European forum and national forums.
To help Europe's neighbouring countries, MEPs urge the use of all political and financial instruments available under the European Neighbourhood Policy, the Nordic Dimension and the TACIS programme (aid for the ex-USSR states) as well as the creation of public-private partnerships.
Procedure: Own-initiative report -- Plenary vote: April, Strasbourg
2007-03-21 Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety Chair Miroslav Ouzký EPP-DE CZ
20070321IPR04418
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
