Parliament adopts report on beef and veal produce
Agriculture
2007-03-14 - 13:23
Parliament gave its verdict on a Commission proposal to clarify the distinction between the different types of meat currently sold in the EU under the name "veal". In a report by Bernadette BOURZAI (PES, FR), the House welcomes the Commission's approach while demanding further guarantees for consumers.
There are two main types of veal production in the EU at present. In most Member States, especially France, Italy, Belgium and Germany, the term 'veal' is used for the meat of animals fed mainly on milk and slaughtered before the age of eight months. In a minority of countries (mainly Spain and Denmark), the animals are fed almost entirely on grain and only sent for slaughter after 10 months.
In the Netherlands, the two types exist in parallel: the 'white veal' (or milk-fed) sector (around 85% of the total) and the 'pink veal' (or grain-fed) sector.
'White veal' is usually regarded as being of better quality and it costs 2-3 euros more per kilogramme to produce. Yet both types are sold under the high-value name 'veal'.
To ensure fairer competition on the market and clarify matters for consumers, the Commission is proposing that meat be described according to the age at which the animal is slaughtered, as this is easier to monitor than the type of feed used. Thus, from July 2007 the following terms would be used:
- 'veal' for meat from animals aged 8 months or less;
- a term such as 'young beef' for animals aged over 8 months but no more than 12 months (though not in the case of Britain and Ireland);
- 'beef' for meat from animals over 12 months old.
For Britain and Ireland, the terms would be:
- 'veal' for meat from animals aged 8 months or less;
- 'beef' for meat from all animals over 8 months old.
In addition, the Commission is proposing to make it compulsory for labels to indicate the category of meat with a letter ('X' for veal, 'Y' for young beef) as well as the age of slaughter. Other information could also be given, such as the type of feed. Derogations would be allowed for the Netherlands, Denmark, Spain and Greece.
European veal production totalled just over 800,000 tonnes in 2005. Five Member States account for 85% of the total: France (30%), the Netherlands (25%), Italy (18%) and Belgium and Germany (6% each). France and Italy alone account for nearly 70% of consumption.
This Regulation, says MEPs, should not apply to the meat of bovine animals aged twelve months or less for which a protected designation of origin or geographical indication is registered.
View of European Parliament
The report by Bernadette Bourzai, adopted under the consultation procedure, approves the harmonisation measures proposed by the Commission but opposes the idea of derogations. It also calls for Member States to be allowed to impose penalties in the event of failure to comply.
In addition, says the House, the regulation should apply not only to fresh, frozen or deep-frozen meat but also to prepared, processed or cooked meat products. Lastly, MEPs suggest that the categories 'X' and 'Y' be replaced by 'V' for veal and 'Z' for young beef.
Council's position
In debates in Council in recent months a majority of Member States have broadly supported the Commission proposal and appear to have a similar position to MEPs regarding sanctions on fraud and the lettering to be used for different categories of meat. However, some states want derogations in certain areas. The Commission is keen for the procedure to be completed in time for the regulation to enter into force on 1 July this year.
20070309IPR04007 Marketing of the meat of bovine animals aged 12 months or less
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5382832
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
