International Women's Day: how long to 50/50?
Women's rights/Equal opportunities
2007-03-08 - 19:17
The past and present of gender equality were discussed at a Women's Rights Committee seminar marking International Women's Day on 8 March. MEPs reviewed the achievements and persistent inequalities in women's rights and gender equality over the past 50 years, concluding that though much has been done, even more remains to be done. Participants included EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering, employment and equal opportunities Commissioner Vladimír Špidla and former Commissioner Anita Gradin.
The European Parliament has long attached great importance to women's rights, said President Hans-Gert Pöttering in opening the seminar, entitled "1957 - 2007: the European Union and the Advancement of Women. Women Building the Future of Europe". Yet times had changed, he continued, pointing out that whereas in 1979, one had to fight to establish even an ad hoc committee on women's rights, by 1999 the task of promoting gender equality had been enshrined in the Amsterdam Treaty. Commissioner Špidla also stressed women's importance in European integration, saying that "there are not only founding fathers but also founding mothers".
Women's rights 50 years after signing the Treaty of Rome
Mr Pöttering voiced a broad consensus that "Over the last five decades we have achieved a great deal, nevertheless lots needs to be done." On the plus side, it was noted that the legislation in the EU provides for equality, that the share of women in the European Parliament has increased from 16% in 1970 to 30% in 2004 and that women's employment rates have almost doubled since 1970s. On minus side, participants noted that inequalities persist and that in the developing world the situation is far worse. MEP and former European Parliament President Nicole Fontaine pointed out that "if Member States would respect their commitments, we would not even need the Women's Day". Former Commissioner Anita Gradin, pointing to the seminar posters, demanded: "How long will it take before we get this 50/50?"
General concern was voiced over the pay gap and female poverty, women's under-representation in politics and trafficking in and violence against women and children. Council representative Ms Heidemarie Wieczorek-Zeul noted that 70% of world's poorest are women and that 130 million women worldwide are subject to genital mutilation. She concluded that "as far as inequality persists, we will find that 21st century has not got off on the right foot".
And what does the future hold?
Talking about Europe's demographic challenge caused by lower fertility rates, postponement of first pregnancies and aging, Ms Livia Sz Olah from Stockholm University argued that women's advancement has to be promoted, since: "Societies with higher level of gender equality appear to be in a better position to meet the challenge." The need for a greater role for women in the future, especially in the "Lisbon" jobs and growth strategy, was noted by Dr Serenella Mariani (Pharmaceutical group BRACCO S.P.A), who said that already now her company provides for maternity leaves, paid holidays for children, care for elderly and flexitime if needed in order to attract or keep female employees.
MEP Raũl Romeva Rueda (Greens/EFA, ES), felt that the only way forward is for men to assume their responsibilities in the reproductive area. He was also in favour of gender quotas in politics and believed that the Member States should put forward two candidates of different sexes for Commission President. Several other participants also admitted that even though they had been sceptical about quotas earlier, they now believe that these serve a purpose.
Ms Denitsa Zlateva, from International Affairs BSP Union for Parity and Solidarity, expressed the hope that by 2057 women will have equal access to political and economic power but she stressed that this can only be achieved "if we all share the vision, have the same goals and are willing to work together to achieve these goals".
Commissioner Špidla also appealed to everyone to contribute to the fight for equal rights, saying "It is not true that there are people who can make a difference and people who cannot. There are only people who are willing to do so or people who are not. Let our souls be an instrument for change!"
2007-03-07 Chair Anna ZÁBORSKÁ EPP-ED SK
20070305IPR03781
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
