EP President Pöttering condemns situation in Zimbabwe
Institutions
2007-03-29 - 09:09
At the beginning of the session in Brussels, President Hans-Gert Pöttering issued the following statement in connection with recent events in Zimbabwe: "In the past weeks the political situation in Zimbabwe has escalated. There have been violent attacks from government-controlled forces.
On 11 March, a gathering in the suburbs of the capital Harare was disrupted by armed police. In this attack a member of the opposition, Gift Tandere, was shot and numerous protestors were injured.
Forty leading members of the opposition, including the Chairmen of the main opposition party, MDC (Movement for Democratic Change), Morgan Tsvangirai, and Arthur Mutambara, were arrested and suffered serious mistreatment by the police.
On 18 March, a member of the opposition party, Nelson Chamisa, was severely beaten and was taken into hospital with serious injuries. He was travelling to the ACP-EU joint parliamentary assembly. This attack prompted the Bureau of the ACP-EU joint parliamentary assembly, in agreement with other African members, to condemn this incident. The Bureau called on the government of Zimbabwe to put an end to the ongoing violence in the country and to respect human rights and the rule of law.
We condemn all forms of violence and repression by the government of President Mugabe. The Council and the Commission should co-operate with all international, regional and national forces in order to find a transitional solution to turn it from the current regime to a real democracy."
Glenys Kinnock (PES, UK), Co-President of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly said: "I wanted to tell the House that one hour ago Morgan Tsvangirai was again arrested by the police and security forces in Harare. He and his staff were about to have a news conference to discuss the events which you described in your speech.
I would like this House, therefore, to condemn that re-arrest of Morgan Tsvangirai and to say that the brutality against the opposition has to stop and the southern African community has to react in their meeting in Tanzania this week."
Highlights of the Brussels plenary 28-29 March
The March plenary session takes place just three days after the signing of the Berlin Declaration to mark the 50th anniversary of the signing of the Treaty of Rome. German Chancellor and President of the European Council Angela MERKEL will present the declaration to MEPs, Commission President José Manuel BARROSO will also take part in the debate. Following this set-piece debate, MEPs turn their attention to convergence in supervisory practices with oral questions to the Council and the Commission. The House will then debate the future of Kosovo and the role of the EU. A report being put forward by the Foreign Affairs Committee gives its full support to the Ahtisaari proposal for a status settlement, while avoiding any explicit mention of Kosovo's independence. The report also reaffirms the European perspective of both Serbia and Kosovo, and called for the EU to play a central role in the current international negotiations for a settlement. Later on Wednesday, the Parliament debates organic production and labelling of organic products . Stricter standards for the use of plant-health and veterinary products, stronger guarantees against contamination by genetically modified organisms (GMOs), reliable labelling and tougher inspections, including those on imports, are among the priorities of the report. MEPs will also turn their attention to the EU's financial resources , including the UK rebate. The report proposes a reform of the own-resources system which would, above all, emphasise equality between Member States. There would be a second stage, starting in 2014, based on a yet-to-be-determined system of levies, although this would not be a real "European tax". Football features highly on the plenary agenda with two reports . The first report says that professional football in the EU needs better governing rules in many areas, from managing clubs' finances to recruiting young talent, says a report by EP Committee on Culture and Education. The socio-economic challenges facing soccer are too great for the football governing bodies to tackle alone, and the European Commission should propose solutions, it adds. The second report concerns amendments to the original decision by the Council in 2002 which called for the establishment of national football information points in each Member State, "responsible for co-ordinating and facilitating police information exchange", in connection with international football matches. The Transport Committee is tabling two reports designed to raise standards of maritime safety . The first looks at the duties of "flag states" (the state where a ship is registered), the second at the question of civil liability. These reports are part of a group of seven reports known as the "third maritime safety package". The other five will come before Parliament's plenary in April. Thursday 29 March On Thursday, the High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy, Javier SOLANA presents prospects for the EU's Common Foreign Policy in 2007 . The issue of the possible installation of a US missile system in the Czech Republic and Poland will feature prominently in the speech and debate that follows.
20070328IPR04763 Agenda 28-29 March 2007 (Brussels) Briefing for 28-29 March 2007 plenary (Brussels) Declaration of the Bureau of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly on the ill-treatment of the Zimbabwean opposition MP Nelson Chamisa -21 March
EN
1
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?language=EN&reference=2007-03
EN
3
LINK
/intcoop/acp/56_01/pdf/zimbabwe_decl.pdf
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070320BRI04383 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
