Manchester to hold double football celebration of 50 years - Treaty of Rome and Manchester United
Sport
United Kingdom
2007-03-12 - 18:09
Old Trafford Manchester to hold double 50 year celebration
The best of European football will be on show in Manchester, Old Trafford on 13 March to mark the 50th anniversary of the signature of the Treaty of Rome setting up the modern-day European Union. Coinciding with the 50th anniversary of their participation as the first English team to play UEFA’s European club competition, Manchester United will play a Europe XI to be coached by Italian World Cup winner Marcello Lippi.
Below is an interview with Arlene McCarthy MEP (Labour, North West) who will attend the match.
The Europe XI squad includes many of the Italian World Cup winning squad, Barcelona and Liverpool Captains, Carles Puyol and Steven Gerrard. Three Brazilian stars, Ronaldinho, Ronaldo and Juninho Pernambucano will also play as guests for the Europe XI. All proceeds from the event will go to the Manchester United Foundation which is a registered charity funding local community projects. It has benefited over one million people since its creation in 1992.
As an MEP who is attending the game, what are your thoughts ahead of the match?
AM. Marking both the 50 th anniversary of the European Union and Manchester United’s 50 th anniversary as the first English club to play in the UEFA European Competition with this high profile charity match is a great way to bring home to people and football fans the benefits of our membership of the European Union.
Can you explain the symbolism of the 50 th year anniversary?
AM. It will be a symbolic match not just because it marks 50 years of the Treaty of Rome but perhaps more important for football fans it marks 50 years of Manchester United playing in European competitions. Manchester United was the first club to defy the ban on English clubs participating in Europe. It is symbolic that the charity match is taking place at the “theatre of dreams” at Old Trafford.
How would you describe the power of football?
AM. Football as one of the most popular forms of popular culture, both unites people around “the beautiful game” and it transcends differences. When I go to a football match you can feel the energy and enthusiasm of the fans, who come from all different walks of life, different socio-economic backgrounds and represent all age groups from the 79 year old pensioner to the 9 year old child.
Football has a powerful force for change in local communities, I am a keen supporter of the work that football clubs do in local communities encouraging young children to read and hosting after school clubs. The clubs have led the way on anti-racism campaigns helping us to tackle racism in local communities.
Why are you attending the match?
AM. I represent the North West Region in the European Parliament and we have the best teams in Europe and in the UK. Two of the final three UK teams left in the UEFA champion’s league are from the North West – Manchester United and Liverpool. I am very proud that the city of Manchester is hosting this special European charity match.
We are a first rate European city which has benefited from European funding investment and we have a proud record of sports achievements.
It’s my home city and as a Euro MP who represents Manchester I believe it is important to be there to celebrate football, Europe and support a charity match. I have donated my guest tickets to a great local charity, St Anne’s Hospice which helps people with life threatening illnesses. They need to raise £16,000 a day just to keep going.
What are your expectations for the match?
AM. I hope there will be lots of action, plenty of goals and no red cards. I have to admit to having divided loyalties. I am torn between backing Manchester United or the European XI not because of any sense of duty to back the team playing for Europe but because I am great fan of the two Liverpool players Steven Gerrard and Jamie Carragher who are playing for the European XI.
What does the match mean to your constituents in the North West of England?
AM. It’s a recognition of our achievements. It’s good for Manchester and the region, as it’s a showcase for our sporting talents and the renaissance of Manchester as a premier league European City.
EU funds have been put to good use in the regeneration strategy, it you look across from Old Trafford you can see the Lowry Theatre and Art Gallery a deprived area which has been brought back to life with a boost from EU funds.
Moreover it is also a chance to showcase our fine foods and cuisine as I am delighted that the famous Eccles cake will be on the menu for the 50 th anniversary dinner.
The Europe XI squad for the match currently includes Olivier Kahn, Grégory Coupet, Iker Casillas, Paolo Maldini, Jamie Carragher, Eric Abidal, Lilan Thuram, Carles Puyol, Marco Materazzi, Fabio Grosso, Gianluca Zambrotta, Steven Gerrard, Juninho Pernambucano, Florent Malouda, Luis Miguel, Gennaro Gattuso, Andrea Pirlo, Ronaldinho, Ronaldo, Alessandro Mancini, Zlatan Ibrahimovic and Henrik Larsson.
The 25th March 2007 will mark the 50th anniversary of the signature of the Treaty of Rome that founded the modern-day European Union. The football match in Manchester coincides with the 50th anniversary of the first time an English club entered European football club competitions under the auspices of European Football’s governing body, UEFA.
20070308IPR03876 EU's 50th Anniversary website UEFA website Further details on tickets for the match All 9 MEPs for the North West of England All 78 UK MEPs
EN
1
PHOTO
20070312PHT04066.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://europa.eu/50/index_en.htm
EN
3
LINK
http://www.uefa.com/
EN
4
LINK
http://www.manutd.com/
EN
5
LINK
/members/public/geoSearch/search.do?country=GB&zone=North+West&language=EN
EN
6
LINK
/members/expert/groupAndCountry/search.do?country=GB&language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
