Neil Parish - New Chairman of EP Agriculture Committee speaks out on the committee's priorities
Institutions
United Kingdom
2007-03-05 - 12:32
Neil Parish MEP - Chairman of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development
Neil Parish MEP (Conservative, South West, EPP-ED, UK) was elected Chairman of the European Parliament Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development on 1 February 2007 and will chair the committee until the European elections of June 2009. Mr Parish, who has vast personal experience of agriculture, speaks out on issues ranging from the promotion of bio-fuels, to subsidies, to relations with the European Commission.
How will your past experience assist you in chairing this committee?
NP. I am a former deputy leader of a Council in the south west, so I have a good deal of experience chairing committee meetings - although I admit they were much smaller than the European Parliament committee, and didn't have simultaneous translation!
When I was 16, I took over running the family dairy farm in Somerset in England and continued to run the farm until recently. I feel it can be too easy when talking of farming issues to see them in an abstract way, and I hope my knowledge of how things work on the ground will continue to bring an element of common sense to the Parliament's deliberations.
What are the priorities for the Agriculture Committee in 2007?
NP. The main work of the committee will be to deliberate the follow-up reforms to the CAP - particularly reforms to the wine regime and the fruit and vegetables regime.
European agriculture is at a crossroads. With high-quality produce, and stringent animal welfare standards, we can have the most successful agricultural industry in the World. What we need are a few key reforms which enable farmers to explore new opportunities like those being presented by biofuels, and to reduce farmers' dependence on subsidies.
In the next thirty months, my main goal will be to move EU spending priorities away from production-based subsidies while ensuring we maintain a level playing field across Europe.
Do you and your committee believe the European Commission is bringing forward the right blend of proposals?
NP. Generally I think the Agriculture Commissioner is robust about the need for an equitable reform of the Common Agriculture Policy, which I support. She and I have a good working relationship and I like her straight-talking approach.
My committee will obviously have occasional concerns about some of the proposals being brought forward by the Commission, but generally I feel it often strikes the right balance on agricultural issues. If only we could say the same for the Commission on a number of other issues!
There are some areas where I fully support the Commission's actions - for example in its unstinting support for biofuels, where the Commission has been far more pro-active than my own national government.
The EP has mainly consultation powers over the CAP, which represents roughly 40 percent of the EU budget, are you and your committee satisfied with this situation?
NP. Although MEPs may not have substantial formal powers over the CAP, I do believe they have a fair degree of influence. Under a so-called interinstitutional agreement between the Parliament and the other EU institutions, we will have a fundamental review of the CAP in 2008. This 'health check' will fully involve all MEPs, but particularly those on the agriculture committee, and the Budgets committee. I think we will have a good opportunity to have a substantial say over the future reform of the Common Agriculture Policy.
How has enlargement impacted on the Agriculture Committee?
NP. I believe the effect enlargement has had on the agriculture committee is microcosmic of the effect it has had on the whole EU. The centre of gravity has shifted away from 'Old Europe', and towards the new states who want to see market-led, rather than government-led solutions to our problems.
The inclusion of countries that still have massive agriculture industries has made us have to fundamentally reassess how we organise agriculture in the enlarged EU, and that can only be a good thing.
How will you ensure your own impartiality?
NP. It depends what you mean by impartiality. I have committed to always put the interests of farmers first, so perhaps that does make me partial in a way. All farmers ask for is a level playing field across the EU, and that is what I want to create.
The Agriculture and Rural Development Committee is responsible for:
1. the operation and development of the common agricultural policy;
2. rural development, including the activities of the relevant financial instruments;
3. legislation on:
(a) veterinary and plant-health matters, animal feedingstuffs provided such measures are not intended to protect against risks to human health,
(b) animal husbandry and welfare;
4. the improvement of the quality of agricultural products;
5. supplies of agricultural raw materials;
6. the Community Plant Variety Office;
7. forestry.
20070226IPR03601 Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development Profile of Neil Parish MEP European Commission website on Agriculture and Rural Development
EN
1
PHOTO
20070305PHT03771.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/committees/agri_home_en.htm
EN
3
LINK
/members/expert/committees/view.do?language=EN&id=4528
EN
4
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/agriculture/index_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
