MEPs strongly back Martti Ahtisaari's proposal on Kosovo, call for it to be put under "supervised sovereignty"
External relations
2007-03-29 - 13:53
Parliament gave its full support today to the Ahtisaari proposal for a status settlement, stating that "sovereignty supervised by the international community is the best option" for securing the objectives of a peaceful, self-sustaining Kosovo. The report also reaffirmed the European perspective of both Serbia and Kosovo, and called for the EU to play a central role in the current international negotiations for a settlement.
Members voted to fully support the UN-led drive to determine the final status of Kosovo, and to the Ahtisaari Proposal in particular. Martti Ahtisaari, former Finnish President, was the UN Special Envoy charged with devising a plan for the status settlement of Kosovo. His proposal, released early last month, would give Kosovo some of the trappings of sovereignty, such as rights to membership in international organisations, but does not advocate outright independence. The own-initiative report by Joost Lagendijk (Greens/EFA, NL), adopted by an overwhelming majority in the House on Thursday 29 March (490 in favour to 80 against with 87 abstentions) spelled out several desirable aspects of a settlement:
-access to international financial organisations
-an international presence in Kosovo, with a clear definition of its role and mandate
-clear provisions on decentralisation which grant substantial autonomy in key areas -full respect for human rights
-retention of Kosovo's multi-ethnic character, with protection for cultural and religious sites
-the establishment of a limited, internal, multi-ethnic Kosovar Security Force
-international guarantees for the territorial integrity of all neighbouring states
International implications
Addressing fears, especially in Russia, that granting Kosovo any form of independence would exacerbate other separatist tensions around the globe, the report "underlines that the solution in Kosovo will set no precedent in international law, as Kosovo has been under UN rule since 1999 [...and] is in no way comparable to the situation in other conflict regions which are not under UN administration." In addition, the House is of the view that "in the long run, the solution regarding the future status of Kosovo lies also in the fact that both Serbia and Kosovo are due to become part of the EU, together with their neighbours, since the future of the Western Balkans lies in the European Union."
The EU's role
The report emphasises that the EU Member States should speak with one voice on the Kosovo issue, by adopting a common position in Council, and maintaining it in international fora, especially the UN Security Council. The Parliament also argued that "the European Union should have a decisive say on the final terms of the settlement." MEPs also called for a visa facilitation agreement for Kosovo, to ease access for travel into the European Union.
Finally, the report stated that "the EP is prepared to make available the additional resources required in order to finance the future EU involvement in Kosovo with a view to implementing the status settlement." The report also expressed the Parliament's support for the establishment of an ESDP (European Security and Defence Policy) mission to Kosovo.
20070326IPR04617 The future of Kosovo and the role of the EU Final text, as adopted by the European Parliament, will be available here in due course
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5406842
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta.do;jsessionid=E7E33FD323A895C23379DC178210CAAB.node1?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
