Rome Youth Summit Declaration calls for a stronger Parliament and a more democratic Union
Future of Europe/European integration
2007-03-26 - 13:27
The EU needs to involve more young people in the decision-making system in order to reconnect with citizens, agreed participants in the first European Youth Summit, held in Rome on 24 and 25 March to mark the Rome Treaty's 50th anniversary. The Youth Summit Declaration on the future of Europe calls for the European Parliament to have co-decision powers in all policy areas and the right of legislative initiative.
The European Youth Summit brought together over 200 young participants from all 27 EU Member States. Organised jointly by the EU and the European Youth Forum, it was held in parallel with the informal European Council in Berlin.
"Seeing so many of you gathered here today, I am confident that the vision and aspirations laid down by the founding fathers 50 years ago are in good hands", said European Parliament Vice-President Alejo Vidal-Quadras (EPP-ED, ES), at the opening of the summit on 24 March. To tackle the new problems Europe is facing, EU leaders need to connect more with civil society, he continued, adding that "We need to involve you, European Youth and youth organisations, more, in the ongoing debate on the future of the European Union".
In her opening speech, European Youth Forum President Bettina Schwarzmayr said "Youth organisations play a key role in reducing the gap between where decisions about society are made and where they are implemented. [...] We call on politicians to be accountable and we want to see a strong European Parliament, as the EU elected body that has legitimacy, as the natural conduit connecting citizens to the European Union." [...] "The EU needs to listen to its citizens and in particular its young citizens. We are ready to contribute to this chapter of the tale", she concluded.
"After successful decades, the European project seems to have lost direction and inspiration", noted the young delegates, who called on European leaders to unite their efforts to "re-launch the integration process and to ensure that citizens are fully involved in decision-making procedures".
The role of civil society, education and reforms: proposals for a more democratic Union
The future of the EU Treaty, the EU's social and economic model, sustainable development, the EU's role in a globalised world, democracy and civil society, youth and education were debated by working groups on 24 March, to prepare the concluding Declaration. The final text places great emphasis on education and the role of civil society organisations. The Declaration calls on Member States to guarantee access to education for all and for non-formal education to be recognised as complementary to formal education. It also calls for an increase in funding for non-governmental organisations (NGOs), as primary promoters of civic participation, and says that youth organisations and young people from diverse backgrounds should be closely involved in all youth-related decision-making processes.
On institutional reform, the Declaration calls for a more democratic decision-making system and better communication with citizens. It advocates a "reform of the European institutions, where the European Parliament co-decides in all policy fields and has the right to initiate legislation, where the European Commission is [...] a true European executive, fully accountable to the Council and the Parliament." According to the delegates, "such reform requires a real legitimate Constitution that can only be achieved through transparent and participatory procedures, such as the election of a Constitutional Assembly that will establish a democratic Convention and an EU-wide referendum".
The Youth Summit Declaration was formally presented to Mr Vidal-Quadras, Commission Vice-President Margot Wallström, Commissioner for Education and Youth Jan Figel and German Ambassador in Italy Michail Gerdts, representing the Council Presidency, in the Campidigolio building on 25 March. Mr Vidal-Quadras informed participants that "This declaration will be used as a working document and discussed by the [EP] Culture committee and other relevant committees", adding that: "you can count on the European Parliament to see your ideas come to reality ".
The Declaration text was also immediately forwarded to EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering, who was attending the informal European Council in Berlin, where the Heads of State and Government adopted a policy declaration on the values and ambitions of the EU.
2007-03-23
European Youth Summit
24 and 25 March
Rome
20070326IPR04608 Official Web site of the European Youth Forum More information on the Youth Summit The Rome Youth Declaration
EN
1
LINK
http://www.youthforum.org/
EN
2
LINK
http://europa.eu/50/news/article/070316_a_en.htm
EN
3
LINK
http://europa.eu/50/docs/rome_youth_declaration_en.pdf
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
