Textbooks and lawbooks: MEPs underline the importance of constitutional, educational and police reform in Bosnia-Herzegovina
External relations
2007-03-15 - 12:55
While welcoming positive signs of change from Bosnia-Herzegovina, for instance in the police sector, the Parliament noted that constitutional reform was a pressing priority for the country, especially in recent times of increasing ethnic and nationalistic tensions. The adopted report also maintained that "education is the primary vehicle for reconciliation," and suggested ways to reform the sector.
The own-initiative report, drafted by Doris PACK (EPP-ED, DE), expresses MEPs' concern about the fact that "formerly moderate parties [...] resorted during the campaign to confrontational and divisive language" in the recent elections. It also condemns the failure to arrest all the war criminals still at large in the country, and the fact that "documents potentially of use to the investigations" have disappeared. (Par 9) The House was also troubled by the "persisting ethnic barriers in Bosnia-Herzegovina" (BH).
At the same time, Members welcomed recent plans to restructure the police forces, and insisted on the country's "clear prospect of European integration" as a basis of EU-BH relations. The committee urged the country's political leaders to undertake necessary reforms, especially with respect to the State's Constitution and education policy. It also recommended establishing a "truth and reconciliation commission for the country," and emphasized the need for implementing public broadcasting reforms.
With respect to education, MEPs argued strongly in favour of "dealing with the burden of the past, including the issue of persons who went missing during the bloody conflict," and noted that this implied "an end to the segregation of different ethnic groups schooled under the same roof, a debate on the creation of a common curriculum for those in compulsory schooling, paying special attention to the way history is taught, and improved continuing training for teachers.
On the constitution, Ms. Pack's report takes the view that "the EU, under the aegis of the EU Special Representative (EUSR), should play a leading role in re-launching the constitutional debate, notably by facilitating the dialogue between the parties." It also warns against any attempt to carve out "mono-ethnic territories," or otherwise undermining the multi-ethnic character of BH.
Finally, the Parliament expressed its satisfaction with the decision to reconsider closing down the Office of the High Representative (OHR), whose mandate runs out on 30 June of this year. The Peace Implementation Council (PIC), which oversees the OHR, has recently said it would maintain the office until June, 2008, a position which has been systematically advocated by the EP. Members also welcomed the extension of the mandate of the EUSR in the region, and regretted the recent announcement by Christian Schwarz-Schilling (who currently holds both the post of EUSR and the Head of OHR) to step down in June this year, commending the work he has carried out during his mandate.
20070309IPR04015 Proposal for an EP recommendation to the council on Bosnia-Herzegovina
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5420242
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
