MEPs debate Berlin Declaration with Merkel
Institutions
2007-03-29 - 09:29
MEPs debated the Berlin Declaration which was signed on 25 March to mark the 50th anniversary of the EU with Chancellor Merkel. The declaration, signed by the three Presidents of the European institutions, was widely welcomed by the major groups, although some MEPs criticised the way it was negotiated. Chancellor Merkel suggested that the EP hold an event with civil society to formally contribute to the June European Council.
President-in-Office of the EU Council
Chancellor Angela MERKEL told MEPs that with the mid-term of the German presidency approaching, two important goals had already been achieved. There was the agreement on energy and climate change at the Spring Council: "We used Commission proposals to get agreement in Council on far reaching conclusions. We are all aware that the EU is only in a position to play a pioneering role. If it succeeds in setting ambitious objectives a lot of work is still needed to flesh them out - but that is how politics works." The aim to reduce CO2 emissions by 20 per cent by 2020, with binding renewable energy targets would "make the EU well placed in international negotiations." Mrs Merkel thanked Parliament for its support on this issue.
The other important step, said the President-in-Office of the EU Council, was taken last weekend. "The Berlin Declaration underlined the enormous success EU represents and the enormous challenges still facing us. I wish to thank President Pöttering and leaders of Parliament's political groups for their support. We have succeeded thanks to combined efforts of the European Parliament, Commission and all the Council members." The signing, she said, underlined the consensus on need for such a declaration, which underscores a commitment and promise to work together for future of Europe. A large part of the text was on shared and common values. "We share an ideal of society for EU, founded on freedom, security and justice."
Mrs Merkel said she was grateful that the EP session had started by addressing the situation in Zimbabwe. "We in Europe, I said at the Berlin informal Council, cannot turn our backs on the situation in Darfur. We have done our utmost to push for more hard line UN resolutions on this issue. In EU we also have a duty, if it proves impossible for UN to adopt sanctions, to consider them within the EU. We have a duty to act.
"I also made clear that all of us were aware that 25 March was Independence Day for Belarus," she added, saying the EU would support the people of Belarus in their aim to play a full part in Europe.
Mrs Merkel said: "The EU finds it fully unacceptable that 15 British troops have been captured and detained by Iran. We stand in absolute solidarity with Britain on this issue. Our strength lies in a united approach. We need to feel a sense of shared responsibility and try to find a common position on such matters."
She said the Berlin Declaration had adopted a forward looking stance with the objective of a renewed basis for EU by 2009. She was grateful for EP support on this point too: "We don't want to have to tell people of Europe in parliamentary election campaign that we are unable to further enlarge EU, or to say energy policy is not one of the EU's core competences, or that on domestic security issues we are unable to work on basis of majority decisions, which is vital. Such a campaign must not be allowed further to widen gap between EU institutions and people." On this issue, she said the German presidency would come up with a "road map", not ready made solutions, but "we will set out our objectives and will to all we can to achieve them."
Mrs Merkel stressed recent political progress on issues including mobile phone roaming, banking and payment transactions, agricultural spending and the "open skies" agreement. All of these, she said, were questions of great practical interest to the people of Europe."
She spoke of three forthcoming summits during the German presidency. There was the EU-US summit at the end of April. In this regard, the Open Skies agreement had been a good omen. There was much that could still be freed up between EU and US. Energy policy and climate change would also be high on the agenda: "We have ambitious aims and will encourage others to share them. Developing and threshold countries will only sign up if industrialised countries set stringent goals for themselves." The summit would also prepare the ground for the G8 meeting in June, also under German chairmanship, with preparations taking in representatives of major emerging markets like China, Mexico and Brazil. Finally, there was the EU-Russia summit: "The EU's relationship with Russia is of paramount importance. The Commission has been working feverishly on Partnership and Cooperation Agreement," she said, saying that energy security would be a major part of it. A step change in economic cooperation was needed.
Finally, the German Chancellor reflected that "the people of Europe will measure the performance of leaders on their success in strengthening Europe as a community providing people with prosperity and social cohesion. As I said in Berlin, the world won't wait for Europe. We must ensure we bring Europe to forefront of events on basis of shared values and objectives." She warned against navel gazing, saying we needed "to openly promote our objectives and values, we cannot be too caught up in our own problems. We need to be able to act decisively to satisfy hopes and needs of people of Europe, for a secure and prosperous future."
European Commission President
Commission President José Manuel BARROSO began by welcoming Parliament's statements of support on Zimbabwe and Darfur, strongly condemning the human rights violations and appealing to the authorities there to respect human rights.
Achieving 50 years of peace, freedom and solidarity was beyond the dreams of Europe's founding fathers, said Mr Barroso, explaining that Berlin had been a symbolic venue for a Union of 27 Member States and almost 500 million citizens. The European spirit that prevailed there had shaped the collective commitment, set out in the Declaration, to common values fit for the 21st century.
Mr Barroso congratulated Chancellor Merkel on her personal dedication which, he said, had been decisive in creating the European spirit among Member States in Berlin, and noted that the European Parliament's presence there had borne witness to the Union's democratic maturity.
Mr Barroso looked forward to the success of the "twin-track strategy", i.e. the Spring Council commitments on energy policy and climate change together with the Berlin Declaration commitment to agree on an institutional settlement before the European Parliament elections in 2009.
"By delivering results we create political momentum", he continued, stressing that Europe needs a "treaty settlement" to enable it to face up to the challenges of coming years, such as climate change, energy security, migration and global competition.
The Commission also wants a rapid constitutional settlement to clear the "permanent shadow of doubt" cast by Euro-pessimism - the EU cannot claim to be serious about solving the major issues of the day if it can't agree on its own working arrangements, he said.
"We can never take the achievements of peace, freedom and solidarity for granted", said Mr Barroso, stressing that "to protect the values set out in the Declaration, we need to reform our community of law".
"Europe is not a foreign power - it is not 'them', but 'us'" said Mr Barroso, urging EU Member States resist the temptation to "blame Brussels" and instead work together constructively in support of the German Presidency's efforts to find a solution.
Mr Barroso hoped that a "precise mandate" for settling the institutional impasse could be arrived at by June 2007. "This is the sort of test that a generation of leaders faces once in a lifetime". We should take pride in the past, but also have confidence in the future, he concluded.
Political group speakers
Fifty years - two generations - is but a blink of the eye of history. Yet notions such as "stability" and "prosperity" no longer speak to our young people, because they take them for granted, observed EPP-ED Chairman Joseph DAUL (FR).
Yet surely the terrorist bomb attacks on London and Madrid suffice to illustrate the threats to peace and stability, he continued, expressing sympathy for the UK service personnel held in Iran.
Placing himself in the shoes of a young European, Mr Daul listed educational and sports exchanges, freedom of movement and the single currency, and twinning programmes (which an outgrowth of prosperity) among the things that Europe has done for us.
Europe is not a panacea, but it can help us to meet new challenges, such as globalisation, he continued. Europe needs to open up to other countries - we have own role to play, our own social model to promote. "We must rise to meet the tide of history" as we have in the last 50 years, he said.
The Declaration is a strong text and an easy read - it "puts us back in the saddle", said Mr Daul, underlining that Ms Merkel's honesty and human touch do credit to Europe.
Martin SCHULZ (PES, DE) said: "We are seeing some inflation in the use of the term 'historic', but this is a genuinely historic moment", said Socialist Group Chairman Martin Schulz (DE). He praised Chancellor Merkel for "achieving the best that could be achieved in the circumstances", but stressed that the "truly historic phase starts now".
The constitutional treaty is "moribund", and "we shall not have the treaty that we wanted - but this does mean that we shall not have one at all", he continued. "Some say 'no more revision of the treaties', or 'Nice has gone far enough', but we say 'no' - without reform, there can be no further enlargement", said Mr Schulz,
Europe is small compared to China, India and the USA. "If it dissipates its strength by fragmenting itself, it will founder. This would be the death knell not just for the treaty, but for the ideal itself", he said.
"We have defeated intolerance. Integration and inclusion have been used to oppose territorial demands. But hatred and intolerance are still out there, and will flourish if we destroy the integration process".
Mr Schulz concluded by calling on Member States to join Chancellor Merkel in working with the Commission to "set our own house in order and carry out reforms". "You, Chancellor Merkel, have succeeded in getting Socialists on your side", he said.
Graham WATSON (ALDE, UK) congratulated the Chancellor on her achievements "Text and consensus." The celebration of the Union's success was both timely and appropriate. It is, he said, largely due to the European Union that we owe the security, prosperity and opportunity which our citizens enjoy.
Mr Watson said "As we sat in Berlin's Historiches Museum on Sunday morning, two things struck me:
The first was your inspired move to engage the European Youth Orchestra for the occasion. It is first class and it deserves better financial support. The second was that of the 31 people on the platform - Heads of State and Government, Presidents of the institutions et al - You were the only woman. It brought to mind a verse of the poet Robert Burns:
'While Europe's eye is fixed on mighty things
The fate of empires and the fall of kings
While quacks of State must each produce his plan
And even children lisp the Rights of Man
Amidst this mighty fuss just let me mention
The Rights of woman merit some attention'
Continuing, Mr Watson stated: "What I cannot congratulate you on is the procedure you chose. A text drafted in the catacombs of the Bundeskanzleramt and signed by the Presidents of the three main institutions should not have the temerity to open with the words 'We, the citizens of the European Union'. For it is the citizens of the European Union who need to be re-engaged in the task of building Europe."
And nor does it help, Chancellor, for the European Peoples Party, your party, to claim all the credit for building this Union. The drafters of this vainglorious EPP Declaration rightly praise Monnet and De Gaspari and Kohl: but their memory is selective at best. Thatcher, Chirac, Berlusconi - they were all EPP Leaders too, but you seem to have overlooked their contribution. The Union is not the project of one political party. It belongs to us all. We hope, Chancellor, that the Berlin Declaration will herald a new departure. We look to the intergovernmental conference you have secured to put in place the institutional building blocks of the Union's future. The new Europe, should be one where democracy has the upper hand. And our values have the final word."
Cristiana MUSCARDINI (UEN, IT) said that the Berlin Declaration was "a great emotional moment", recalling the historic events of 1989 and the subsequent fall of the Berlin Wall. Ms Muscardini stressed the importance of recognising differences saying "it is our strength". She stated that her group was disappointed that the Berlin Declaration "did not recognise fully Europe's roots". She said that Europe was now both multi-cultural and multi-ethnic but each community should be able to hold a fruitful dialogue. Ms Muscardini "warned against the dangers of theocracy but also excessive secularism". Europe, she said, must be more than a marketplace.
Monica FRASSONI (Greens/EFA) began by referring to the praise of female leadership in the previous speech by Graham Watson (ALDE, UK), suggesting that a system of co-presidencies would make it much easier to have more female leaders. The Berlin Declaration, she continued, contained nothing "world-shattering or original", but was instead "a fair description of our reality." What is needed now, she explained, is continuing in the "right direction", to deal with situations such as Darfur, which we cannot solve together as the European Union "because we stand divided".
Uniting the EU through a constitution, she said, was necessary, for the "method of the Berlin Declaration will not suffice." If the constitution is to succeed, we must be "brave enough to risk democracy, to open up the IGC [Inter-Governmental Conference]" and, above all, "bring in the public" on the debate.
The Berlin Declaration was "neither a dream nor a reflection of reality", said Gabriele ZIMMER (DE), speaking for the GUE/NGL group. It was instead, an "extension of reality", one that made no reference to the poverty and social exclusion that exists in the EU today, nor what Ms Zimmer referred to as the "disintegration and renationalisation" of Europe. The Berlin Declaration, she declared, was representative of "governments, not people". A future constitution, she warned, would be a "threat to civic society and its participation in Europe."
Jens-Peter BONDE (IND/DEM, DK) began with reference to the secrecy surrounding the Berlin Declaration, warning the Parliament not to "sign up to a text that its members don't have sight of." On the constitution, attempts to revive it will, he said, merely be "window-dressing." Instead, he insisted, "democratic forces must unite to demand a referendum on the future treaty, in every single country." We have to "give people more power, not take power away from the people", through a system that is "more Montesquieu, less Machiavelli."
Bruno GOLLNISCH (ITS), the French chairman of ITS, commenced by criticising that "community preference has taken a backseat" and that it had given way to products from outside the EU. In opening up its borders, the EU had imported poverty as well as given rise to "casual and precarious" employment. He then went on to say that there was "no mortal or spiritual" power left in the EU, which was why the festivities surrounding the signing of the Berlin Declaration were "an entirely cynical celebration". Mr Gollnisch also accused the German Presidency of still wanting to promote the Constitution by any means, although it had been kicked out the front door, "and you are trying to drag it in through the back door."
Jim ALLISTER (UK), representing NI group, lamented the fact that the Berlin Declaration "peddled much of the same old nonsense." It is "NATO not the EU", he said, which can "take most credit for the defence, return and promotion of freedom and democracy in Europe." He concluded by stating that, while Eurosceptics support mutual co-operation, they reject the "grasping, centralising EU" in its present form.
British speakers
Timothy KIRKHOPE (EPP-ED, UK) said "I shall begin by acknowledging the historical importance of the 50th anniversary of the signing of the Rome Treaty. Whatever our view of the kind of Europe we want to see, I think we must all welcome some important achievements of Europe in the past five decades. We have indeed contributed towards the development of friendly relations between those Member States who until recently in historical terms were enemies. It has provided a forum where democratically elected governments can take decisions based on dialogue. We have seen the development of a single market in Europe, which has offered new economic opportunities for our peoples, and the enlargement of 2004 healed remaining divisions. I believe that these and other achievements are something all of us can welcome.
However, it is the future we must now look to. The European Union today is viewed by many, not least in my own country, as a distant bureaucracy. They see us still as an over-regulated body that is encroaching on too many matters that should be the preserve still of nation states. People want to see cooperation in Europe, but they do not understand why politicians in this Parliament spend so much time on constitutional and institutional issues. People ask what we are going to do to combat global climate change, to fight the scourge of global poverty and to make our continent more competitive in the face of globalisation. They want us to deliver on the substance and not dwell too much on processes. There may well be a requirement for improving the institutional workings of the EU through treaty changes, but this does not necessarily mean a complex new Constitution.
In the 21st century we need more flexibility and more decentralisation to enable our economies to win in international markets. We do not need more regulation: we need less. We do not necessarily need more majority voting to fight climate change or global poverty; we need more effective intergovernmental cooperation. Constitutions and institutions do not themselves generate prosperity, they do not make our economies more competitive, they do not reduce CO2 emissions and they do not feed hungry people in the developing world. I urge all governments and the Presidency now to get on with the job. They have started well by delivering on policy substance."
Andrew DUFF (ALDE, UK) questioned "Would you please confirm that the presidency is now firmly in favour of improving rather than impoverishing the Constitutional Treaty to ensure its speedy ratification?
Will you firmly chose a 'constitution plus' rather than a mini, tiny or even a teeny treaty? Will you not tolerate an IGC that has the sole purpose of extricating Member States from pledges to promote referenda? Remember the unfulfilled challenges of Laaken. The IGC should not be allowed to pull apart the comprehensive package agreed between the institutions and the Member States. Its focus instead should be on reforming the common policies so that they become more response to contemporary concerns and future challenges.
And, to all those that are asking you to open up the first and second parts, please tell them to be patient. Let us first bring the treaty into force, to try things out in practice before returning to tampering afresh with the agreed balance of power. Sometime, the historic first amendment will surely come but it should not be attempted now."
Stephen HUGHES (PES, UK) said "In looking to the future development of Europe, the Berlin Declaration quite rightly underlines the importance of solidarity and social cohesion in a European model combining economic success and social responsibility. It reminded me of another declaration entitled Enhancing Social Europe adopted by nine EU governments shortly before the Spring Summit this year. That declaration is aimed at rebalancing the policy mix in favour of action in the employment and social fields. In response, the Spring Summit conclusions included a clear reference to decent work, workers’ rights and participation, equal opportunities, safety and health protection at work and the need for a family-friendly organisation of work and the importance of social cohesion was underlined and the need to fight poverty, particularly child poverty. The importance of the social dimension was, therefore, highlighted in the clearest terms. The conclusions also recalled the social provisions of the Treaty and, in particular, its attachment to the improvement of employment and improved living and working conditions. That is part of Article 136 of the Treaty which was celebrated on Sunday and it serves as a preamble to the very clear legal bases available to the Commission to make proposals to improve employment and living and working conditions.
I think that is a timely reminder from Berlin and from the Spring Summit that the Commission needs to relaunch a social agenda with content because. looking at the Commission's work programme at the moment. it seems to have forgotten that it has any legal bases to allow it to act at all. Let us have fresh legislative proposals to tackle exploitive forms of atypical work. Let us see flexo-security be given positive meaning for the millions of workers who currently see it as a cloak for exploitation. Finally, I hope the German presidency will keep social Europe centre stage in the approach to and beyond the June Summit and in that way the Berlin Declaration will retain credibility."
Response to the debate
Responding to the debate, Chancellor MERKEL thanked Parliament for its contribution. She said that Europe was moving forward based on a Europe of projects with practical consequences. Europe is more than decision-making processes. Europe was taking decisions that affected people's lives. Referring to how the Declaration was drawn up, Chancellor Merkel said: "The Berlin Declaration involved the 27 Member States and the European Commission. You could not always guarantee success on the open market." The public must be key stakeholders in the EU. Chancellor Merkel suggested the European Parliament could hold an event involving civil society in May which would feed into the June European Council.
20070326IPR04616 Germany 2007 - Presidency of the EU (you can download the text of the Berlin Declaration) Address by the President of the European Parliament on the 50th anniversary of the signature of the Treaties of Rome
EN
1
LINK
http://www.eu2007.de/en/About_the_EU/Constitutional_Treaty/BerlinerErklaerung.html
EN
2
LINK
/president/speeches/en/files/sp0017.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
