Irish MEP presents EP's Annual Human Rights Report
Human rights
Ireland
2007-04-26 - 13:10
Irish MEP presents European Parliament human rights report
As the EPP-ED's Coordinator on Human Rights and a member of the European Parliament's Subcommittee on Human Rights, Irish MEP Simon Coveney was chosen for the second time to write the European Parliament's Annual Report on Human Rights. Mr Coveney commented that this Report offered 'constructive criticism' relating to the EU's performance in the area of human rights and "measured that performance against criteria that the EU has set for itself."
Responding to the fact that the pursuit of human rights is an issue close to the hearts of Irish people, Simon Coveney MEP has worked on a number of reports in this area and participated in many delegations to assess the level of human rights in countries throughout the world. He commented immediately after presenting the Annual Report to his colleagues in the European Parliament that this Report is "very important for me." During the debate, Mr Coveney said: "One of the focal points of the report concerns the EU’s role in the new UN Human Rights Council. The assertions made are based on the Parliament’s attendance at a number of those Council meetings in Geneva. The Council and Commission’s recent annual report could not refer to the UN HRC so I felt that it was appropriate that we should focus on it in the report and in the debate today. Our report recognises that while it has the potential to develop into a valuable framework for the EU multilateral human rights effort, for the first 12 months the UN Human Rights Council has not been a good news story. The UN Human Rights Council has failed to reach consensus and an acceptable compromise on key issues such as the Middle East, Darfur, Burma and many others. Instead, it has been used at times as a political point-scoring chamber and we must find ways of preventing it being used as a political forum for conflict between geographical or ideological blocks of countries."
The Report assesses the performance and policies of the European Commission, the Council of the European Union and the European Parliament in the area of human rights according to five guidelines:
1) the death penalty
2) torture
3) women and children in conflict situations
4) protection of human rights defenders throughout the world
5) structures and approach towards human rights dialogues with third countries
The EU institutions are criticised in the Report for their response to breaches of human rights throughout the world during 2006 and a number of recommendations are made in this regard. Particular reference is made to the situations in China, Iran, Russia, Uzsbekistan, Turkey, Belarus, Iraq, Libya, Sudan and the Palestinian territories.
During the debate, Liam Aylward (UEN, IE) highlighted the importance for the EU of playing a leadership role in promoting human rights in the Middle East. He stated that "Israel should immediately release all detained Palestinian legislators, equally, the Israeli soldier Corporal Shalit, who is being held in Palestine, must be immediately released."
Simon Coveney received the overwhelming support of his colleagues for this Report and many of them commended him for the work he had put into it.
20070419IPR05474 Annual Report on Human Rights in the World 2006 and the EU's policy on this matter Debate 25 April Strasbourg - Human rights in the world – Moratorium on the death penalty (debate) Text adopted 26 April - Human rights in the world 2006 and the EU's policy on the matter
EN
1
PHOTO
20070426PHT05894.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5439442
-//EP//TEXT CRE 20070425 ITEM-015 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0165 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
