Opening of the session - Pöttering condemns murders in Turkey / Tribute to Yeltsin
Institutions
2007-04-23 - 17:50
Hans-Gert PÖTTERING, President of the European Parliament opened the session by making reference to the murder of three workers in the Turkish town of Malatya. The President condemned the murders in the sharpest terms. He called on the Turkish authorities to bring the perpetrators of the crime to justice. "It is the responsibility of all states to protect religious minorities", he said.
The President of the European Parliament also paid tribute to the former President Boris YELTSIN who, he informed the House, had just passed away.
Changes to the agenda
MEPs agreed to postpone the vote on the report on: damages actions for breach of competition rules until Wednesday.
The House also agreed to postpone the vote on the report on: Basic information on purchasing power parities until Thursday.
Finally, Parliament voted in favour of adding a vote on motions of resolutions to the May Brussels plenary (9 and 10 May) on the strengthening of European legislation in the field of information and consultation of workers. A Commission statement on this topic will take place on Wednesday evening in Strasbourg.
Highlights of the Week
Monday 23 April The session starts with a debate on payment services in the internal market . MEPs are to debate and vote on the legal framework designed to make cashless payments – such as card transactions, bank transfers and direct debits – simpler and cheaper with the creation of a single European payments area. An informal deal with the Council means the measure should be adopted at this first reading stage, giving the banking industry the time it needs to meet its 2010 target. Following this, MEPs will debate and vote on a draft regulation on advanced therapy and medicinal products designed to foster gene therapy , somatic cell therapy and tissue engineering. MEPs in the Environment and Health Committee support the draft text but are calling for guarantees regarding the products and techniques used, plus extra support for smaller companies working in this field. The vote takes place on Wednesday. The House will turn its attention to the enforcement of intellectual property rights . Parliament will be asked to approve the first EU directive aiming at harmonising national criminal law when a first-reading report on legislation imposing criminal sanctions for the infringement of intellectual property rights comes up for a plenary vote. The vote takes place on Wednesday. Tuesday 24 April Tuesday starts with a debate on the EU budget discharge for 2005 . MEPs on the Budgetary Control committee have relaunched the idea of "national declarations." They are demanding that EU Member States take responsibility for co-managing Community funds, alongside the European Commission. Another idea from the 2005 discharge exercise is to look at the cost/benefit ratio of Community spending audits, which MEPs would like to see rationalised. Tuesday also sees MEPs debating that progress that Croatia has made towards accession to the EU . Croatia, a candidate country for accession to the EU since October 2005, has made major progress in its preparations, according to MEPs. However, the EP Foreign Affairs Committee believes it must make further efforts in areas such as cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), reform of the judiciary and the transition to a market economy. MEPs then turn their attention to combating HIV/AIDS within the EU and in the neighbouring countries . In an own-initiative report for the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety Committee, MEPs stress the need to renew efforts to combat AIDS, not only within the EU but in neighbouring countries, too. Tuesday evening is dedicated to the third maritime safety package . The Transport Committee is backing measures put forward by the European Commission to protect Europe against maritime accidents and pollution. This "third maritime safety package" seeks to promote healthy competition between shipping operators who comply with international rules on safety and compensation. The Commission will make a statement on Galileo - the European Satellite Navigation System on Tuesday evening. MEPs will vote on a resolution on Wednesday. Wednesday 25 April The key debate of the Strasbourg week is on transatlantic relations. MEPs will debate the topic after hearing statements from both Council and Commission. The next EU-US Summit will take place on 30 April in Washington DC where the key topics for debate will include energy and climate change. MEPs will also vote on a resolution. German Minister of State for Europe, Günter GLOSER, will represent the Council in the debate. At midday on Wednesday, the President of India, Dr A.P.J. Abdul Kalam will address MEPs in a formal sitting. On Wednesday, the House will vote on a proposal from the Conference of Presidents to set up a new Temporary Committee on Climate Change. Simon Coveney (EPP-ED, IE) will lead the a debate on human rights ion the world and the EU's policy on the matter . Focusing on the situation in 2006, the report looks at EU policies on breaches of human rights, criticises EU action in this area and makes a number of recommendations. China, Iran, Russia and Sudan are among countries singled out for criticism. Wednesday also sees statements from the Commission and Council on the situation in Ukraine . MEPs will also debate the issue of homophobia in Europe . The House will vote on a resolution on Thursday. Parliament will also turn its attention to a moratorium on the death penalty with a vote on resolutions on Thursday. Thursday 26 April MEPs will debate EU relations with Switzerland. The House also turns its attention to the situation of disabled women in the EU. At 3pm on Thursday, MEPs will debate the deteriorating situation in Zimbabwe. The House will also vote on a resolution. The session ends as usual with three debates and votes on human rights around the world. On this occasion, the topics are: the recent suppression of demonstrations in Russia, the kidnapping of BBC journalist Alan Johnston in Gaza and the human rights situation in the Philippines.
20070420IPR05536 Briefing - 23-26 April 2007 Final Draft Agenda
EN
2
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?language=EN&reference=2007-04
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070413BRI05265 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
