Plenary session: 28-29 March: Berlin Declaration and EU foreign policy dominate
Institutions
2007-03-30 - 11:06
Angela Merkel and Javier Solana were in Plenary
When MEPs met for a 2 day Plenary session the main focus of debate was the recent Berlin Declaration to mark 50 years since the Rome Treaty. German Chancellor Angela Merkel was in the hemicycle for a debate on the implications of the Declaration. The reaction of MEPs was generally positive although some would have preferred a more open drafting process.
The 2 day session also saw a debate on the future status of Kosovo with MEPs adopting a report on the subject. This came just one day before the EU's High Representative came before Parliament to explain the international challenges ahead in 2007. Among others he identified the Middle East and Kosovo as two areas where the EU must play an increasingly assertive role. For a full round up of the 2 day session please click below.
20070323FCS04521
Wednesday in Plenary: Zimbabwe, Berlin Declaration, Kosovo
Chancellor Angela Merkel lays out her plans to MEPs President Pöttering warmly welcomed the two other signatories of the Berlin Declaration, Council president Angela Merkel and Commission president José Manuel Barroso at the beginning of the plenary session. The declaration was widely welcomed by the major groups, although some MEPs criticised the way it was negotiated. Later on, Commissioner Olli Rehn joined a lively debate about the status of the Kosovo province. MEPs unanimously condemned the increasing violence of Zimbabwe's government.
Opening the sitting Mr Pöttering read a statement on behalf of all the political groups on the situation in Zimbabwe where the government is mounting violent attacks on the democratic opposition. He said: "we condemn all forms of violence and repression by the government of President Mugabe. The Council and the Commission should co-operate with all international, regional and national forces in order to find a transitional solution to turn it from the current regime to a real democracy". The Berlin Declaration German Chancellor Angela Merkel was warmly welcomed by MEPs following the Summit and Declaration at the weekend under her Presidency of the Union. She told MEPs that "we have to do our outmost to work together to achieve the objectives. We need the Parliament to help". She mentioned EU-Russia and EU-USA summits as important events to come. Energy and climate change were also key areas according to Mrs Merkel - "it is important to strengthen the role of EU in this area" she told MEPs. The President if the European Commission José Manuel Barroso stressed the "rapid and ambitions need for institutional settlement" regarding the Constitution. "Failure to agree on institutional settlement will cause divisions which could threaten our common values" he said. "It is obvious that even the biggest Member States cannot tackle climate change, energy security or mass migration alone." Political Group reaction For the European People's Party Joseph Daul praised Chancellor Merkel's stewardship of the Summit: "you have proven that Europe is not only about speeches and laws, it is also about emotions, joy and conviviality". He went on to say that "the Berlin declaration is a strong and readable text which puts Europe back on track and which gives new perspective with the proposal to find solution to the institutional questions before the European elections in 2009". The leader of the Socialist PES group Martin Schultz noted that "we have to deal with the question where we take this continent. European integration is not finished, it needs to continue. Without reformed union, there won't be any enlargement." The House as a whole warmly welcomed and endorsed the content of the Declaration as a statement of the basic principles of the Union. Some group leaders – Graham Watson for the Liberal ALDE Group and Monica Frassoni for the Greens – expressed reservations as to the process by which the Declaration had been formulated, stating the view that more open public and parliamentary debate should have occurred. Other Groups, notably the Europe United Left (GUE), felt the Declaration could have said more about the problems Europe faces. Debate about the Future of Kosovo The future of Kosovo has been high on the Parliament agenda on Wednesday. This week has seen intensive diplomatic activity after UN special envoy to Kosovo, former Finnish president (1994-2000) Martti Ahtisaari, handed over his recommendations on the final status of the Kosovo to the secretary general of the UN. The UN Security council is expected to vote on the issue before the end of May, thus ending a long transitional period after the international military intervention of 1999. In reaction to this, Dutch green MEP Joost Lagendijk presented a Parliament report backing the Ahtisaari recommendations to give Kosovo "supervised independence". Europe's Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn was present during the debate, in which most MEPs agreed that the current status quo in Kosovo is not an option and spoke out in favour of opening the way for a peaceful and prosperous development of the region. German conservative MEP Doris Pack said very clearly, that "the Ahtisaari plan is the only available basis for a peaceful co-existence of ethnic Serbs and Albanians". In order to create a functioning multi-ethnic society, Europe will have to take upon itself a leading role in Kosovo´s future. This will include an extensive military and civilian presence of the EU, estimated at 1500-2000 international staff. Parliament will vote on the report on Thursday. Commissioner Rehn has expressed his conviction, that an adoption of the report will further reinforce European unity. Organic products MEPs discussed a report by Marie-Hélène Aubert on the proposal for a Council regulation on organic production of agricultural products and respective labelling. Parliament is only being consulted on this issue. Other reports discussed in the plenary:
The future of the European Union's own resources
2008 budget guidelines,
Joint debate on two reports on football,
Maritime transport
Integration of new Member States in the CAP President Pöttering condemns situation in Zimbabwe Berlin Declaration Report on Kosovo
Thursday in Plenary: EU foreign policy, own resources
Javier Solana, EU foreign policy chief Day 2 of Plenary opened with an overview of the Union's foreign policy in 2007 by Javier Solana - the EU's High Representative for foreign policy. He identified the Arab-Israeli dispute, the nuclear stand off with Iran, the status of Kosovo and Darfur as major issues. Mr Solana also condemned the seizure of 15 UK personnel by Iran and called for a debate on missile defence in Europe. In a later vote on Thursday MEPs adopted reports on the EU's "own-resources".
Solana before MEPs to report on EU foreign policy Mr Solana told MEPs that there was "major desire" around the world for a strong EU foreign policy and reminded them that the EU has 10 international military missions and plans more in Afghanistan and Kosovo. Later in the debate Joseph Daul of the European People's Party took up this theme when he said that EU foreign policy should encourage freedom around the world. Middle East: On the Middle East Mr Solana welcomed and supported the recent Arab League initiative to revive a 2002 plan which would give Israel peace treaties and recognition from Arab states if it withdrew to its 1967 borders, - and pledged support for the new Palestinian national reconciliation government. Socialist leader Martin Schulz noted that the EU is built on dialogue and it was important to talk to the new Palestinian government. Iran: On the nuclear stand-off with Iran, Mr Solana said "Iran must comply with its (UN) obligations". He also said that Europe must support non-proliferation of nuclear material and disarmament. The heads of all the political groups supported a political solution to the crisis although some, notably Graham Watson for the Liberal ALDE Group and Daniel Cohn-Bendit for the Greens/EFA, strongly advocated moves towards general nuclear disarmament. Mr Solana said that he had raised the issue of the captured British sailors when he met the Iranian Foreign Minister at the weekend. The political groups condemned the detention and called on Tehran to release them - while Mr Watson noted that "most of them are my constituents". Kosovo: On the disputed province Mr Solana repeated the conclusions of UN envoy Martti Ahtisaari that it would be "extremely difficult to find a negotiated solution favourable to Kosovo and Serbia". He said Darfur must remain the EU's "number one concern" in Africa. For the European people's party Joseph Daul called the situation in Darfur "genocide" and developments in Zimbabwe "an affront". Missile defence: (the Czech Republic and Poland have agreed to let the US station missile systems on their territory). Mr Solana said that the EU was not a "defensive alliance" and the Treaties give sovereignty to its members in this area. However countries are obliged to support the general aims of the Union and "it would be a mistake not to talk about this issue". Martin Schulz for the Socialist PES Group warned of a "new arms race" of missile defence systems are developed in Europe. He said it would solve none of the existing problems like poverty and disease but "only create new ones". Konrad Szymanski for the Europe of the Nations Group warned against taking the "Russian view" - one that "could divide the EU". Own resources: a fairer distribution of EU money? MEPs adopted a report proposing a reform of the "own-resources" system which would above all emphasise "equality between EU states". Own resources were created in 1970 and consist of agricultural duties and sugar production levies (approximately 1.5% of the EU budget) and customs duties collected at the EU's external borders (roughly 11% of the Union's budget). The opinion of MEPs is that they believe the current system is complex, incomprehensible to the public and not transparent - hence the need for reform. The own-initiative report by European People's Party MEP by Alain Lamassoure advocates two stages of reform: In the first stage the system would be based on the "Gross National Income resource". This resource is less visible to the general public but is more equitable in relating contributions to the general level of prosperity. Under this scheme the British rebate would be abolished by 2013. In the second stage, the EU would benefit directly from a certain share of an existing tax, as happens with regional or local authorities in most countries. The new system will, under no circumstances, grant the European Union the right to levy taxes. Fiscal sovereignty will remain with the Member States. MEPs want the new system to be introduced from 2014, with a "transition period" to guarantee a smooth phasing-out of the old financing system. The next Plenary session opens on 23 April in Strasbourg. Solana debate in full Own resources - more
EN
1
PHOTO
20070329PHT04942.jpg
EN
2
PHOTO
20070329PHT04841.jpg
EN
4
LINK
http://www.eu2007.de/en/About_the_EU/Constitutional_Treaty/BerlinerErklaerung.html
EN
6
PHOTO
20070329PHT04917.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070328IPR04763 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A6-2007-0067 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326IPR04625 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070329IPR04856 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
