The Week Ahead 7 - 13 May 2007
Institutions
2007-05-04 - 11:39
Plenary session and committee meetings - Brussels
Plenary Session
Nobel prize winners at the EP. Just before the formal opening of the session, Parliament will mark Europe Day, 9 May, with President Hans-Gert Pöttering welcoming a number of European winners of the Nobel Prize to a discussion in the plenary chamber. (Wednesday, 3pm)
Foreign affairs. MEPs will discuss EU-Russia relations with the Council and Commission. The annual report on the common foreign and security policy and an own-initiative report on reforms in the Arab world are also on the plenary agenda.
Transport. The EP will deal with several pieces of transport legislation, including a first reading for requirements for lorries to be equipped with rear-view mirrors designed to cut out blind spots, and a second reading for rules on public service obligations for rail and road transport provision. (debate Wednesday, vote Thursday) .
Duty on alcohol. A report calling for the scrapping of EU-wide minimum levels of excise duty on alcoholic drinks will be put to the vote. (debate Wednesday, vote Thursday)
In committee
Equitable Life. The committee of inquiry into the crisis at the Equitable Life Assurance Society adopts its final report (Tuesday) .
Fruit and vegetables. The Agriculture Committee will vote on report on the reform proposals for the fruit and vegetable sector put forward by the Commission (Tuesday) .
EU external policy. Javier Solana, High Representative for the CFSP, and Olli Rehn, Commissioner for Enlargement, will appear at the Foreign Affairs Committee to discuss with MEPs and national MPs the EU's common foreign and security policy, its enlargement strategy and relations with the western Balkans (Monday) .
Massoud Barzani. The President of the autonomous Kurdish government in Iraq will also appear before the Foreign Affairs Committee. (Tuesday)
20070504IPR06279 The Agenda
EN
1
LINK
/news/expert/event_top_page/default/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
