Post-Briefing - 23-26 April 2007 - Strasbourg
2007-04-30 - 10:58
Selected highlights of the Strasbourg plenary 23-26 April 2007:
Indian President speaks of three "Indo-European missions" to promote global peace and prosperity
The President of the European Parliament, Hans-Gert Pöttering, welcomed "with great pleasure" the President of India, Dr. APJ Abdul Kalam, to address the house at the Plenary Session on Wednesday, 25 April. With reference to Dr Kalam's role as "an architect of the Indian Space and Nuclear program", President Pöttering said "We are very pleased that India is benefiting in research programmes funded by the EU and is working together with the EU on Galileo."
Zimbabwe: MEPs condemn Mugabe dictatorship
In a resolution adopted on Thursday by 68 votes to 1 with 0 abstention, Parliament issues a hard-hitting condemnation of the Mugabe regime. MEPs call on Member States to apply the EU's existing restrictions on Zimbabwe strictly, including the arms embargo and the travel ban. They also urge that all aid to Zimbabwe be delivered exclusively through NGOs, the EU being the most important donor to the country.
Economic ties, missile defence and visas highlighted in debate on EU-US relations
Ahead of the EU-US summit in Washington DC taking place on Monday 30 April, Parliament adopted a resolution on Wednesday, 25 April on transatlantic relations - a priority of the German EU Presidency. Among topics covered in the resolution and in the debate with Council and Commission which preceded the vote: closer economic ties, the planned anti-ballistic missile system in Poland and the Czech Republic, visas for EU citizens visiting the USA and various foreign policy issues.
Human rights: Russia, BBC journalist in Gaza, Philippines
In three human rights resolutions adopted at the end of the Strasbourg plenary session, Parliament condemns the use of force against demonstrators by the Russian police and the lack of free speech in the country; it issues a heartfelt appeal for the release of BBC journalist Alan Johnston, who has been kidnapped in Gaza; and it calls for an end to the politically motivated killings in the Philippines.
MEPs set out safer rules for innovative therapies
An EU regulation on revolutionary medical techniques such as gene therapy, cell therapy and tissue engineering, adopted on 25 April by the European Parliament after a tough battle on ethical issues, offers new hope to thousands of patients and researchers. These "innovative therapies", which have a huge potential for curing diseases such as Parkinson's, Alzheimer's and other degenerative conditions including cancer and heart disease, also have great potential for the European economy.
Simpler, cheaper cross-border payments on the way
MEPs adopted a legal framework designed to make cashless payments – such as card transactions, bank transfers and direct debits – simpler and cheaper, paving the way for the creation a single Euro payments area. A deal with the Council means the legislation will enter into force at this first reading stage, giving the banking industry the time it needs to meet its 2010 target.
MEPs vote to set up a new temporary committee on climate change
MEPs voted in favour of setting up a new temporary committee on climate change on a proposal from the Conference of Presidents. The committee will have 60 members and its mandate will be one year.
Security measures in civil aviation: who should pay?
Parliament adopted a second-reading report heavily amending the Council's common position on a new regulation laying down common rules on checks, searches, surveillance, prohibited items, security patrols and other aspects of airport and aircraft security. A key difference with the Council is who should pay for any extra security measures not required by the regulation.
Safety at sea: Parliament votes on latest maritime legislation
Parliament backed measures put forward by the European Commission to protect Europe against maritime accidents and pollution. This "third maritime safety package" seeks to promote healthy competition between shipping operators who comply with international rules on safety and compensation.
Croatia: good progress towards accession and some issues remain
Croatia, a candidate country for accession to the EU since October 2005, has made major progress in its preparations, according to the EP. However, the House believes it must make further efforts in areas such as cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), reform of the judiciary and the transition to a market economy. A revised institutional framework should enter into force by the end of 2008 in order to accommodate Croatia in the EU, say MEPs.
Intellectual property: pirates and counterfeiters to feel the full weight of criminal law
The first EU directive aiming at harmonising national criminal law was backed by the European Parliament when it adopted on 25 April a first-reading report on legislation imposing criminal sanctions for the infringement of intellectual property rights. If ultimately adopted, the directive will oblige all Member States to regard any intentional infringement of an intellectual property right carried out on a commercial scale as a criminal offence.
Statement by President Pöttering on the situation of Bronislaw Geremek
On Thursday, 26 April, prior to the voting session, Parliament's President Hans-Gert Pöttering made an announcement on the situation of Polish MEP Bronislaw Geremek (ALDE). Mr Pöttering told the House that the EP's Conference of Presidents had approved, by a large majority although not unanimously, the press release issued by himself on this subject (see below). The Conference of Presidents had also "stated its sympathy and solidarity with our colleague Bronislaw Geremek".
Poland urged to drop new law banning 'homosexual propaganda' in schools
Following a debate on homophobia in Europe, Parliament adopted a resolution on Thursday voicing concern at the recent announcement by the Polish Education Minister of a new draft law to outlaw 'homosexual propaganda' in schools. The resolution - adopted by 325 votes to 124, with 150 abstentions - calls for a fact-finding mission to be sent to Poland, for "worldwide de-criminalisation of homosexuality" and for the Commission to take Member States to court if they breach their EU obligations.
No more delays to GALILEO, say MEPs
In a resolution on the global satellite navigation system GALILEO, Parliament expresses deep concern about the slowing down of negotiations for the franchise contract and voices fears about the increasing overall costs of this EU programme. Any further delays to the project should be kept to a minimum, say MEPs, and GALILEO should be fully operational by 2011.
Adopted texts can be found here :
Agenda for the Brussels plenary session 9-10 May 2007 can be found here : 20070420BRI05535
EN
1
A
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
2
A
/sides/indexPartSession.do?reference=2007-04&language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External relations
Indian President speaks of three "Indo-European missions" to promote global peace and prosperity
2007-04-30 - 10:58
The President of the European Parliament, Hans-Gert Pöttering, welcomed "with great pleasure" the President of India, Dr. APJ Abdul Kalam, to address the house at the Plenary Session on Wednesday, 25 April. With reference to Dr Kalam's role as "an architect of the Indian Space and Nuclear program", President Pöttering said "We are very pleased that India is benefiting in research programmes funded by the EU and is working together with the EU on Galileo." President Pöttering also noted that Dr Kalam's election as President of the Republic of India was impressive, for "as a Tamil and a Muslim in a country where the Hindus have a majority, this was not a trivial success." It was testament, President Pöttering added, to Dr Kalam's ability to "appeal to people of many different cultures and religions."
Mr Pottering went on to say that it was a "great pleasure to be able announce today that the EP last month set up a special European Parliament delegation for relations with India." Such a delegation "shows the great significance which India has for the EU."
President Kalam praises the EU
Beginning with a reference to "the unique place in human history" of European civilisation, President Kalam expressed his admiration for the European Union as "an example for connectivity among nations, probably with no possibility of war, leading to lasting regional peace." The EU is strongly connected to India "by language, by culture, by ancient beliefs [and] ideologies", which has helped foster "a sustained trade and intellectually satisfying collaboration in many areas."
Co-operation for the future
President Kalam stressed that both India and the European Union are "conscious of the need for growth to respect the environment and make it sustainable for future generations." This objective, he said, requires a level of co-operation that will produce "a win-win situation for all, so that we can have a politically and socio-economically emergent civilization."
Indo-European Missions
With these aims in mind, President Kalam said that he hopes to begin "three important Indo-European missions which can contribute to global peace and prosperity." These missions are in response to a specific challenge, namely: "How do we evolve righteousness, in the hearts of every citizen of the world?"
The "evolution of enlightened society"
The first of these missions, the "evolution of enlightened society", would constitute a "methodology for evolving a happy, prosperous and peaceful society in our planet". This would be achieved through educating today's children about the common moral values we share, so that "righteousness in the heart is developed in young minds."
President Kalam explained that this involved the need to develop spirituality on a global scale, so as enable universal understanding of the importance of "a good human life and welfare of the society, while pursuing the material life." The challenge, President Kalam added, was this: "Can we bridge the spiritual component of the religions to bring peace to nations and to the world?"
Economic development is equally important in the evolution of enlightened society, President Kalam continued. It is essential to "ensure that the citizens are empowered with good quality of life encompassing nutritious food, good habitat, clean environment, affordable healthcare, quality education and productive employment." On this basis, President Kalam proposed to "realize the vision of transforming India into a developed nation before 2020."
Energy independence
Seventeen percent of the world's population lives in India. However, less than one percent of the world's known oil and natural gas resources can be found there. Still, India will have to considerably step up its power generating capacity from the current 130,000 MW to 400,000 MW by the year 2030.
Energy independence is thus the second of the three Indo-European missions. "Energy independence has got to be achieved through three different sources namely renewable energy, electrical power from nuclear energy and bio-fuel for the transport sector", President Kalam stated. He suggested setting up an “Indo-EU Renewable Energy Development programme”. This programme should lead "to an availability of commercial class, large-scale power plants within the next decade".
Establishing a World Knowledge Platform
The third mission is what President Kalam called a "World Knowledge Platform" to combine the skills of the EU and India in science and technology and produce global applications in areas such as agriculture and food processing, knowledge products, human resources, disaster prediction and management. The "combined strengths of the nations can be utilised to the mutual advantage of both India and the EU", the President pointed out.
Reinforcing the "strategic partnership"
In conclusion, President Kalam expressed confidence that the three Indo-European missions "will definitely reinforce further our strategic partnership", leading to a change in the lives of many people. Together, the EU and India can achieve much through the co-operation which arises from the "visible common thread of our dreams and problems."
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External relations
Zimbabwe: MEPs condemn Mugabe dictatorship
2007-04-30 - 10:58
In a resolution adopted on Thursday by 68 votes to 1 with 0 abstention, Parliament issues a hard-hitting condemnation of the Mugabe regime. MEPs call on Member States to apply the EU's existing restrictions on Zimbabwe strictly, including the arms embargo and the travel ban. They also urge that all aid to Zimbabwe be delivered exclusively through NGOs, the EU being the most important donor to the country. In a resolution adopted on Thursday by 68 votes to 1 with 0 abstention, Parliament issues a hard-hitting condemnation of the Mugabe regime. MEPs call on Member States to apply the EU's existing restrictions on Zimbabwe strictly, including the arms embargo and the travel ban. They also urge that all aid to Zimbabwe be delivered exclusively through NGOs, the EU being the most important donor to the country.
In the wake of the violent break-up of the Save Zimbabwe Campaign prayer rally organised on 11 March this year by opponents of the regime - two people were killed and more than 300 were arrested - MEPs strongly condemn the Mugabe dictatorship for "its relentless oppression of the Zimbabwean people, opposition parties and civil society groups and its destruction of the Zimbabwean economy". The House condemns the murder of opposition activist Gift Tandare and the arrest of Morgan Tsvangirai, chairman of the Movement for Democratic Change, Nelson Chamisa, Grace Kwinjeh, Lovemore Madhuku, William Bango, Sekai Holland, Tendai Biti, Arthur Mutambara and many others treated brutally by the police forces. Acknowledgment of crisis by neighbouring countries Parliament takes heart from one new development : "the recognition by SADC that a crisis exists in Zimbabwe and the appointment of President Thabo Mbeki of South Africa to facilitate dialogue between Zanu-PF and the opposition MDC". EU must apply its own measures in full However, the EU must play its part too, and Parliament calls on the Council "to ensure that all Member States rigorously apply existing restrictive measures, including the arms embargo and the travel ban". MEPs are also in favour of enlarging the list of banned individuals so that it encompasses even more of Mugabe's power structure, including government ministers, deputies and governors, military, the CIO and police personnel, and the Governor of the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe. In addition, Parliament calls on the Council to ensure that no banned persons are invited to, or attend, the planned EU-Africa Summit in Lisbon in December this year. Aid, say MEPs, must be delivered through genuine non-governmental organisations and must reach the people for whom it is intended without being intercepted in any way by agents of the Mugabe regime. In 2006, the EU donated €193 million in total. The House backs the initiative of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly to send a delegation to Zimbabwe to "ascertain the situation on the ground". This investigation should be carried out as soon as possible. MEPs insist that the government of Zimbabwe grant access to the country to all members of any such delegation. Britain and South Africa urged to use their positions on the UN Security Council Lastly, the resolution calls on the United Kingdom, which assumed the Presidency of the United Nations Security Council this month, "to put Zimbabwe on the agenda of the Security Council", and "anticipates that South Africa will play a constructive role as a non-permanent member of the Security Council". Full text of resolution will appear here (under 26 April)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External relations
Economic ties, missile defence and visas highlighted in debate on EU-US relations
2007-04-30 - 10:58
Ahead of the EU-US summit in Washington DC taking place on Monday 30 April, Parliament adopted a resolution on Wednesday, 25 April on transatlantic relations - a priority of the German EU Presidency. Among topics covered in the resolution and in the debate with Council and Commission which preceded the vote: closer economic ties, the planned anti-ballistic missile system in Poland and the Czech Republic, visas for EU citizens visiting the USA and various foreign policy issues. RESOLUTION ADOPTED BY PARLIAMENT
On the economic front, the EP supports the initiative by the German Presidency to launch a New Transatlantic Economic Partnership, with a road map for achieving a barrier-free transatlantic market, covering investment, intellectual property, innovation, public procurement and the relation between trade and security.
Parliament stresses that bringing the WTO Doha Development Agenda to a successful conclusion with full respect for the development dimension and make progress in the matter of developing countries' access to medicines is a priority for both parties.
Missile defence system, visas
MEPs call on the US to redouble its efforts to consult and explain its planned missile defence system within NATO in order to allow the Alliance and Europe to remain united, and they stress the importance of "pursuing consultations on the system within the NATO-Russia Council". The EP urges the US and all other countries which apply entry visas to selected EU Member States to immediately lift the visa regime and treat all citizens of EU Member States equally.
Energy and environment
On environmental and energy questions, the US is pressed to reconsider its position regarding ratification of the Kyoto Protocol and both parties are urged to develop alternative energy production methods and pursue greater energy efficiency.
Israel-Palestine, Iran
Among a wide range of international issues, Parliament calls on the Council and the USA to intensify efforts, through the Middle East Quartet, to foster negotiations between Israelis and Palestinians for a peace solution on the basis of two secure and viable states. It welcomes the formation of the Palestinian national unity government and urges both transatlantic partners to engage in a constructive dialogue with it. On Iran, Parliament welcomes the close cooperation between the EU and the US on the Iranian nuclear issue, encourages both partners to continue cooperation in strengthening the IAEA and underlines the value of the nuclear non-proliferation treaty.
Call for Wolfowitz to resign from World Bank
Among other issues, Parliament also calls on the EU Presidency and US Government to signal to the President of the World Bank, Paul Wolfowitz, that his withdrawal from the post would be a welcome step towards preventing the World Bank's anti-corruption policy from being undermined.
Institutional framework and role of Parliament
Lastly, the EP insists on the wider involvement at all levels of the Congress and the European Parliament and wants the existing interparliamentary exchange to be transformed into a de facto 'Transatlantic Assembly'. The EP asks the Commission to discuss with the relevant EP committees its negotiating strategy before engaging in negotiations, when legislative issues are involved.
DEBATE PRECEDING THE VOTE
Council Presidency - Günter Gloser
For the Council Presidency, Günter GLOSER, German Minister of State for Europe, began by stating that the message that the European Union and the United States of America can be "a vital force for good" in the world would be brought to the forthcoming EU-US summit in Washington. He made particular reference to the issues of energy security and climate change.
Mr Gloser thanked the European Parliament for its role in the transatlantic relationship and for its commitment. He went on to say that the transatlantic relationship is built on a solid basis, including the "common values of freedom, democracy, the state of law and tolerance" and that experience shows that this basis, which has sometimes been put to the test, "has withstood the test of time". Mr Gloser pointed out that the transatlantic relationship is not just about bilateral issues but also about global issues. He said that "it would be unrealistic to expect that we would always see eye to eye" but that the important thing is, that "in dealing with these questions, we do not allow ourselves to become divided."
Mr Gloser referred to the questions of combating terrorism, strengthening the transatlantic economy, the mobility of citizens between the EU and the US and the forthcoming EU-US aviation agreement. He also spoke of initiatives that could be taken in the future to strengthen the relationship - in such areas as investment conditions, financial market rules, intellectual property. He paid particular attention to future cooperation in the area of research and development and to the question of energy security which he said "is going to be the issue for the 21st century."
Mr Gloser concluded by saying that "no country is in a situation to solve the conflict problems of the modern world by going it alone ..[..].. we must succeed in bringing together the experience of the EU and the US."
European Commission - Vladimir Spidla
Commissioner Vladimir ŠPIDLA saw the EU-US summit as a new chance to enhance cooperation between the two sides. The first goal of the summit, he said, was to promote economic convergence across the Atlantic by removing barriers to trade. He welcomed Angela Merkel's proposals for a "new ambitious economic partnership".
The EU and the US have much in common on foreign policy, stressed the Commissioner, and planned to "tackle a number of key areas" for example "in Kosovo and Afghanistan we will make every effort to bring about stability, prosperity and the rule of law." Nato members were trying to work "to revive the political process with Israeli and Palestinian government leaders" to develop international aid mechanisms.
The "historic open skies agreement" was another key area. This was set "to bring huge economic benefits", estimated at about €12 billion and 80,000 new jobs. But the EU would also be working on a comprehensive agreement on airline services.
Tackling climate change and energy would also require cooperation between the two sides, and the EU would be pushing the US to accept a policy based on clean technology, market mechanisms but above all a "global approach". Mr Spidla hoped for "a clear statement to emerge from the summit for the Climate Change Conference to be held in December 2007".
Turning to civil liberties issues, the Commissioner said the EU would "call on President Bush to commit himself to ensuring that all EU citizens can travel to the US without a visa". There is no impediment to US citizens coming to the EU, so the "discrimination against EU citizens" must be eliminated. The US would also be urged to find "a solution to the transfer of passenger data", with a new framework to replace the current interim regulations.
Lastly, the two sides must seek closer cooperation on combating terrorism, "in harmony with our obligations under international law".
Political group speakers
On behalf of the EPP-ED group, Joseph DAUL (FR) began by saying that "the strong transatlantic ties are based on personal ties". During the 50th Anniversary of the Treaty of Rome, we had an opportunity to think about the fact that without American help (such as the Marshall Plan), European reconstruction would not have been possible. Our group has been the most ardent defender of the transatlantic relationship. We need to strengthen our ties to the US Congress, and I am happy that "the first EP office to open abroad will be in Washington, DC". He also proposed that the President invite the new Speaker of the House to address us here in Strasbourg.
Turning to policy issues, Mr Daul said "I also hope that the Congress' new temporary committee on climate change will be able to work with our new committee. We must talk in a fully frank way with our partners in the US".
One of his preoccupations was "the danger that stricter customs barriers in the US may become non-tariff barriers to our products". Another was that "The fight against terrorism and organised crime must always be based on an appropriate legal basis".
On foreign policy, Mr Daul said "We have worked together positively in Belarus and the Ukraine". We also need to extend this cooperation to Africa: the tyranny in Zimbabwe and genocide in Darfur. The Doha round talks also need to be concluded in the interests of the developing world. "Nuclear proliferation also poses a great danger, and the EU and the US need to find a common solution to the Iran issue". He concluded by saying "The EU and the US are together defending a common civilisation".
For the Socialist group, Jan WIERSMA (NL) said "everyone can see that a new wind is blowing in Washington", giving a new chance for cooperation with the EU. The Democrats controlled Congress and within the Bush administration, the influence of the State Department and Condoleeza Rice had grown. Having taken part in Parliament's delegation to Washington the previous week, Mr Wiersma said “it was clear a sea change is under way with more support for the effective multilateral approach, they are much keener to cooperate.” There was, he said, recognition that the methods used in Iraq had failed and that new ways to tackle security problems were needed. The Americans were looking for more dialogue with both the Europeans and the Russians.
On the Middle East, he wanted to emphasise that “the new national unity government in Palestine is not left in lurch, we want to support this development.” There was also, he said, a new US domestic agenda on issues like health, environment and working conditions. Criticism of secret prisoner camps and data protection problems must be pursued, he said, but there was now a good basis for cooperation. He concluded by saying that the EU-US summit should focus on the role of the World Bank in the fight against corruption.
ALDE group leader Graham WATSON (UK) recalled that after 11 September 2001, Le Monde had said “nous sommes tous americains” – but times had changed since then. “The United States administration had been shredding the values that made America respected around the world.” Whether it was to resist unilateralism on trade, Kyoto or respect for international law, a “frank, forthright and occasionally fraught dialogue” was needed, covering issues like open skies or the visa waiver programme too. “Bush succeeds in divide and rule in Europe at least as well as Putin,” said Mr Watson.
Removing trade barriers and harmonising standards across the Atlantic was a top priority, but this should not be at the expense of the Doha round. Describing climate change as “the greatest security threat of modern times” he said we needed to get US agreement to stabilise and reduce CO2 emissions. Allegations of torture and the issue of extraordinary renditions should also be raised at the summit, he said. He suggested that problems like the SWIFT affair and air passenger data transfer could only be solved in a wider democratic context including Parliament and the US Congress in a kind of “transatlantic Schengen area”.
The turmoil in Iraq, said Mr Watson, was “proof of what happens when we get the balance wrong.” There was now a duty for Europe and America to help repair the damage. He noted that of the 2 million refugees who had fled Iraq, the United States at taken only 466. It was time for a comprehensive aid budget and a burden sharing system for asylum seekers. He said Europe's leaders should send the message to Paul Wolfowitz of the World Bank that it was time for him to go. They would be judged as individuals for the courage they mustered in Washington, he added.
For the UEN group, Brian CROWLEY (IE) opened by saying that "the economic relationship between the EU and the US is the most important one that exists in the world." He added that "many of our opponents seek to highlight the political differences" but insisted that "they must remember that there is more in common between us than there is dividing us." The need for co-operation is as strong as ever, Mr Crowley continued, and offered the example of Afghanistan, where "we have to work with the US to ensure stability" not least because "90% of the heroin in Europe comes from Afghanistan." Finally, Mr Crowley reminded the house that "actions we can take collectively are far greater than those we can take individually."
Thosaigh Brian Crowley (UEN, IE) a óráid as Gaeilge agus dúirt sé go bhfuil "an gaol eacnamaíocht atá idir Aontas na hEorpa agus Meiriceá, ar an ngaol eacnamaíochta is tábhachtaí sa domhan." Dúirt sé go mbíonn ár naimhde "ag iarraidh áird a tharraingt ar na difríochtaí polaitiúla atá idir an dá réimeas ..[..].. ach ní mór dóibh cuimhneamh go bhfuil i bhfad níos mó comónta idir sinn, ná mar atá difríochtaí."
For the Greens/EFA, Angelika BEER (DE) began by stating that "of course we want to strengthen transatlantic relations on a new basis", but stressed that this basis must be connected to European values. A bridge between Europe and the US "must mean that we would call on the US administration to ensure that its future policies are based on democratic values." The Americans should have a moratorium on the death penalty, for example. This opportunity, Mrs Beer continued, means that "fundamental principles can be redefined." We would not agree to call recent US behaviour "combating terrorism", she said, because this behaviour "restricts the rights of individuals." There is also the need to take the initiative "as Europeans." In Afghanistan we need to ensure sufficient funding ourselves "so that peaceful developments are available", and in Kosovo, "we simply cannot wait for the Americans to solve the problems for us."
For his group, Francis WURTZ (GUE/NGL, FR), told the House "Merkel has stated that the key project in transatlantic relations will be harmonisation of and cooperation in market regulation. Minister Würmeling was more frank: he stated that the goal is to progress towards a barrier-free transatlantic market. But the definition of such a project is a heavy deregulation of the market. The Transatlantic Business Dialogue is a lobby that has been pushing for this for a long time. This is not true cooperation--it is a battle for markets." He also asked "Are we going to keep silent on issues such as PNR, the ICC, Guantanamo, GMOs, SWIFT, CIA renditions just to satisfy the Transatlantic Business Dialogue lobby?"
Speaking on behalf of the Independence and Democracy Group, Godfrey BLOOM (UK) said the EU should be "extremely careful to avoid gesture politics in our relationships with the United States of America". Everything the EU did had "a global dimension", said Mr Bloom. "We must be extremely careful before we burn any bridges we have when we deal with the United States", since they are the UK's "biggest trading and investment partner".
For his group, Frank VANHECKE (ITS, BE) said that the new partnership between the EU and the US had to be "an affair based on mutual recognition mutual aid, mutual respect for each other's interests". The summit in April "will also be an opportunity to think more about our common fight against international terrorism, especially against the increase in fundamentalism in Islam", Mr Vanhecke said. "Let's not forget that that struggle is based on the values which we share, on the western values which we share". Lastly, he said that "foreign policy in the US is often the target of criticism, but the way in which it is criticised here in the Parliament is one-sided and negative". The EU should "not forget that the US is a country with which we have had a lot of misunderstandings and different opinions, but they are our allies, not our enemy".
For the non-attached members, Roger HELMER (UK) began with a warning to those who criticise the US, for example on the issue of climate change. He reminded the House that "here in Europe we ratified Kyoto but we're not delivering." It still seems, Mr Helmer continued, "that perhaps only two Member States will actually hit their Kyoto targets." Furthermore, Mr Helmer stated that "in recent years, the US trend on emissions has been better than the EU trend." In economics, the US "has already adopted a global approach." Finally, Mr Helmer stated that it is time that "we in this House stopped our moral posturing" and started treating the US with respect.
British and Irish speakers
Sarah LUDFORD (ALDE, UK) said that on a parliamentary visit last week to Washington, we learnt more about the high level contact group on security than we have in Brussels, and also about renewed transatlantic discussions among officials on the legal basis for rendition. She insisted "Congressmen as well as MEPs must be not only informed but included in that debate". She added "The tactics of the GWOT - the global war on terror - have failed, according to Scotland Yard's counter-terrorism chief. He said yesterday that Al Qaeda had not only survived the six-year onslaught but possessed momentum".
We must also insist on respect for fundamental rights. "If the information shared is based on dubious profiling or data-mining exercises or tainted by torture, what value does it have? As one of the officials in Washington said 'garbage in, garbage out'". We must have more cooperation between Congress and Parliament in order to bring democratic accountability and the desired goal of a transatlantic Schengen-type zone.
According to Charles TANNOCK (EPP-ED, UK), "the next EU-US Summit will prove an historic one". He fully supported the German Presidency's initiative for extensive economic partnership between the EU and the United States, "in particular Chancellor Merkel's ambitious aim for a transatlantic market without barriers by 2015".
"Some in this House regrettably would call this instead of 'partnership' a 'transatlantic rivalry' because for them the EU is in competition with the United States. If that is indeed the case, then America is clearly winning", said Mr Tannock. "The healthy long-term prospects of its free enterprise economy are in sharp contrast with the EU's gradual decline in a sea of over-regulation." He continued "On the world stage we should be grateful to the US that it is willing to bear a disproportionately large burden in fighting global terrorism with its uncompromising stance on Iran's acquisition of a nuclear bomb which now demands a similar response from EU governments."
He believed that "America is also helping make Europe more secure by its deployment of missiles and missile shields". Finally, together we must urge Russia to behave as a reliable energy supplier and uphold its commitments to democracy and human rights.
Jonathan EVANS(EPP-ED), told that House that, as chairman of the Transatlantic Legislators Dialogue, he last week briefed Congress in Washington on the findings of the EP Temporary Committee on rendition flights in Europe. Their US counterpart, Congressman Delahunt of Massachusetts, had thanked the EP for its work on this issue. In fact Congress was "the first parliamentary body which had asked Parliament's committee to share and discuss its findings", even though the EP's criticisms "have also been directed at European governments and national parliaments which have to date failed to follow the Congressional lead".
This weekend he would be leading a small delegation from Parliament for high level discussions in the margins of Monday's EU-US Summit. He pointed out that the three presidents, Barroso, Bush and Merkel, would be holding a formal briefing session with the TABD, the global corporate CEOs, but have so far not scheduled any such meeting with either US or EU legislators. "I hope that is an omission that they will put right at future summits", said Mr Evans.
Avril DOYLE (EPP-ED, IE) stressed that while "we need a new ambitious economic partnership between the US and the EU" it must "be hand in hand with a new ambitious environmental partnership".
There was transatlantic accord at the recent G8 Environment Ministers meeting, when they agreed with the peer-reviewed science of 2500 world scientists that human-induced climate change is accelerating and that climate change has wide-ranging consequences. "There was, however, less accord" on what those policy responses should be.
However, with the Stern report, recent elections in the US, the IPCC report and the increased demand from citizens on both sides, said Ms Doyle, "I feel that transatlantic dialogue and cooperation on climate change is increasing and will, or has to, lead to an agreement for the post-Kyoto 2012 period that includes the United States".
Council and Commission replies
Replying for the Council, Mr GLOSER said that the best way to tackle the big challenges in transatlantic relations, such as climate change and terrorism, is to talk to and learn from each other.
Data security issues such as air passenger name records and SWIFT banking data transfers will be discussed openly, not side-stepped, he promised.
On visa freedom, there should be no split within the EU, and all Member States should be treated equally.
Mr Gloser felt that the EU had succeeded in moving from unilateralism to multilateralism, and getting the US on board, with regard to Iran, Russia and China. However, more progress is needed in the Middle East, he said, hoping that the 30 April EU/US summit would provide solid foundations for addressing the critical points.
Commissioner ŠPIDLA welcomed Parliament's view that every effort should be made to find multilateral solutions to common challenges, including climate change.
He hoped the EU/US summit would bring progress with regard to Iran, Sudan and Afghanistan, and to the Middle East Quartet's work.
On human rights, the Commission backs Council efforts vis-à-vis the USA, said Mr Špidla, recalling President Bush's observation at the 2006 summit that the Guantanamo Bay detention camp should be closed and the detainees released.
Dialogue between MEPs and their US Congress counterparts is a pillar of transatlantic relations that deserves to be strengthened, inter alia by holding the annual transatlantic dialogue meeting before the EU/US summit, and involving legislators more extensively in the process, he said.
On carbon emissions, renewable energies and biofuels, the Commission is looking to establish quantifiable targets, as agreed by the European Council.
On visas, it is too soon to expect big changes, said the Commissioner, reiterating the position that all EU citizens should be able to visit the US without having to get visas, just like US citizens visiting the EU. A deal on passenger data protection should be possible by the end of July, he suggested.
Bank transfer data protection for EU citizens should be provided in an appropriate form in the USA, said the Commissioner, who expressed disappointment that although dialogue was under way, negotiations had not yet begun on a formal agreement.
The "anti-missile shield" issue needs to be debated at EU level, because even though it is not a defence union, it would doubtless be affected, said Mr Špidla.
On the "BAVAK" case, Mr Špidla said that a decision to discriminate against a bank's clients on the basis of nationality would have to be notified to the Commission, and that no such extra-territoriality could be accepted in the European system.
Efforts are under way to foster economic growth on both sides of the Atlantic, and not just through deregulation concluded the Commissioner. Text adopted by EP
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External relations
Ukraine urged to solve its crisis peacefully, but could the EU have done more?
2007-04-30 - 10:58
With the political crisis in Ukraine continuing, MEPs discussed the situation with the Council and Commission. While Ukraine is seen as a vital interest of the EU, there was a consensus that the country's politicians must find a solution themselves without outside interference. Some speakers, however, suggested that the EU might have played a more active role in Ukraine's recent political development. Council and Commission
Opening for the Council, Germany's Federal Minister of State Günther Gloser welcomed this opportunity to debate developments in Ukraine, adding that their importance could not be overstated. Ukraine's 2004 "Orange Revolution" had set an example for other states in the region, he said, but the wrangling required to form a government thereafter had proven very difficult.
In April 2007, President Viktor Yushchenko had sought to dissolve Parliament, which had refused. The case was now before the constitutional court and the Council was in close contact with all the protagonists continued Mr Gloser. If the court could settle the constitutionality issue, then well and good, but political compromises would still be needed, he continued, adding that he welcomed assurances from both sides that violence would not be used to settle disputes. Free and fair elections and a free press are essential to the democratic process and would always have the EU's support, he concluded.
For the Commission, Vladimir Špidla reminded MEPs that negotiations for an expanded co-operation agreement with Ukraine had begun on 5 March and stressed that a solution to the current difficulties must be found. The Commission was especially concerned at the apparent hardening of differences between President Yushchenko and Prime Minister Viktor Yanukovych, he added.
"Stability is vital for Ukraine and its future in Europe", he continued, reiterating Commission President José Barroso's statement the previous week that "there is no political problem to which a solution can't be found".
The non-violence of street demonstrations in Ukraine demonstrates that its citizens understand the need to abide by democratic principles and the rule of law - including the independence of the constitutional court - and the Ukraine appears to be developing a "new style of compromise", including "controls on the political system".
"It is not the role of the EU to intervene" in these developments, said the Commissioner, but "we should call on all political forces to work together for compromise [...] we have confidence that Ukraine's young democracy will pass this test".
Since the Orange Revolution and the adoption of the EU/Ukraine action plan, political dialogue and co-operation have intensified, said the Commissioner, citing € 120 million in support under the new European neighbourhood policy, an agreement on visa regulations, and moves to free up trade. Work on the expanded agreement, to which Ukraine is strongly committed, opens up new prospects for co-operation on energy, he added.
"Ukraine is a key partner for the EU, and we are entirely resolved to enhance our relations" concluded Commissioner Špidla.
Political group speakers
On behalf of the EPP-ED group, Foreign Affairs Committee Chair Jacek Saryusz-Wolski (PL) told the House that the crisis in Ukraine is a "matter of concern" to all those who followed the country's progress since the Orange Revolution. It is "vital", he added, "that today's situation be resolved in line with the rule of law". As he then went on to say, the EU "could have done more to stop this crisis from developing" -- namely, with financial aid and more political support. The Union, he argued, must encourage democratic gains in Kiev, particularly by way of a new enhanced agreement with Ukraine. The present crisis, he added, "is a challenge for the Union" to step up its engagement in Ukraine. It is "high time to do more", he concluded. "Let's support Ukraine's European choice".
For the Socialist group, Jan Marinus Wiersma (NL), stressed that the Orange Revolution had led to greater democracy in Ukraine but that it had also given rise to the current conflict, which was "an expression of the divisions in the country". The problem was one of "balance between the institutions and the various political players in the country". It was not up to the EU to "take sides". If the political players would not compromise, constitutional solutions would not work. The challenge was "to overcome internal conflict so that they can undertake the necessary reforms to have closer ties with us".
On behalf of the Liberals, István Szent-Iványi (HU) said the situation since the Orange Revolution had become "more complicated than we had hoped". However, the crisis was of a "domestic political nature" and the EU could only help by remaining neutral - though it obviously had "an interest in a stable democratic Ukraine". Responsibility ultimately lay with the country's politicians and the current negotiations between the EU and Ukraine on a new-generation cooperation cooperation agreement would only succeed "if Ukraine gets back on course".
Guntars Krasts (LV), speaking for the UEN group, reminded the house that "democratic processes are quite successful in the Ukraine" and therefore we cannot exclude the possibility of Ukraine as a candidate for EU membership in the mid-term. The integration of the Ukraine into the world economy, Mr Krasts added, is "a good precondition for solving in a peaceful way the present crisis." A crisis which, Mr Krasts continued, "should be considered a test for maturity." The role of the EU should be "to facilitate a compromise between the militant parties." Mr Krasts concluded by stating that "At the end of the day it is the people of the Ukriane who have to decide how to run their country."
On behalf of the Greens/EFA, Rebecca Harms (DE), said that "despite the confusion", the conditions in Ukraine are "so much more stable than we could have hoped for four years ago." Such conditions are important for the EU, which has "so much interest in ensuring a stable development in Ukraine." The new elections in the Ukraine are "essential" but it is necessary that "all of the parties must respect the outcome of the elections." The parties must also "do a lot more to make sure that the constitutional reforms finally occur." Mrs Harms ended with a reference to Poland as "the most important advocate of the Ukraine in the EU", with the hope that Poland can "pass on the European approach to the Ukraine."
German MEP Helmut Markov, for the GUE/NGL group, underlined that "when a president dissolves a parliament, this obviously needs to be in line with the rule of the constitution of the given country." Hence, the question of whether President Yushchenko's decision was in line or not was a legal matter rather than a political, Markov added. Parliament had the tendency to "put parties into neat little boxes", considering Yushchenko on the one hand as a partner for the European Union and Prime Minister Yanukovych "as the Russian protégé." Instead, Parliament should acknowledge that, even though there were two different nationalities involved, "they are both citizens of the Ukraine, they both represent the interests of that country".
On behalf of the IND/DEM group, Bastiaan Belder (NL) expressed the firm belief that "the future of the EU and the future of Ukraine are closely interlinked", since "the EU-27 will have to extend its borders" and "Ukraine will be taken on board one day". This prospect was also a good incentive for "the powers in the Ukraine that want to bring about a reform", Mr Belder stated. He insisted that "Council and Commission cannot ignore what is happening there" and that the EU should "have to look at the overall crisis situation, but also at our European neighbourhood policy", which "could be useful in trying to bring about stability."
British MEP
Charles Tannock (EPP-ED, UK) said he had observed the 2006 Ukrainian parliamentary elections, which had been "held in exemplary fashion" but "regrettably the outcome then produced neither a stable government nor a climate of fianncial probity amongst many of the RADA MPs who had little interest in politics and really only a vested interest to protect their business interests or avoid prosecution by acquiring parliametnary immunity". He believed the EU Council "missed a trick in not granting Ukraine in the heady days of the Orange Revolution the same status as western Balkan countries like Albania of being called a potential candiate for eventual EU accession. This would have been a great carrot to westernising democratic reformist forces." He welcomed EU plans for a deep free-trade and visa facilitation travel area after Ukraine joins the WTO. Above all, "Ukrainians must be brought closer to the European Union where they rightfully belong".
Council and Commission responses
Responding to the debate for the Council, Mr Gloser said that on many points there was agreement between Parliament and Council. It was, he said, for those with political responsibility in Ukraine to decide from themselves on how to proceed. “The EU cannot act as a broker, it is a domestic matter. The President and Prime Minister of Ukraine need to come together to find a solution.” Javier Solana had been in close contact with both groups, he said, the EU was not keeping out of the situation, but was being neutral. It was necessary for people in Ukraine to decide what to do.
For the Commisssion, Mr Spidla said his institution agreed with much of Parliament's assessment. “We will follow the development of the crisis and try to make a contribution, encouraging those with positions of responsibility in Ukraine to think of the good of their country and seek a compromise,” he said, adding that the Commission stood by the EU's agreements with Ukraine and recognised Ukraine as one of the EU's key partners.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Opening of the session - Pöttering condemns murders in Turkey / Tribute to Yeltsin
2007-04-30 - 10:58
Hans-Gert PÖTTERING, President of the European Parliament opened the session by making reference to the murder of three workers in the Turkish town of Malatya. The President condemned the murders in the sharpest terms. He called on the Turkish authorities to bring the perpetrators of the crime to justice. "It is the responsibility of all states to protect religious minorities", he said. The President also paid tribute to the former Russian President Boris YELTSIN who, he informed the House, had passed away.
Agenda change
Parliament voted in favour of adding a vote on motions of resolutions to the May Brussels plenary (9 and 10 May) on the strengthening of European legislation in the field of information and consultation of workers. A Commission statement on this topic took place on Wednesday, 25 April in Strasbourg. The vote will take place on 10 May in Brussels.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Human rights
MEPs take stock of EU record on human rights protection in 2006
2007-04-30 - 10:58
On Thursday, 26 April, the European Parliament gave overwhelming backing to the EP's 2006 annual report - drafted by Simon Coveney (EPP-ED, IE) - on Human Rights in the World. MEPs expressed particular concern about the situation in Russia, China and Iran; the EU and its institutions did not escape criticism. The 2006 report assesses the human rights activities of the Commission and the Council -- and the overall performance of the Parliament in this field. It focuses on EU policies with respect to human rights offenders, submits criticism of EU actions and makes concrete policy recommendations.
Human rights violations worldwide
China's human rights record is still a matter of "serious concern" and should thus "receive more focus in the build-up to the Beijing Olympic games" note MEPs, emphasising, at the same time, the need to strengthen and improve the EU-China human rights dialogue. That said, members urge the Council and Commission "to raise the question of Tibet" in talks with the Beijing government. The Union's trade relations with Beijing, they add, should be contingent upon human rights reform.
Expressing their "deep concern regarding the deterioration of the human rights situation" in Iran -- notably, "the intensification of the repression against human rights defenders" -- the EP "calls on the Council to express concern about the [situation] in all its contacts with the Iranian government". It also calls on the Commission to use the European Initiative for Democracy and Human Rights (EIDHR) to promote contacts and cooperation with Iranian civil society.
The House also reserves strong criticism for the Russian government, "regretting" that the EU has had "only limited success in bringing about policy change as a result of raising difficult issues" -- such as the situation in Chechnya, the treatment of human rights defenders, and freedom of expression. The report goes on to "deplore Russian legislation limiting the activities of NGOs", as well as the fact "that journalists and human rights defenders have been threatened". It remains "appalled at the murder of Anna Politkowskaja" and is concerned about allegations of Russian involvement in the poisoning of Alexander Litvinenko and of the mistreatment of Mikhail Khodorkovsky while in detention. The Parliament "urges the Commission and Council to raise such cases with the Russian authorities at the highest level and in the new PCA with Russia".
"Regretting" that the EU has not taken "more unilateral action" to persuade the Sudanese government to accept an international peacekeeping force in Darfur, the report urges the EU to back "an international peacekeeping force" and "the enforcement of the no-fly zone over Darfur". The Council, it goes on to say, should agree "a plan of specific, targeted sanctions to be imposed on the Khartoum regime [...] in the event of non-compliance with the demands of the international community."
The report also:
- recognises attempts to set up a human rights dialogue with Uzbekistan, but considers that such a dialogue should not automatically "lead to the lifting of sanctions [...] if no progress is made in the area of human rights and democracy";
- is concerned with the "limited progress" on human rights issues in Turkey and encourages the Ankara government to change Article 301 of the Penal Code;
-urges the adoption of "more effective and targeted sanctions" against the government of Myanmar in light of the country's deteriorating human rights situation;
- proposes that the temporary international mechanism be expanded and ways be explored to resume direct aid to the Palestinian territories;
- urges the Commission “to review its policy tools vis-à-vis Libya” given Tripoli’s failure to ensure a fair trial for five Bulgarian nurses and one Palestinian doctor accused of intentionally infecting children with the AIDS virus;
- calls on the Council and the Commission to urge the US government to “charge or release” Guantánamo detainees “in accordance with international law”;
- expresses "strong disapproval" of US efforts "to actively prevent other countries from ratifying the Rome Statute [of the ICC]" and urges the Czech Republic, "as the only remaining EU Member State not have ratified the Statute, to do so without delay";
- points to "the need to support the [Belarusian] political opposition";
- asks that the EU include the issue of persecution on the basis of sexual orientation in its discussions on human rights with third countries.
Criticism of EU action on human rights
The report also makes some criticisms of the EU institutions’ activity in the area of human rights. It asks the Council to explain “how it was possible for Belarus to be elected onto the Governing Body of the International Labour Organization (ILO) in June 2005” – even though “four major EU countries are permanent members of that Governing Body.” It also notes “with total stupefaction” the provisional suspension by ECHO of humanitarian aid for Iraq, despite “the disastrous situation afflicting the suffering Iraqi people and Iraqi refugees"
MEPs note that the Union, in its texts, attempts “to link immigration and development and ensure that the fundamental rights of immigrants are respected”. Still, they maintain, “the reality on the ground gives the lie to the texts”: readmission agreements are being concluded with third countries that do not have the legal and institutional machinery to handle the readmission of nationals and protect their rights.
The United Nations does not escape criticism, either, particularly with regard to its newly created Human Rights Council (UNHRC). Although "the new UNHRC has the potential to develop into a valuable framework for the EU's multilateral human rights efforts", say MEPs, it has proven "ineffectual in responding appropriately to human rights crises" – this being due to "the use of the UNHRC by many states as a forum for political pressure instead of the promotion of human rights". The EP points to "the need for the EU to make more effective use of its leverage in order to promote important issues on the agenda of the UNHRC".
Recommendations
The report closes with a host of recommendations to the Council and Commission. Both institutions, it insists, should raise the situation of human rights defenders in all political dialogues. EU missions ought to “reach out to local human rights defenders in a more proactive manner”, while the Council should take steps "to facilitate the issuing of visas for all human rights defenders".
MEPs also say that EU Presidencies should continue the approach of promoting the abolition of the death penalty; the Council should “reassess the procedure for listing terrorist groups and […] consider a clear method for taking groups off the list”; the Commission, as Chair of the Kimberley Process throughout 2007, should strengthen the mechanisms designed to stem the flow of conflict diamonds; both Council and Commission should act to ensure that Member States move to ban cluster bombs. Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available shortly via this link
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Human rights
EP reiterates call for universal moratorium on the death penalty
2007-04-30 - 10:58
Earlier this year, the European Parliament called on the EU Presidency to submit a resolution on a universal moratorium on the death penalty to the UN General Assembly. To no effect: to this day, no such text has been tabled. Today, therefore, the Parliament reiterated its request, urging the EU and its Member States to submit a moratorium resolution -- immediately. In a text adopted by an overwhelming majority of members, the Parliament -- having noted that an earlier (2006) EU statement on the death penalty has by now gathered 88 signatures among UN member countries -- called on the Union to seize the momentum by taking "every possible opportunity" to foster "regional abolitionist coalitions" in the campaign for a universal moratorium.
Lastly, the Parliament called on the EU's institutions, together with the Council of Europe, "to support the World Day against the Death Penalty by declaring 10 October, as from 2007, a European Day against the Death Penalty." Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here shortly via this link
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Human rights
Human rights: Russia, BBC journalist in Gaza, Philippines
2007-04-30 - 10:58
In three human rights resolutions adopted at the end of the Strasbourg plenary session, Parliament condemns the use of force against demonstrators by the Russian police and the lack of free speech in the country; it issues a heartfelt appeal for the release of BBC journalist Alan Johnston, who has been kidnapped in Gaza; and it calls for an end to the politically motivated killings in the Philippines. Russia: free speech under further pressure as elections approach Looking ahead to the upcoming parliamentary and presidential elections in Russia, today's resolution focuses on the recent demonstrations in Moscow and St. Petersburg and related free speech issues. It follows Parliament's resolutions of 25 October 2006 on the murder of journalist Anna Politkovskaya and of 13 December 2006 on EU-Russia relations. Attacks on demonstrations part of deteriorating climate for free speech in Russia The resolution, adopted by 65 votes to 0 with 2 abstentions, refers to the rally of Russian opposition members - including Garry Kasparov and former prime minister Mikhail Kasyanov - in Moscow’s Pushkin Square on 14 April, which was broken up by security forces. Demonstrators and journalists were beaten and detained. A protest held on 15 April in St Petersburg was also broken up. Parliament believes that "the Russian authorities, in the run-up to the parliamentary and presidential elections, are increasing pressure on opposition groups and non-governmental organisations to refrain from any activities directed against the president and the government and to prevent the media from reporting any such activities". It argues that "democracy has been weakened in Russia, in particular by the bringing of all major TV stations and most radio stations under government control, the spread of self-censorship among the print media, new restrictions on the right to organise public demonstrations and a worsening climate for NGOs". Police repression condemned Parliament therefore "strongly condemns the use of excessive force by the Russian anti-riot police during last weekend’s peaceful demonstrations in Moscow and St Petersburg and calls on the Russian authorities to comply with their international obligations and to respect freedom of expression and freedom of assembly". It "condemns in particular the repressive actions used by the security forces against journalists doing their professional duty". More broadly, MEPs are "deeply disturbed by an emerging pattern of use of excessive force by the Russian authorities towards opposition activists", which "raises deep concern about the situation of democracy and respect for human rights in the Russian Federation". Investigations demanded Russia’s human rights ombudsman said police in both cities had exceeded their authority and the governor of St Petersburg ordered an investigation into human rights violations at the rally in her city. Backing these moves, the EP urges "the Russian State Duma to set up a working group to investigate why such force was used against peaceful demonstrators". It also "calls on the Council of Europe to investigate the human rights violations at the rallies". With a view to the elections, Parliament calls on the Russian leadership to "guarantee all political parties and movements a chance to take part in the democratic process" and on the Central Election Commission and the Russian judiciary "to be vigilant, objective and impartial in scrutinising the campaign and election processes". The authorities are urged to respect the democratic standards laid down by the OSCE and the Council of Europe. EU action The resolution repeats the EP's call for the EU-Russia Human Rights Dialogue to be stepped up "so as to make it more effective and result-oriented", while fully involving the EP at all levels, with a view to strengthening this element in the new Partnership and Cooperation Agreement to be negotiated soon (the current one expires in 2007). Meanwhile, the resolution asks the Commission and the Council to express the above concerns clearly in their contacts with the Russian Government, in particular at the next EU-Russian Summit to be held on 18 May 2007 in Samara. * * * Appeal for release of BBC journalist Alan Johnston BBC journalist Alan Johnston was abducted at gunpoint on 12 March 2007 whilst returning home in Gaza City and his whereabouts have remained unknown since that date. In their resolution today, MEPs express their support for his family and colleagues and call for Mr Johnston's immediate release. Earlier in the day BBC journalists had gathered in the European Parliament in Strasbourg to read out a letter from their colleagues to MEPs. The resolution, adopted unanimously, points out that the Palestinian media community, public and politicians from all sides have condemned the kidnapping and are calling for his immediate release, proving the extent to which his work is appreciated by the local population. Parliament stresses that press freedom is "of primary importance for democracy and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms". The abduction of Mr Johnston - who has remained in Gaza during a period of increased violence, precisely to report on what is happening there to the outside world - is not an isolated case. As international journalists' associations point out, fifteen foreign journalists have been kidnapped in Gaza since August 2005, and thousands of journalists around the world face the threat of kidnapping, violence and intimidation every day. Appeal for safe return The resolution "calls for Alan Johnston to be immediately and unconditionally released unharmed and returned to safety". Parliament "pays tribute to Mr Johnston’s record as a journalist of the highest integrity, with a record of sixteen years working for the BBC and, in particular, the past three years spent in Gaza, where he has been the only permanently based foreign journalist from a major media organisation". Solidarity with family and colleagues It expresses "warm support for Mr Johnston’s family in these difficult circumstances, and for his BBC colleagues and management, who have been campaigning tirelessly to build public and political support for his release". MEPs also express solidarity with the International Federation of Journalists (IFJ) and its member unions, including the Palestinian Journalists’ Syndicate, "in their efforts to secure Mr Johnston’s release and their campaign for a new global commitment to ending threats to independent journalism". They recall in this regard the appeal delivered by the IFJ to the leaders of the Palestinian Authority on 19 April, with the signatures of 197 Members of the European Parliament. Efforts must be stepped up Although "no group has claimed responsibility", President Abbas "has confirmed publicly that there is credible evidence that Mr Johnston is alive, that he is being held in secure conditions and that there is information as to which group is holding him". MEPs therefore urge the Palestinian Authority to "redouble its efforts to secure Mr Johnston’s speedy release". Continued and strengthened support is also requested from the European Commission Technical Assistance Office to the West Bank and Gaza Strip, EU Member States' diplomatic representatives and the High Representative for the CFSP. * * * Philippines: political killings a growing problem In a resolution on the Philippines, adopted by 68 votes to 0 with 0 abstentions, Parliament draws attention to the number of politically motivated killings in the country, which it says has risen dramatically in recent years, as well as the general human rights situation in the country. The local human rights organisation Karapatan has recorded 180 forced disappearances and over 800 killings, most of them by unidentified gunmen, since 2001. Most of those killed, such as opposition party members, church people, community leaders, peasants, journalists, lawyers, human rights activists, trade unionists, have been accused by the government of being front organisations for illegal armed groups and 'terrorists'. In a positive development, President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo has appointed a high-level independent commission to examine the problem and a national-level police task force to investigate the killings. The commission's findings indicate army involvement in the political killings. In response to its recommendations, President Arroyo has issued a 6-point plan to stop the killings. However, MEPs believe all this is far from enough. Authorities urged to investigate rise in political killings In its resolution Parliament expresses "grave concern at the increasing number of political killings that have occurred in recent years in the Philippines and "urges the Philippine authorities to make the necessary investigations in a timely, thorough and transparent manner and to bring those responsible to justice". It also "condemns in the strongest terms the murder of Ms Siche Bustamante-Gandinao, a dedicated human rights activist….and is concerned about the lack of any police investigation concerning this important case". Anti-terrorism measures likely to lead to arbitrary arrests MEPs believe that "the adoption of the Human Security Act 2007, which will enter into force in July 2007, is liable to further increase the incidence of human rights violations by the Security Forces because it will allow arrest without warrant and arbitrary detention". Parliament also "denounces attacks on legal opposition groups". It welcomes the progress made but says the government must "adopt measures to end the systematic intimidation and harassment of witnesses in connection with prosecutions for killings" and "ensure truly effective witness protection". It is also important "to stop inciting violence towards certain political or civil-society groups and to restore normal accountability mechanisms to check government abuses". The Ombudsman is urged to "take seriously his constitutional role in responding to extrajudicial killings attributed to public officials". Abolition of death penalty welcomed While welcoming the signing by President Arroyo of legislation abolishing the death penalty in the Philippines, the EP calls on the Philippines to ratify the newly adopted UN Convention on Enforced Disappearances. Call for freedom of political expression ahead of elections The climate of impunity "has a corrosive impact on public confidence in the rule of law" and the killings are "creating a climate in which people in the Philippines cannot feel free to exercise their rights of political expression and association", says the resolution. The President is urged to "take immediate action in order to prevent the risk of further escalation of violence before and during the upcoming polls". Lastly, those applying for the redistribution of land under the Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Programme must be protected and indeed the land reform programme must be accelerated in order to curb one of the root causes of political violence, say MEPs. Full text of resolutions will appear here (under 26 April)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Public health
MEPs set out safer rules for innovative therapies
2007-04-30 - 10:58
An EU regulation on revolutionary medical techniques such as gene therapy, cell therapy and tissue engineering, adopted on 25 April by the European Parliament after a tough battle on ethical issues, offers new hope to thousands of patients and researchers. These "innovative therapies", which have a huge potential for curing diseases such as Parkinson's, Alzheimer's and other degenerative conditions including cancer and heart disease, also have great potential for the European economy. The new regulation does not interfere with decisions made by Member States on whether to allow the use of specific types of cells such as embryonic stem cells in accordance with their ethical choices. Some MEPs had tabled ethical amendments (which had already been rejected by the Committee on the Environment and Public Health in September 2006) but these amendments were rejected by the plenary.
Three political groups - the PES, ALDE and GUE/NGL - had agreed a compromise package with the Council aiming to conclude the legislative process at the first stage of the codecision procedure. This package was endorsed by the plenary when it adopted the amended report by Miroslav Mikolášik (EPP-ED, SK), thus paving the way for the regulation to enter into force speedily.
What is the aim of the regulation?
The regulation provides for a compulsory centralized procedure to authorise the marketing of these innovative products and also for post-authorisation monitoring of patients and products. In the compromise package the European Parliament succeeded in pushing through changes which reinforce the initial provisions to enhance product safety and make life easier for small firms.
Ethical issues
Following today's vote, the general ethical principles included in the draft regulation remain unchanged: the donation of cells and tissues must be voluntary and unpaid and the anonymity of donors and recipients guaranteed. Patients must have the right to know the origin of any cells or tissues used, subject to respect for donor anonymity. The "subsidiarity principle" will apply to ethical issues, i.e. Member States remain free to accept or forbid some therapies on their territory.
Scope and definitions
The EP voted to exclude from the scope of the legislation any products containing or consisting of non-viable human or animal cells or tissues. A number of definitions were tightened up, notably regarding engineered cells and tissues, combined products and products including medical devices.
More incentives for smaller companies
To boost the development of innovative therapies, the Commission had proposed reducing by 90% the fee payable to the European Medicines Agency (EMEA) for a scientific opinion. Parliament today voted to grant a reduction of 95% to smaller companies (SMEs) but only 65% maximum to other firms. It also voted for a reduction of 50% in the marketing authorisation fee SMEs pay.
Parliament decided to make the central role of the Agency in the evaluation and authorisation procedure more prominent. The draft regulation already provided for a special committee to be set up inside EMEA but Parliament successfully demanded changes in the composition and role of this committee, which will now have more independence and be more transparent.
Products with cells and genes already on the market in accordance with existing rules will be granted a three-year transitional period but tissue-engineered products will have four years.
Entry into force
The regulation should apply 1 year after entry into force, in practice from around mid-2008.
After five years the Commission must report on the way the regulation has functioned and review of the scope of the regulation.
DEBATE - Monday, 23 April 2007
The European Parliament debated a draft regulation designed to foster gene therapy, somatic cell therapy and tissue engineering. The unresolved issue of "ethical amendments" poses a threat to any agreement with the Council, which, like the Commission, wants to restrict the new regulation to technical issues, leaving it to Member States to decide on any ethical conditions to be observed on their territory, under the subsidiarity principle.
Commissioner Günter VERHEUGEN, Vice-President of the Commission, with responsibility for Enterprise and Industry, began by stating that "There are countless people in Europe who are ill ..[and that].. these new therapies will bring hope to many ailing people." He clarified that he was speaking about diseases like cancer, Parkinson's disease and aids .. what he referred to as "terrible diseases". The Commissioner went on to say that this proposal looks at easier access to treatments and makes a contribution to research standards. The Commissioner invited MEPs, "as a matter of urgency, to expedite this procedure" He emphasised that "it is not to be delayed further" and welcomed the fact that some of the groups had agreed on a compromise package.
With regard to the question of ethical issues, the Commissioner pointed out that this law is about making sure "that the patient receives effective medicines ... it is not intending to do anything else ..[..].. What we are doing is strictly observing the principle of subsidiarity because ethical matters are the responsibility of Member States." The Commissioner concluded by stating that "Above all ladies and gentlemen, you would be helping to save the lives of those who are seriously ill.
The rappporteur Miroslav MIKOLÁŠIK (EPP-ED, SK) expressed his disapproval of the compromise arrived at, without his knowledge, by three MEPs and representatives of the Council and of the Commission. He pointed out that these amendments did not have the support of the Committees nor of the rapporteur. He emphasised that he was addressing the Plenary Session as the rapporteur on this issue and that "since the beginning of 2006 the EP has been working hard on this proposal ..[that].. the final report [was] adopted by a large majority."
In addition, the rapporteur explained that there was one aspect of the proposal which still worried him: that the European Commission had introduced an opt-out for some Member States concerning contentious products - "In practice, this would mean that certain products would not have access to all markets." The rapporteur went on to say that this position could not be upheld legally.
Giles CHICHESTER (EPP-ED, UK ), for the Committee on Industry, Research and Energy, said that he supported this proposal and hoped that it will go forward smoothly. He said: "I regularly see reports in the press of exciting new therapies and developments in this field. But usually they are in the USA and not in Europe, which is to our loss. I have to say, with respect to the rapporteur, I would like to congratulate him for his work but I have to respectfully disagree with him with regard to the two amendments from the Legal Affairs Committee which seemed to me, and to many on my committee, to be pushing in exactly the opposite, retrogressive direction of this proposal. So I join in supporting the compromise package which has been put forward, particularly by my distinguished colleague Mrs Roth-Behrendt, not least because independent observers tell me that this package is in line with the ITRE research committee's position. So naturally I support it. "
Hiltrud BREYER (Greens/EFA, DE). on the other hand for the Legal Affairs Committee. said that the committee had a right to present amendments on ethical issues. Amendment 17 as proposed by the Legal Affairs Committee and which is not part of the proposed compromise reads "This Regulation shall not apply to advanced therapy medicinal products that contain or are derived from human embryonic or foetal cells, primordial germ cells or cells derived from those cells."
Political Group speakers
John BOWIS (EPP-ED, UK) said: "It is, as the Commissioner has said, an exciting time in medical research. We are on the verge of a new breakthrough and the root for this is the development of advanced therapies, using gene and cell therapies and tissue engineering. Gene therapy and somatic cell therapy products are already being clinically tested - some of the tissue engineering products are already with us and so this proposal is there to ensure that we deal with a complex issue in a sensible and universal way, through central authorisation so that we can pool scarce expertise at Community level, ensure the highest standards of patient safety across the EU and enable access to the European market and thus to all patients.
That is what it is all about and on the basis of that I do welcome my honourable friend's report and congratulated him on the work that he did, not only in bringing the reports through out Environmental Committee but in the subsequent work he has done negotiating with the Presidency, in the trialogue, and we have needed to look at various issues, the hospital issue, the small, medium enterprise issue, the medical devices issue. And of course with this comes a number of ethical issues and those are important but my belief certainly is that the EU's job is to guarantee safety and efficiency and Member States should take the ethical decisions. That is where I believe we will conclude on this important measure and we now have to look very carefully at the options before us in the votes on Wednesday to make sure that we take something through which has the whole hearted support of this House."
Dagmar ROTH-BEHRENDT (PES, DE) focussed her comments on the procedure, stating that thousands of patients were waiting for treatment based on advanced therapies. Ms Roth-Behrendt said: "We tabled a package of 75 amendments. 32 are exactly identical to the amendments from the committee; 18 amendments are slight linguistic changes; 10 amendments are working on a compromise which you and I agreed on already before you stopped cooperating and 15 amendments are linguistic or legal concerns. That is the situation where we are at the moment.
Then I have to say something on the so-called 'ethical' amendments. Yes, Member States who want to ban the use of foetal stem cells should be allowed to do that and everybody who says that the Court of Justice would deny that and would put it under Article 95 is either not knowledgeable, and then giving the wrong impression I am afraid. If you read Article 30 of the Treaty, you are exactly sure that Article 30 says public morality is always a reason to make sure that a Member State can ban that. And that is what happened in the past. That is what happens at the moment in the European Union and those Member States who allow research on that (we always said they could continue) but the patients there also deserve the right to have the safest, best products available, and that is why I tabled an amendment on subsidiarity making it sure again (and that amendment is in the package). That amendment says that every Member State which thinks a product should not even be produced there, nor marketed, should be allowed to ban it. For other Member States, the patients should have the freedom to get that. That is what we are here for."
Frédérique RIES (ALDE, BE) said that the regulation offered a practical solution to thousands of patients who are awaiting progress on cures for a range of diseases including Parkinson and Alzheimer's. In the medium, she said, this could also offer a solution to the problem of the lack of organs. Mrs Ries stressed that the compromise put forward by the main political groups would allow the Member States to decide on ethical issues according to their respective national laws. "The EU had no power or right to legislate on ethical matters". Mrs Ries also pointed out that the Commission supported this position. Finally, Mrs Ries stated that the European Parliament had supported EU funding on stem cell research as long as it respected national rules.
Konrad SZYMAŃSKI, (PL) speaking for the UEN group, warned that "despite great efforts made by the rapporteur", the proposal on advanced therapies "may have serious shortcomings", for if the package of amendments is not supported there is the danger that "there may not be enough guarantees for human dignities." If Europe rightly wants to set human rights standards in the world, Mr Szymański continued, it could not afford to adopt a "passive position", when it comes to advanced therapies.
Hiltrud BREYER (Greens/EFA, DE), hoped that the vote on this proposal "will prove to be a touchstone" in that in might constitute the "incorporation of European values in legislation." Ensuring the "non-commercial of the human body" is essential, and it is also important to "avoid genetic interventions" and recognise the need for "clear bans" on the issue. A "disastrous signal" will be sent out, Mrs Breyer added, tantamount to a "breaking down of the ethical dam", if the EP were to abandon its opposition on these ethical principles, for "we have to speak out clearly in favour of European values."
The purpose of this proposal, Adamos ADAMOU (GUE/NGL, CY) said, is to "allow Member States to decide themselves whether or not they can use these ethically sensitive products." There is, he added, "no room in the text for personal ethical views." Furthermore, if a compromise can be reached on the first reading, it will mean that, in the near future, "These new technologies can allow [patients] to have more effective treatment."
There are very serious doubts, said Johannes BLOKLAND (IND/DEM, NL) about "the technical possibilities of therapy based on germ-line modifying therapy and human hybrids." It is, he continued, "my serious hope that such products can be kept outside the scope of this regulation", so as to "enable us to maintain the dignity of the human body." The proposal in its current form, Mr Blokland added, might mean that "a national ban on any European-authorised products could potentially be attacked in court."
Irish and British speakers
Proinsias DE ROSSA (PES, IE) thanked those Members who participated in the detailed processing of this regulation. It is extremely important, he said, that issues as sensitive and complex as this are dealt with under the codecision procedure. It reassures our citizens whose national parliaments cannot vary a regulation to see their MEPs engaged in preparing balanced and effective legislation which seeks to enhance their lives.
Continuing, Mr De Rossa stated that the therapies which this regulation seeks to deal with have great potential for treating cancer, Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease. Regrettably, and not unexpectedly, some reactionary elements are falsely claiming that this proposal overrides Member States' rights on ethical issues. They want to exclude products derived from embryonic stem cells from the remit of this regulation. The effect of doing so would be to leave such products unregulated in many parts of Europe as regards their safety, quality and efficacy.
Contrary to these wild claims, the regulation, he said, does not circumscribe a Member State's right to refuse to countenance embryo- or stem-cell-based therapies. Indeed he stated that he would deplore such a ban by any Member State. This regulation is about saving life and about enhancing the quality of life, not its destruction – as is being claimed by some in this House tonight, he said. "We owe it to tens of thousands of patients and their families to do everything we can to encourage and make available the most advanced treatments for some of the most intractable illnesses facing our societies today. We also need to guarantee insofar as we can that they are safe and of the highest quality and that they actually work. This is what this regulation seeks to do. I fully support the Socialist Group position and call on all Members – and indeed I would particularly call on all my Irish colleagues – to support this regulation."
Kathy SINNOTT (IND/DEM, IE) referred to the visit of the Ukrainian Prime Minister to the European Parliament last month. In a discussion in committee, Mrs Sinnott stated that she had asked him about the trade in human body parts, especially of infants before and after birth. The Prime Minister acknowledged this gruesome trade and called it painful. He reminded her that it also included embryos. He said the problem was not only Ukrainian sellers but also the wealthy international buyers
Continuing Mrs Sinnot stated "He asked for our help to end this form of human trafficking. Our help. Tomorrow's vote will determine whether we have any help to give. If we uphold the ban on commercialisation and if we exclude human embryos from the scope of this directive, then we will be able to do something about the wealthy buyers within the EU. If, however, we give the green light to commercialisation and destruction of embryos, not only will we be unable to help Ukraine with the buyers who keep the trade alive, but we will also cause the same painful situation in the EU, whereby those who are desperate for money are exploited for their body parts to benefit those who are rich enough to pay for them."
John PURVIS (PPE-DE, UK). stated that there are many European families with members suffering from serious diseases. There are also many medical researchers and therapists with the means to help those patients, and they are all waiting for this important piece of legislation. It will provide the common legislative framework which will make these innovative therapies more readily, more widely and more safely available. It is urgently required, it will be of great benefit and there is no reason for delaying its implementation by loading it with unnecessary ethical provisos and carve-outs that are impossible to agree with the Council.
"It has been firmly established that ethical restrictions are properly within the power of individual Member States if they wish to limit or forbid. Subsidiarity is the essential rule. But there is every reason to have a European standard for regulating the safe use of such therapies where they are used. So I ask my colleagues, and particularly my good friend the rapporteur, to let this vitally important piece of legislation proceed this week, so that agreement with the Council can be reached.
Many of our less fortunate fellow Europeans will thank us when this legislation comes into effect, but they will have great difficulty understanding if it is further delayed, emasculated or stopped altogether by this Parliament. This is one of those occasions when it is really important for us to exercise our powers carefully and responsibly and let this matter be finalised." Text, as adopted by EP, will shortly be available via this link
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Public health
MEPs say fresh boost needed for fight against AIDS
2007-04-30 - 10:58
Have the therapies that prolong the lives of AIDS patients (but still fail to cure them) led Europe to become complacent? Anyone might think so, as least so far as gay men are concerned. In recent years there has been an upturn in the number of infections in Europe. Half the new cases are people under 25 years old. MEPs firmly supported a new action plan proposed by the European Commission. In an own-initiative report by Georgs Andrejevs (ALDE, LV) adopted by the European Parliament, MEPs stress the need to renew efforts to combat AIDS, not only within the EU but in neighbouring countries, too.
Epidemic
Europe's figures are low compared with those of sub-Saharan Africa, where two-thirds of the world's 40 million people with the infection are to be found. However, the numbers in Europe are still worrying given our potential for prevention and information.
In 1998, western Europe diagnosed 42 new infections for every million inhabitants. In 2006 the proportion reached 74 - nearly double - or 26,000 new cases a year, in addition to the 700,000 already infected. However, the resurgence is even more spectacular in the neighbouring countries of eastern Europe and central Asia, where around 270,000 new cases were recorded in 2006 alone, of which 90% were in Russia and Ukraine.
Received ideas
According to a Eurobarometer survey in February 2006, 45% of EU citizens still believe that the disease can be caught by drinking from the glass of a person who has AIDS or is HIV-positive. This shows how much information work still needs to be done, both to spell out the real risk factors and to combat discrimination.
56% of new cases in the EU are heterosexuals, of whom three quarters are immigrants or migrants, often infected in countries where the disease is widespread. The number of new cases among intravenous drug users is declining, which seems to confirm the effectiveness of programmes to provide sterile syringes and needles. However, new cases are growing among men who have had sexual relations with other men.
The House asks Member States to consider giving a mandate, in accordance with Articles 300 and 308 of the EC Treaty, and limited in scope and time, to the Commission on behalf of the EU to negotiate with the pharmaceuticals industry an agreement aiming at lower prices for ARV drugs in the European Union. MEPs call on the Member States to respect the sexual and reproductive rights of people living with HIV/AIDS.
Multi-targeting information campaigns
MEPs call for information and prevention campaigns targeted at high-risk groups, notably migrants and immigrants, and sex workers and their clients. They want to see measures to promote condoms, drug substitution treatments, sterile needle and syringe supplies, voluntary screening, health programmes for women, simultaneous programmes to combat AIDS and tuberculosis (a third of HIV-positive patients die of tuberculosis) and programmes to fight homophobia and stigmatisation.
The report reiterates that every human being has a right of access to health care. It argues that palliative care should be expanded, along with social integration programmes for people infected with the virus, and that sex education should be available to all citizens. The House urges the Member States to ensure universal access to education and the provision of instruction in the preconditions for personal growth, including an ability to live together in society and ethical principles, the provision of life-skills and sex education, including responsibility and respect for one's partner and action to promote increased safety in schools for all children, to increase protection against violence, abuse, rape, the dangers of sexual promiscuity, unintended pregnancy and sexually transmitted infections including HIV, in the closest possible association with schools, other educational resources, the social services and services that combat juvenile delinquency.
The report strongly encourages the Commission and the Member States to subsidise and provide money for research and development of microbicides and female condoms which give women the power to protect themselves and a male partner from HIV/AIDS with or without the partner's agreement, since condoms continue to be the most well known and widely available protection against HIV/AIDS and sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), but require a male partner's agreement.
More funding for research
AIDS research gets too little funding, say MEPs, who want to see more development work done on microbicides and female condoms. They object to the high cost of new medicinal products, and say that small changes to them should not lead to a proportional prolongation of licences.
MEPs also advocates better access for NGOs to Community funding and better co-operation with civil society through a future European forum and national forums.
To help Europe's neighbouring countries, MEPs in the committee urge the use of all political and financial instruments available under the European Neighbourhood Policy, the Nordic Dimension and the TACIS programme (aid for the ex-USSR states) as well as the creation of public-private partnerships.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Economic and monetary affairs
Simpler, cheaper cross-border payments on the way
2007-04-30 - 10:58
MEPs adopted a legal framework designed to make cashless payments – such as card transactions, bank transfers and direct debits – simpler and cheaper, paving the way for the creation a single Euro payments area. A deal with the Council means the legislation will enter into force at this first reading stage, giving the banking industry the time it needs to meet its 2010 target. Although cash in the euro area has been the same since the euro notes and coins were introduced in 2002, non-cash payments still mostly rely on national systems, which can make cross-border payments slower and more expensive than national ones. Payment card systems are also national, which means consumers cannot always use their ordinary payments cards when they travel abroad. Individuals who regularly need to make payments in another country, because they have a holiday home or children studying abroad, for example, usually need to open a second bank account in that country. The same restrictions make cross-border business more expensive and complex for companies.
The European payments industry – banks, clearing organisations and others – have committed themselves, with the EU’s support, to changing all of this by 2010. The single European payment area project should mean that bank transfers, direct debits and similar payments will be made through a new European system, with domestic and cross-border transactions being made in the same way at the same speed. It will also mean payment card systems converging on a common standard, so that cards from all over Europe will be accepted all over Europe, without extra fees or technical barriers. Altogether, since the European and domestic systems will be the same, there should no longer be a need to have a second account in another country. There will be less fuss and lower costs for businesses and consumers alike, and, while there will be transitional costs for the banking sector, in the medium term they too should see lower running costs and be able to offer new products.
All this can only happen if the national laws governing payment systems are adjusted to provide a common framework, and that is what is proposed in the Payment Services Directive. The Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee, adopted its report on the issue, drawn up by Jean-Paul Gauzès (EPP-ED, FR), in September 2006. Parliament has delayed putting it to a plenary vote in the hope of reaching a first reading agreement with the Council and completing the legislative process quickly. It took until 27 March 2007 for the Member States to reach agreement in the Council on a text; one of the main points at issue had been the extent to which capital requirements and other supervisory instruments imposed on banks should also apply to non-bank payment institutions.
In the vote on Tuesday, 24 April, MEPs approved without further changes the compromise text worked out between the rapporteur and Council representatives. This already has the political support of the Council, so the legislative process will be completed at this first reading stage.
Among the points set out in the compromise text are:
the creation in European law of a new class of service provider, “payment institutions” which, essentially just process payments and do not take deposits in the way banks do;
capital requirements and registration conditions to be imposed on these payment institutions are set out, with the provision that Member States may waive most of these for smaller-scale service providers (those dealing with transactions worth less that 3 million euro per month);
payments should arrive at the latest the next working day, where these are made in euro, or are domestic payments made in the national currency of a Member State not in the euro area, or payments involving a single conversion between the euro and the national currency of a Member State not in the euro area;
charges, where these are levied, will normally be on a shared basis with the payer and payee each paying the charge levied by their own service provider, but it is made clear that charges can be set at zero, or that all charges could be levied on the payee (as is often the case with merchants accepting card payments).
It also sets out the rights and obligations of payment service providers and their customers.
The directive applies to all Member States (and indeed the EEA as well), not just the euro area.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Economic and monetary affairs
Governments urged to reduce public debt and deficits
2007-04-30 - 10:58
A report adopted by Parliament on 26 April backs a strict application of the Stability and Growth Pact and calls for renewed efforts by Member States to use the current upswing in the economy to prepare public finances for the challenges of the future, notably an ageing population. The annual own-initiative report on public finances in the Economic and Monetary Union, drawn up by Kurt Lauk (EPP-ED, DE) and adopted by 277 votes in favour to 142 against with 130 abstentions, welcomes the “considerable effort” made by many Member States to meet their Stability Pact obligations, but expresses concern at the implementation of the preventive arm of the pact, notably in those countries which have not balanced their public finances. It says a lenient application of the pact could “pose a serious threat to balanced public finances and employment opportunities.” Violations of the pact “could ultimately undermine the common monetary policy and add tot he pressure to increase interest rates.”
Looking further ahead, Parliament is “alarmed” by the “dramatic increase in age-related expenditure” projected by the Commission and is concerned that six Member States are considered to face a high risk to the long term stability of their public finances, ten a medium risk and only nine a low risk.
MEPs urge that reduction of public debate be accelerated during economic upturns, avoiding pro-cyclical measures, with structural and tax reforms to improve the economic performance of the Member States. They encourage governments to conduct the necessary reforms of the labour market and services sector, and to reduce the administrative burden on business. They call for structural reforms and additional measures permanently to improve the investment climate and boost investment.
Parliament advises the Council to ensure that Member States running an unsustainable public debt make new public debt unlawful or unconstitutional by 2015, thus drawing on the best practices of certain Member States and regions.
MEPs welcome the recent agreement of the Eurogroup jointly to discuss budgetary projection in order to determine in advance the appropriate fiscal strategy for the following year. They say a debate on these projections should take place in the European Parliament with representatives of national parliaments.
The report warns Member States to present statistics “of a high standard” to the Commission, and urges the Commission “to check vigorously the quality of statistics reported” to them, and take penalty measures where necessary to ensure improvements.
Finally, MEPs deplore the lack of policy coordination in the euro zone and draw attention to the divergence in fiscal policies of the zone’s Member States. They are concerned about the possible antagonistic effects of such a lack of cooperation. Text, as adopted by the EP, will shortly be available here
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Budgetary control
2005 discharge - Member States' responsibility in question
2007-04-30 - 10:58
MEPs have relaunched the idea of "national declarations." They are demanding that EU Member States take responsibility for co-managing Community funds, alongside the European Commission. Another idea from the 2005 discharge exercise is to look at the cost/benefit ratio of Community spending audits, which MEPs would like to see rationalised. The House granted discharge to all EU institutions and agencies for 2005 but made a number of points, including, most importantly, the fact that after 12 years, it still was not possible for the Court of Auditors to certify error-free accounts with a "positive declaration of assurance".
Many MEPs deplored the absence of Council during the debate which preceded the vote on the discharge. Among others, rapporteur Bart STAES (Greens/EFA, BE)and José Javier POMÉS RUIZ (EPP-ED, ES) wondered why Council decided to sit out the debate whereas Parliament has called for action from the national governments on the shared management of EU monies".
Many others MEPs also questioned the agencies' growing number and control issues, an element which is horizontally reflected in the reports by Edit HERCZOG (PES, HU).
A step towards a statement of assurance
These national declarations, according to the 2005 Commission discharge report by Salvador GARRIGA POLLEDO (EPP-ED, ES) may be multiple, so as to reflect the realities of the Member States' differing political systems. They would also help to "improve the quality of national supervisory and control systems", and hence the management of the Community budget. The report also observes that the declarations could facilitate a positive 'statement of assurance' (DAS)" being obtained from the Court of Auditors.
The Commission is therefore invited to submit to the Council a proposal for a national management declaration covering all Community funds under shared management, based on sub-declarations by the various national bodies responsible for the management of expenditure, with, if possible, the participation of national audit bodies.
National statements could clearly make a very useful contribution to the Community's auditing arrangements: in very large areas of Community budget management (CAP spending that is not subject to the IACS integrated administration and control system, structural funds, internal policies, external actions, SAPARD programme), the Court of Auditors has found that the effectiveness of supervisory and control systems should be improved.
These deficiencies make it impossible to obtain a positive statement of assurance as to the reliability of the accounts, notes the report. The Parliament welcomes the Commission's transparency initiative and expects it to lead to practical action and legislative initiatives which in turn result in transparency in the use and management of EU funds. The House expects Member States to support and complement this important initiative by ensuring that they in turn are fully transparent in their use of EU funds.
Seek out errors, but not at any price
MEPs want the issue of the "acceptable rate of error" clarified, after the cost of controls has been assessed. The European Parliament believes it crucial to take account of the cost benefit ratio between the resources dedicated to control activities and the results obtained by the controls.
The report notes, moreover, with great concern, the large number of errors picked up by the Court of Auditors in operations at the level of the final beneficiary.
The text approved by Parliament calls on the Commission to further improve its effective supervision of controls delegated to Member States. Should Member States' control systems still prove insufficient, the Commission should impose clear deadlines and apply sanctions where those deadlines are not met.
Reimburse!
The effective recovery rate can also be improved, says the draft report, but only via the Member States' enforcement agencies. It could be helped by revealing the identities of debtors who have been found guilty by the courts but are unwilling to make payment. Improved recovery would also boost the European institutions' credibility.
Likewise, the Commission should simplify the rules and apply existing legislation on suspension of payments where necessary and act when Member States fail to comply with basic requirements.
This idea of publication also appears in the area of transparency. Whereas the report welcomes the Commission's transparency initiative, it also calls on the Commission to do everything in its power to persuade Member States to grant the public a right of access to information - via a web site - on projects and the beneficiaries of various Community shared-management funds.
Lastly, the Commission is invited to publish information on the expert groups upon which it calls in its work, including the names and fields of expertise of the groups' members.
Parliament voted in favour of a proposal to grant a discharge to the Commission for 2005.
Discharge for the agencies
As regards the grant of a discharge to the sixteen executive agencies (rapporteur: Edit HERCZOG (PES, HU), the House recommends a series of cross-cutting observations in the resolutions accompanying its decisions, which are positive.
MEPs consider that the "ever growing number" of Community agencies and their activities do not seem to fit into an overall framework. Their role, in some cases, does not meet citizens' expectations. The European Commission is therefore invited to set out general guidelines for the creation of new agencies, whilst avoiding any duplication of activity between the agencies and the institutions.
Other institutions
The House granted discharges to all the other institutions, including Parliament. MEPs ask the Secretary-General to provide the relevant parliamentary committee with details of the costs of maintaining Parliament's three places of work in total and by location. MEPs also request the Secretary-General to provide the relevant parliamentary committee with an analysis of the environmental impact of the Parliament's three work places overall and by location, and of the related travel requirements.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Regional policy
Gearing regional policy to EU enlargement scenarios
2007-04-30 - 10:58
If EU regional policy funding is to keep pace with the demands of further EU enlargement, then the "individual responsibility" of Member States must be increased, EU aid must be better targeted so as to prevent waste, and more projects should be loan financed. Institutional, financial and political reform is also necessary, as part of a review of the EU financial framework. So says a report by Markus PIEPER (EPP-ED, DE), endorsed by Parliament on 24 April, with 473 votes in favour, 113 against and 104 abstentions.
The Pieper report assesses the likely consequences of the EU accession of Turkey, Croatia, the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and the Western Balkan states (Albania, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Montenegro and Serbia, including Kosovo).
Assess integration capacity
The report takes EU "integration capacity" to mean inter alia that it must be able, in the light of budgetary realities, to pursue the aim of social, economic and territorial cohesion. The EU should assess whether it is capable of integrating a given candidate country at the time of accession, it says.
Under current rules and conditions, Turkey's accession to the EU would increase the EU-27 area by 18.3% and its population by 14.7%, but reduce its per capita GDP by 10.5%, says the report. This would lend an entirely new scale to EU cohesion policy, which has never yet been applied to a country of such a size, with such a low level of economic development and such large regional disparities, it adds.
By contrast, Croatia's accession would increase the EU-27 area by 1.3% and its population by 0.9%, but would decrease its per capita GDP by only 0.6%. That of the other Western Balkan states would increase the EU-27 area by 4.8% and its population by 4%, but decrease its per capita GDP by 3.5%. For comparison, the EU accession of Romania and Bulgaria increased the EU-25 area eligible for EU structural funding by 9% and its population by 6%, but decreased its per capita GDP by 5%.
To enable accession candidates to get effective support for regional development, subject to their political progress prior to possible EU membership, the report urges the Commission to propose a "graduated model" for cohesion policy.
Compare instruments
To enable appropriate budgetary decisions, a comparison needs to be made of the effects on EU-27 development of the key funding instruments (European Regional Development Fund, European Social Fund, Cohesion Fund, European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development)
Finally, the report notes that the success of cohesion policy is linked to national economic policies and that in this connection the implementation of the National Action Plans for the Lisbon jobs and growth strategy has a particular influence on the success of cohesion policy.
Go European
Finally, the report urges the Commission to ensure that in future regional competitiveness and territorial co-operation programmes, funding is concentrated more closely on the "Europeanisation of the regional economy and on infrastructures of European importance".
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Environment
Sustainable use of natural resources
2007-04-30 - 10:58
MEPs adopted an own-initiative report on the sustainable use of natural resources. The House considers that the Commission's action platform for the study of the sustainable development strategy is too cautious and limited in scope and that, in its present form, it will not be able to persuade the public or political decision-makers to pursue the crucial goals for which it provides. The report calls on the Commission to establish goals and targets at political and at sectoral level for resource efficiency, and speed up the work on appropriate tools to maintain progress.
Targets
The European Parliament considers that the Commission should take Parliament, European public opinion and the environment seriously, and calls on the Commission to set binding targets and timetables for natural resources in the following way:
(a) to develop and implement best practices for every production chain,
(b) to achieve a quantitative greenhouse gas reduction of at least 30% by 2020 and of 80% by 2050 against 1990
levels.
Parliament considers that by 2030 the use of primary non-renewable resources in the EU must be reduced by a factor of 4, or the use of natural resources must be halved by 2030 while simultaneously increasing worldwide prosperity.
MEPs stress that the EU should adopt a clear target for the absolute reduction of resource use, given that the analysis in the Annex to the Commission’s Resources Strategy Communication indicates that we need to go beyond a 3% annual resource efficiency improvement, and that halving resource use in the period 2005-2030 requires almost 6% annual resource efficiency improvement.
The House proposes that the Commission perform within three years an assessment regarding the possibilities and the instruments for decoupling natural resource use from economic growth. The revised strategy should include these decoupling instruments. This approach should also be implemented in the revision of existing policies.
Sustainable development outside the EU
The report calls on the EU to ensure that all Community instruments and legislation contribute overall to the conservation of natural resources and the pursuit of sustainable development in the EU and countries outside the EU. MEPs say that the EU should encourage the establishment of resource strategies in non-EU countries, which should also be reflected in its funds and aid policy.
Subsidies
The report also considers that a reallocation of subsidies, for example more subsidies for small-scale hydroelectric power, as well as for wind power and solar energy, would promote the use of new technologies and improve Europe's competitive position in the world, as well as reducing dependence on fossil fuels imported from other parts of the world.
Keep the consumer informed
Finally, among other points, MEPs consider that the EU should do everything possible to provide consumers and producers with proper information on the sustainable use of natural resources, that environmental education, particularly concerning sustainable consumption, should form part of elementary education, and that consumers and producers should be involved in ideas concerning changes which could lead to sustainable use of natural resources. Text, as adopted by EP, will shortly be available via this link
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Environment
European strategy for flood risk management
2007-04-30 - 10:58
Rivers know no borders. Nor do floods. Because of this, in the wake of the disasters of 2002 and 2005 the EU Member States agreed, on a proposal from the Commission, to do more to share the management of flood risks. In a vote on 25 April, Parliament beefed up the proposed measures and approved an agreement reached with the Council. As a result the new directive is all but adopted. The Member States will have two years to apply it. The new directive, to be enacted in national law by mid-2009, provides for three stages:
- preliminary flood risk assessments to be completed by the end of 2011 (thanks to MEPs, this is a year earlier than originally planned);
- flood hazard maps and flood risk maps to be compiled by the end of 2013;
- flood risk management plans to be devised by the end of 2015.
Greater solidarity
The directive sets out the technical detail of these three stages on the basis of standard criteria which should considerably improve risk management at European level.
MEPs also strengthened the principle of solidarity between Member States, which will have to "refrain from taking measures or engaging in actions which significantly increase the risk of flooding in other Member States, unless these measures have been coordinated".
Climate change
This solidarity will be needed all the more since climate change is expected to lead to increased rainfall throughout central Europe over the next few decades. MEPs successfully pushed for the directive to refer to climate change, which will have to be taken into account in the preliminary assessments as well as in the report that the Commission is required to draw up in 2018 on the implementation of the directive.
Soil management
Natural floodplains, with their capacity for water retention, will also play an increasingly important role. MEPs therefore added to the text that floodplains must be maintained and/or restored where possible. They are also to be included in the preliminary assessments and the management plans.
More broadly, says Parliament, the Member States should take account of the potential impact of their land use policies on flood risks. In addition, they call for management plans to include measures to encourage land use practices which are sustainable and improve water retention.
Sources of pollution
The original draft directive focused chiefly on preventing risks to humans and avoiding economic damage. Parliament insisted that environmental damage also be taken into account and, as a result, flood risk maps will have to include data on major sources of pollution.
Comitology
The annex to the directive describes what flood risk management plans should consist of. Any subsequent changes to this annex will be carried out under the new rules governing comitology (the technical committees of national officials who advise the Commission) and will be subject to scrutiny by Parliament. MEPs also successfully demanded that the plans should lay down priorities among the measures to be taken.
Public participation and information
At first reading Parliament had already managed to tighten up the provisions on public participation and information. In particular, the preliminary assessments, the maps and the management plans will have to be accessible to the public, which should also be encouraged to take part in the compilation and updating of management plans.
Also at Parliament's instigation, the directive will not only cover river floods but also sea flooding of coastal zones. However, in the negotiations for an agreement, Parliament dropped its demand for flooding from sewers to be included in the directive. Text, as adopted by EP, will shortly be available via this link
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Environment
MEPs vote to set up a new temporary committee on climate change
2007-04-30 - 10:58
MEPs voted in favour of setting up a new temporary committee on climate change on a proposal from the Conference of Presidents. The committee will have 60 members and its mandate will be one year. MEPs decided to set up the temporary committee on climate change, invested with the following powers: (a) to formulate proposals on the European Union’s future integrated policy on climate change and to coordinate the European Parliament’s position with a view to negotiating the international framework for climate policy after 2012;
(b) to analyse and evaluate the state of climate change and propose appropriate measures, at all levels, accompanied by an assessment of both their financial impact and the cost of inaction;
(c) to draw up as comprehensive an inventory as possible of recent advances and future prospects in combating climate change, in order to provide Parliament with the detailed analysis of these that it needs in order to assume its political responsibilities;
(d) to study the environmental, legal, economic, social, geopolitical, regional and public‑health impact of these recent advances and future prospects;
(e) to analyse and evaluate the application to date of relevant Community legislation;
(f) to this end, to make the necessary contacts and hold hearings with the parliaments and governments of the Member States and third countries, the European institutions and international organisations, as well as representatives of the scientific community, business and civil society, including the networks of local and regional authorities.
Parliament also decided that, while the powers of the European Parliament’s standing committees responsible for the adoption, follow-up and implementation of Community legislation on the subject shall remain unchanged, the temporary committee may make recommendations as to measures or initiatives to be taken.
One year mandate
The House decided that the term of office of the temporary committee shall be twelve months, beginning on 10 May 2007, at the end of which it shall present a report to Parliament containing, as appropriate, recommendations for actions or initiatives to be taken. Text, as adopted by EP, will shortly be available via this link
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Transport
Security measures in civil aviation: who should pay?
2007-04-30 - 10:58
Parliament adopted a second-reading report heavily amending the Council's common position on a new regulation laying down common rules on checks, searches, surveillance, prohibited items, security patrols and other aspects of airport and aircraft security. A key difference with the Council is who should pay for any extra security measures not required by the regulation. In the report, drawn by Paolo COSTA (ALDE, IT), Parliament insists on strict regulation of the use of ‘Sky Marshals’ and the carriage of weapons on board aircraft. Regarding implementing measures, such as the decision by the Commission to ban liquids on board, the EP wants those to expire after six months.
Although Parliament wants implementing measures to expire after six months, it says they may be maintained "but only after a thorough re-evaluation of the security risks and a thorough evaluation of costs and operational impact associated with those measures".
For the first time, European rules will cover security measures during flights, including in-flight security officers. ‘Sky marshals’, as they are commonly known, will have to be properly trained and Parliament insists that weapons “shall not be carried on board an aircraft, unless the required security conditions have been fulfilled, and authorisation has been given by the State granting the operating licence to the air carrier concerned” . It demands prior approval by the State of departure, by the State of arrival and, where applicable, by “any State which is over flown or where intermediate stops are made” .
Parliament also voted for the costs of security measures to be met by airline users and Member States, although if a Member State wants to impose even more stringent measures, it will have to cover the whole cost. "This is a reasonable approach, taking into account the protection of airline customers', the industry's and the Member States' interests", Mr Costa said. The report also stresses that security taxes and charges must be used “exclusively to meet airport or on board aircraft security costs”.
As Parliament differs with the Council over this key point, and given the numerous other amendments adopted, a conciliation procedure with Council will be needed.
Once adopted, the regulation would apply two years after its entry into force, except for the detailed implementing measures for common basic standards (methods of screening, access control and other security controls, methods of performing aircraft security checks and aircraft security searches or prohibited articles), which would apply immediately from the date of entry into force. Thus, subject to agreement in conciliation, these detailed measures could take effect from late 2007, with the whole regulation applying as of 2009. Text, as adopted by the EP, will shortly be available via this link
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Transport
Safety at sea: Parliament votes on latest maritime legislation
2007-04-30 - 10:58
Parliament backed measures put forward by the European Commission to protect Europe against maritime accidents and pollution. This "third maritime safety package" seeks to promote healthy competition between shipping operators who comply with international rules on safety and compensation. Maritime safety has long been a priority of Parliament. In the wake of the Erika and Prestige oil-spill accidents, the EU passed new legislation on maritime safety but further measures are needed to prevent accidents and pollution and to deal with the aftermath of accidents.
The third package consists of seven reports. Two of these (on the obligations of flag states and civil liability of shipowners) were adopted by Parliament in March. The other five (on port state control, a traffic monitoring system, accident investigations, passenger protection insurance and ship inspection bodies) were adopted today in Strasbourg.
1) Safety inspections: port state control
This draft directive seeks to improve the standard of safety inspections of ships in European ports by recasting and simplifying existing EU law.
In a report by Dominique VLASTO (EPP-ED, FR) Parliament voted to tighten up the inspection regime, the criteria for selecting ships for inspection and the parameters for calculating a ship's risk profile. A database showing the risk of profiles of ships and indicating all ships due for inspection should be devised by the European Commission, say MEPs.
The House also expanded inspection regime should apply to vessels with a high risk profile and to passenger ships and oil and chemical tankers more than 12 years old. Pilots should have a bigger role in detecting any shortcomings on board. If port authorities learn that a ship has anomalies or apparent defects, they should inform the competent authority of the port state concerned.
2) Traffic monitoring system: places of refuge for ships in distress
Establishing a clear and precise legal framework on places of refuge for ships in distress is the main aim of this Commission proposal. On behalf of the Parliament, rapporteur Dirk STERCKX (ALDE, BE) says that there should be "no margin of discretion" for Member States in applying this decision on places of refuge and that an independent authority should be set up to designate ports of refuge for vessels in distress. The Commission proposed that fishing vessels over 15 metres long should be equipped with the Automatic Identification System but the House believes this should be required only of ships over 24 metres long.
3) Accident investigations
The inability of some flag States to carry out technical investigations immediately after maritime disasters and incidents is a major concern in shipping circles. This directive would lay down guidelines for such investigations.
The goal of the investigations is not to determine civil or criminal liability but to establish the circumstances and to research the causes of maritime accidents in order to learn lessons and improve maritime safety.
According to rapporteur Jaromír KOHLÍČEK (GUE/NGL, CZ), the independence of permanent investigation bodies is a key point. The European Parliament therefore adopted amendments to boost their independence and distinguish more clearly between technical and criminal investigations. It also highlighted the importance of an efficient early warning system and cooperation between Member States. An amendment was also adopted against the criminalisation of captain and crew of a ship after a major incident.
4) Accident insurance
The draft directive on the "liability of carriers of passengers by sea and inland waterways in the event of accidents" will create an EU-wide level playing field for civil liability of shipowners regarding damage to passengers and their belongings (e.g. luggage and vehicles).
The European Parliament, in a report by Paolo COSTA (ALDE, IT), backs the draft directive, which would incorporate into EU law the 2002 Protocol to the Athens Convention, thereby introducing compulsory insurance to cover passengers in the event of shipping accidents and raising the compensation limits. It also includes a right for an advance payment in the event of death or injury of a passenger. Against the wishes of the rapporteur the EPP-ED and IND/DEM groups tabled amendments to exclude the inland waterway sector and domestic traffic from the scope of this legislation. These amendments were adopted with a small majority.
5) Ship inspection bodies
This proposal aims to improve the quality of work of the "classification societies" (now known as "recognised organisations"), the private bodies which can be authorised by EU Member States to carry out inspection, checking and certification tasks relating to ships flying their flag.
Rapporteur Luis DE GRANDES PASCUAL (EPP-ED, ES) and the Parliament back the Commission's plans, which include the creation of an independent assessment committee to certify the quality system of the recognised organisations.
Previous EU maritime safety legislation
Under the previous two maritime safety packages (known as Erika I and Erika II), the European Union adopted a range of legislation on maritime security and safety, including inspections of ships in port and a ban on using single-hull vessels to transport oil, as well as the creation of the European Maritime Safety Agency EMSA.
What happens next?
At the debate, German Parliamentary of State Katrin ROTH was confident that important parts of the third maritime package could be concluded under the German Presidency, also before July 2007. But given the controversy of some reports, many MEPs think that this co-decision procedure will be continued under the Portuguese presidency. Text, as adopted by EP, will shortly be available via this link
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Enlargement
Croatia: good progress towards accession and some issues remain
2007-04-30 - 10:58
Croatia, a candidate country for accession to the EU since October 2005, has made major progress in its preparations, according to the EP. However, the House believes it must make further efforts in areas such as cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), reform of the judiciary and the transition to a market economy. A revised institutional framework should enter into force by the end of 2008 in order to accommodate Croatia in the EU, say MEPs. In an own-initiative report adopted with an overwhelming majority and drafted by Hannes Swoboda (PES, AT), the House "congratulates the Croatian authorities for the rapid progress made so far in accession negotiations". MEPs stress that key pieces of legislation in crucial areas such as public administration, the administration of courts and anti-corruption policy have already been adopted.
This central European country of less than 4.5 million inhabitants is thus on course to become a member of the European Union once the accession criteria are met and negotiations are completed, thus validating the argument that the future of the western Balkans lies within the EU. MEPs nevertheless stress that the current institutional framework (Nice Treaty) does not provide an adequate basis for further enlargements. This issue should be solved by the end of 2008 at the latest, according to MEPs.
Environmental standards and market economy
Nevertheless, the EP exhorts Croatia to make further efforts on several fronts. It must first strengthen its capacity to implement Community environmental legislation. The application of the Aarhus Convention on public access to environmental information and the ratification of the Kyoto Protocol on the reduction of greenhouse gases are among the top priorities.
The House urges the Croatian authorities to take into due consideration the concerns raised by local communities and public opinion with regard to controversial industrial projects which might pose a threat to the environment or public health, and calls on them to set up a clear and transparent procedure whereby all stakeholders, and not merely investors, can be informed and consulted.
MEPs also point out that having "an open, competitive market economy is a fundamental requirement for EU membership". Croatia must thus comply with the agreed targets for the sale of "minority and majority state-owned interests in companies" and for the reduction of state subsidies in the shipbuilding and steel industries in particular. The committee appeals to Croatia to authorise the acquisition of real estate by EU nationals, with the exception of the exempted areas.
Cooperation with ICTY and judicial reform
In addition, the committee calls on Croatia to cooperate fully with the ICTY. Croatia's institutions and political parties should counteract the public's perception of the ICTY, say MEPs, who deplore the Government's offer to support the defence costs of Croatian army generals.
MEPs also attack the "persisting bias amongst some judicial staff against non-Croatian nationals" and the insufficient protection of witnesses against intimidation. They point out that thorough reform of the judicial system and police are requirements for Croatia's accession. The reform of procedures for appointing judicial staff is expected to provide "sufficient guarantees for a professional and independent judiciary", while a Working Group has recently introduced an obligation for judges to declare any interests and the possibility of transferring them to overburdened courts.
Border with Slovenia, integration of minorities
MEPs urge both the Croatian and the Slovenian governments to exploit all the opportunities available in order to reach an agreement on all their pending border issues, taking into account the agreements reached so far and the conclusions of the European Council of 17-18 June 2004 (which notes Croatia's decision not to apply to the EU Member States any aspect of the Protected Ecological and Fisheries zone), and invite them to abstain from any unilateral action which might undermine such an agreement .
MEPs also propose to "recourse to the good offices of a third party if solutions cannot be found bilaterally to outstanding border disputes".
Another point raised by the EP is the integration of minorities into everyday life and the idea of including in pension calculations the years worked by people who lived in the Republika Srpska Krajina during the conflict.
Lastly, the House voices concern at the flagging public support for EU accession in Croatia and welcomes the fact that the Government and the opposition are joining forces in explaining to the public the economic, political, social and cultural benefits resulting from the accession process. Text, as adopted by EP, will shortly be available via this link
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Research and innovation
Intellectual property: pirates and counterfeiters to feel the full weight of criminal law
2007-04-30 - 10:58
The first EU directive aiming at harmonising national criminal law was backed by the European Parliament when it adopted on 25 April a first-reading report on legislation imposing criminal sanctions for the infringement of intellectual property rights. If ultimately adopted, the directive will oblige all Member States to regard any intentional infringement of an intellectual property right carried out on a commercial scale as a criminal offence. The deterrent measures being proposed range from fines to imprisonment, according to the gravity of the crime.
Commercial operators, not private users, targeted
Parliament, in approving today the report by Nicola Zingaretti (PES, IT) by 374 votes to 278 with 17 abstentions, has backed the overall aim of the Commission proposal, while amending some of its provisions. The EP excluded patent rights from the scope of the directive, and decided that criminal sanctions should apply only to infringements deliberately carried out to obtain a commercial advantage. Piracy committed by private users for personal, non-profit purposes is therefore also excluded.
The proposed directive aims to ensure that national judicial authorities will always be able to impose sufficiently serious penalties by setting out minimum levels for the upper limits on punishments imposed by national law.
At present maximum fines for violating intellectual property rights range from £586 in Greece to £67,000 in Holland. Maximum prison sentences range from three months in Greece to 10 years in Britain.
Under the new directive, in cases of serious crimes committed by a criminal organisation, the maximum penalty must be at least €300,000 and/or four years' imprisonment. The same applies where the offences carry a health or safety risk. For less serious infringements, the maximum penalties should include criminal and civil fines of at least €100,000. Aiding or abetting and inciting anyone to infringe intellectual property rights will also be treated as a criminal offence. In some cases, remedies can include the seizure and destruction of counterfeited goods.
Crime pays - for the moment
Counterfeiting is estimated by industry sources to reduce EU GDP by 8 billion euros annually, with individual companies losing a total of between 45 and 65 billion euros. Annual losses in revenue are estimated at 7.2 % for perfume and toiletries, 5.8 % for pharmaceuticals and 11.5 % for the toy and sports sector. 40% of software in use worldwide is believed to be pirated, and 37% in the EU (= a loss of revenue of 2.9 billion euros annually). Worldwide, 36% of all music CDs and cassettes sold are pirated (total sales of pirated goods is 5 billion units).
First use of criminal law to enforce Community legislation
This is the first directive using criminal law (with the exception of cross-border damage to the environment, where the right to impose criminal sanctions is laid down in the treaties).
The proposed directive reflects the Commission's interpretation of the European Court of Justice's ruling of 13 September 2005. According to the Commission, this judgment allows for measures under the Community method to insist on criminal sanctions where these are required for the effective implementation of Community law. This view is contested by those who believe criminal law is not a Community competence, but an amendment rejecting the entire proposal on this basis, tabled by the GUE/NGL and Greens/EFA groups, was defeated by 452 votes to 197 with 11 abstentions.
The text adopted by the Parliament will now be sent to the Council for discussion by national governments. Text, as adopted by EP, will shortly be available via this link
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
MEPs: immunity and statute
Statement by President Pöttering on the situation of Bronislaw Geremek
2007-04-30 - 10:58
On Thursday, 26 April, prior to the voting session, Parliament's President Hans-Gert Pöttering made an announcement on the situation of Polish MEP Bronislaw Geremek (ALDE). Mr Pöttering told the House that the EP's Conference of Presidents had approved, by a large majority although not unanimously, the press release issued by himself on this subject (see below). The Conference of Presidents had also "stated its sympathy and solidarity with our colleague Bronislaw Geremek". DISCUSSION OF MANDATE OF POLISH MEP BRONISLAW GEREMEK
Parliament discussed the situation of MEP Bronisław Geremek, who is facing a legal challenge to his mandate in Poland. Vice-President Pierre Moscovici (PES, FR), who was chairing the plenary at the time, told the session that Parliament had so far received no official communication on the issue from the Polish authorities.
The debate began when the leader of the ALDE group, Graham WATSON (ALDE, UK) made a point of order: "I rise because a member of my group, Mr Geremek, is to have his mandate as a Member of the European Parliament revoked by his own government with effect from 19 April. The powers under which the Polish Government is revoking Mr Geremek’s mandate are a ‘lustration’ or monitoring law adopted just a couple of months ago and currently under legal challenge in Poland’s constitutional court. This law requires all journalists, academics and elected MPs to sign a declaration stating that they have never collaborated with the Communist-era security services. Mr Geremek has signed such declarations in the past. His refusal to sign in this case is on moral rather than political grounds. He rightly objects to the witch-hunt which his government seeks."
After prolonged applause, Mr Watson continued, "I would ask three things, Mr President. I would ask first of all whether Mr Kaczyński, who met Mr Pöttering last week, raised this issue with him; secondly, whether it is right and indeed possible for a Member of this House to be stripped of their democratically-elected mandate in this way; and thirdly, whether you would give the House the assurance that this House will act to protect Mr Geremek’s right to exercise his democratically-elected mandate with all possible haste."
Other group leaders gave their views. For the Socialists, Martin SCHULZ (PES, DE) said: " I'd like to say to Mr Geremek we don't share all of your views but on this point you can count on unlimited solidarity from all of our group and I'm sure of Parliament when its a matter of resisting a government in the European Union prosecuting people who have stood up for democratic development and the freedom of Poland in their own country. It is a scandal that such a great country and the government of Poland is acting in this way.
I expect President of Parliament to tell the Kaczyński government tomorrow that we expect the Polish government to protect the Member of the European Parliament Mr Geremek and we shall measure everything Poland does in future by the way it deals with this colleague. I suggest Mr Pöttering say this tomorrow in these terms."
Co-President of the Greens/EFA group, Daniel COHN-BENDIT (Greens/EFA, DE) said: "Not only do we agree with Mr Geremek, over the years, we fought Stalinism with Mr Geremek. This Parliament has only one position to take: If a government uses Stalinist of fascist methods, we have a duty to protect our colleague without hesitation. We stand in solidarity. "
Francis WURTZ (GUE/NGL, FR) said: "It happens and it will still happen in the future that I disagree politically with Mr Geremek. Nevertheless, I want to express my deep respect for the political courage that he has shown, and I want to express in the name of my group, my total solidarity. "
Leader of the EPP-ED group Joseph DAUL (FR) said: "All of us here enjoy political immunity. This is a Parliament with rules by which we stand. To date there has been no application for waiver, we all, including the EPP, support Mr Geremek, we stand by the legal procedures for all members including Mr Geremek."
The Chairman of the Legal Affairs Committee, Giuseppe GARGANI (EPP-ED, IT) said: "I would like to assure colleagues that when this matter comes before the committee, we will show great sensitivity as regards the independence of Parliament and we shall examine the correspondence and documents very carefully and we shall be able to stand up for the independence of Parliament and the possibility for members to be defended in their independence and freedom."
Vice-President Pierre MOSCOVICI (PES, FR), in the chair for the voting session, said "We have not been notified of any Polish government decision which is indeed very questionable. The role of this Parliament is to protect the mandate of all its members. I imagine that the legal affairs committee will be looking at the matter and will do what is necessary to guarantee the independence of Parliament."
With many more Members seeking the floor, Mr Moscovici called on the two political group leaders who had not yet spoken, Brian Crowley of the UEN group and Bruno Gollnisch of the ITS group.
Brian CROWLEY (UEN, IE) said: "It was unfair of you not to call on my vice-President Mr Kaminski who indicated he wished to speak on the issue. Whether you agree or disagree with the point he would have made is irrelevant - others were given the right to speak and he should have had that right too. Some people in this house have a different interpretation to that by previous speakers. We should have been given an opportunity to have that point heard when the others were heard too."
For Bruno GOLLNISCH (ITS, FR) "The heart of the matter is to find out to what extent, possibly, Mr Geremek, was an accomplice to Stalinist activities in this abominable totalitarianism. I note that in the defence of Members of parliament, which is of no less importance to us than to you - your point of view is often based on variable geometry," referring to cases where he and other members of his group had faced legal action and " you referred to national sovereignty".
Pierre MOSCOVICI (PES, FR) concluded the discussion by saying: "The Conference of Presidents will discuss this matter tomorrow. I am sure there will be a broad majority in the European Parliament in support of Mr Geremek and I intend to express my own solidarity with him now." Statement by EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering on the mandate of Bronisław Geremek
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070425IPR05868 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Fundamental rights
Poland urged to drop new law banning 'homosexual propaganda' in schools
2007-04-30 - 10:58
Following a debate on homophobia in Europe, Parliament adopted a resolution on Thursday voicing concern at the recent announcement by the Polish Education Minister of a new draft law to outlaw 'homosexual propaganda' in schools. The resolution - adopted by 325 votes to 124, with 150 abstentions - calls for a fact-finding mission to be sent to Poland, for "worldwide de-criminalisation of homosexuality" and for the Commission to take Member States to court if they breach their EU obligations. Although Poland is not the only country in Europe where homophobia is an issue - MEPs also mention cases of discrimination in Italy and the United Kingdom - most of the resolution focuses on recent developments in Poland. MEPs not only express concern about statements by Minister Giertych regarding a new law providing for the dismissal, fining or imprisonment of school directors, teachers and pupils in cases of gay rights' activism, they also note the Polish government's stated wish to promote similar laws at European level and the fact that the Polish Ombudsman for Children announced that she is preparing a list of jobs for which homosexuals are unfit. On the positive side, MEPs welcome the fact that gay pride events are no longer systematically banned in Poland.
Among its demands, Parliament calls for the "worldwide de-criminalisation of homosexuality" and reiterates its call to all Member States to bring forward legislation outlawing discrimination against same-sex couples. It also wants the Commission to ensure that the "principle of mutual recognition" of national laws is applied in this field to ensure the free movement of gay couples without discrimination. The Commission is also asked to draft new EU directives to ensure that discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation in all areas is prohibited -- so far there is only a Community law on equal treatment at work. Lastly, the Commission is urged to take Member States to Court if they violate their obligations under EU law.
A fact-finding mission to Poland ?
In the resolution, MEPs urge the Polish authorities "to refrain from proposing or adopting a law as described by the Vice Prime Minister and Polish Minister of education". They also call on the authorities to "publicly condemn and take measures against declarations by public leaders inciting discrimination and hatred based on sexual orientation".
Lastly, Parliament requests the Conference of Presidents [the EP's political group leaders] to send a fact-finding mission to Poland, with a view to getting a clear picture of the situation and entering into dialogue with all parties concerned.
The European Parliament adopted a similar resolution on the increase in racist and homophobic violence in Europe "and notably in Poland" in June 2006. At that time MEPs mandated the European Monitoring Centre on Racism to conduct an inquiry into the emerging racist climate in Poland. Text, as adopted by Parliament, will be available shortly via this link
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-024-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Justice and home affairs
Rapid response teams to tackle illegal immigration
2007-04-30 - 10:58
Parliament on 26 April approved a regulation providing for special rapid response teams to be set up to give technical and operational assistance in the case of major influxes of illegal migrants over the external borders of any EU Member State. This report is the fruit of a first-reading agreement with Council and was adopted in plenary today by 526 votes 63 with 28 abstentions. Given the difficulties that some southern Member States face in coping with massive arrivals of illegal immigrants by sea, the Council in 2005 asked the European Commission to draft a regulation to set up "Rapid Border Intervention Teams". It stipulated that these teams should pool Member States financial means and human resources to act in emergencies at EU frontiers, but always under the co-ordination of the EU frontier management agency Frontex. The draft regulation would lay down common rules for the tasks that can be carried out by the "guest" border officers of other Member States within Frontex joint operations. In negotiations on the regulation, questions immediately arose over the funding of the teams and the need for all Member States to contribute financial and human resources.
Mandatory solidarity
The principle of "mandatory solidarity", under which all Member States must deploy specially-trained border guards at Frontex's request, was included in the agreement with the Council at the instigation of Parliament's rapporteur Gerard Deprez (ALDE, BE). Rapid intervention teams will be mobilised "for a limited period" and only if the country faces an "urgent and exceptional pressure". The decision as to whether an influx amounts to an "emergency" justifying a request to mobilise an intervention team will by taken by the Director of Frontex.
Member State contributions
According to the draft regulation, it will be up to the Frontex Management Board to decide by a three-quarters majority the profiles and the overall number of border guards to be made available by each Member State. EU countries will then be required to contribute border guards corresponding to the required profiles, unless they themselves face "an exceptional situation substantially affecting the discharge of national tasks".
The salaries of border guards deployed in rapid border intervention teams deployed in a host country will continue to be paid by the countries of origin, but the additional costs of operations (travel expenses, repatriation, insurance, living costs) will be borne by Frontex. To this end, Parliament has boosted the agency's budget by €10 million for 2007.
Tasks and powers
Team members may only perform tasks and exercise powers "under the instructions from and, as a general rule, in the presence of border guards of the host Member State", says the draft regulation. A provision inserted by MEPs in the compromise text stresses that the exercise of these powers needs to be proportionate to the objectives and "shall not discriminate against persons on the grounds of sex, racial or ethnic origin, religion or belief, disability, age or sexual orientation". Text, as adopted by the EP, will shortly be available here
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-025-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Industry
No more delays to GALILEO, say MEPs
2007-04-30 - 10:58
In a resolution on the global satellite navigation system GALILEO, Parliament expresses deep concern about the slowing down of negotiations for the franchise contract and voices fears about the increasing overall costs of this EU programme. Any further delays to the project should be kept to a minimum, say MEPs, and GALILEO should be fully operational by 2011. The deployment and operation of GALILEO, financed by both public and private funds, is supposed to be managed by means of a "concession" issued to a private consortium as part of a public-private partnership. Parliament is "deeply concerned by the fact that the concession negotiations have been at a standstill for several months". Such delays would have a significant impact on the overall cost of the project. MEPs "overwhelmingly" support the clear mandate given to Jacques Barrot, Vice-President of the European Commission responsible for the Galileo Programme, to submit to the June Council:
a credible roadmap for coming to contractual conclusions as soon as possible,
possible solutions for securing the long-term financial obligations,
a scenario for the earliest possible provision of EGNOS satellite navigation services, and
alternative scenarios for the realisation of the programme, especially for costs, risk and affordability.
The House also urges the Council to keep any further delays of this project to a minimum. Furthermore, the Commission should submit two progress reports to the Parliament: one by mid-July 2007 and another one "well before" the negotiations reach the point that a revised proposal for a modified legal base for financing the Galileo Programme being made available.
The GALILEO project will be the first major public-private partnership undertaken at EU level. The private franchisee will be responsible for deploying and operating the 30 GALILEO satellites. The European GNSS Supervisory Authority, a public body, is supposed to oversee the private consortium. To ensure better public governance, Parliament calls on the Commission to come forward with a proposal for "clear political responsibility and leadership on the part of the Commission".
The purpose of GALILEO
The EU decided to start its own global satellite navigation programme - GALILEO - in response to the US Global Positioning System (GPS). Its aim is to provide accurate positioning and timing services worldwide for civil applications, says the Commission in its Green Paper on Satellite Navigation Applications. Among its benefits, GALILEO is expected to assist train control systems, search-and-rescue operations in sea and air, emergency management after natural or human-made disasters and exploration of oil and gas resources. The Commission estimates that the market in products and services of global navigation satellite systems (GNSS) will reach €400 billion by 2025. In 2020 some 3 billion satellite navigation receivers - e.g. in cars, mobile phones, banking systems, and energy distribution networks - will be in service. Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here shortly
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-024-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-026-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Fisheries
Fisheries: more stable financial framework for Regional Advisory Councils
2007-04-30 - 10:58
Parliament approved on Thursday a proposal to put Regional Advisory Councils for fisheries on a sounder operational basis by improving their funding conditions. The EP stresses that the current proposal relates only to the financial aspects of RACs and that other aspects - in particular the number and composition of RACs - remain to be resolved during the forthcoming review. The Regional Advisory Councils (RACs) were established as a result of the reform of the Common Fisheries Policy, adopted in 2002. Council Decision 2004/585/EC defines a general framework for the functioning of the RACs to ensure a consistent and balanced approach amongst them. The possibility of granting Community financial aid to RACs is one of the aspects included in this Decision.
The purpose of the Commission proposal amending Decision 2004/585/EC is to put RACs on a sounder operational basis by improving the conditions under which they are funded. This is to be effected by mainstreaming them into the budget, meaning that the Community contribution no longer needs to be a degressive one and that they are subject to a single method of accounting, rather than two separate procedures as at present.
RACs: bodies pursuing an aim of European general interest
Defining RACs as "bodies pursuing an aim of European general interest" would provide them with a stable financial framework enhancing their capacity to operate effectively. Furthermore, experience has shown that the existing RACs have difficulties with the current decreasing financial framework which, according to the Commission, will seriously hinder their ability to meet their objectives in the near future. The new financial modalities will simplify the management of the grants by merging the current two grants into a single grant for each RAC.
Council Decision 2004/585/EC needs to be amended accordingly by declaring RACs as bodies pursuing an aim of European general interest, with the result that RACs would receive a fixed financial contribution from the Community budget.
RACs aim at involving stakeholders at an early stage in the decision-making process of the Common Fisheries Policy. Stakeholders' involvement is an essential pillar of the CFP reform and is key for its successful implementation.
Currently, four of the seven intended RACs are fully operational, with others likely to come on-stream in the near future. Moreover, an Inter-RAC Committee has been established to coordinate their activities. Recommendations and advice have been given to the Commission on more than 80 occasions and the RACs have also made a valuable contribution to the deliberations of the EP’s Fisheries Committee.
The proposal does not affect any other aspect of the RAC's composition and workings, which will form the subject of a review to be published later this year.
Parliament's report was drafted under the consultation procedure by Elspeth ATTWOOLL (ALDE, UK). Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here shortly
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-025-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-024-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-025-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-026-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-FULL DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-FULL DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-024-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-025-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420BRI05535 ITEM-026-EN DOC XML V0//EN
