Strasbourg Plenary round up: 23-26 April
Institutions
2007-04-30 - 09:30
Lifting the lid on the Parliament's April session
The April Plenary session of the European Parliament in Strasbourg featured a wide range of subjects. On Monday action on counterfeiting and advanced medicinal therapies was discussed whilst on Tuesday safety at sea, the spread of AIDS and the EU budget featured. Midweek the EU's relations with the US and India were in the spotlight and on Thursday MEPs debated the situation in Russia and Zimbabwe. The cases of Alan Johnston and Bronislaw Geremek were also discussed.
These are just some of the issues that MEPs dealt with during the week. To read more about the April session read the focus.
20070430FCS06126
Monday Plenary: counterfeiting, advanced therapies, financial payments
CDs are under threat from counterfeiting Fighting counterfeit goods, advanced medicinal therapies and ways of making cheaper and faster financial payments were all on the agenda on Monday in plenary. The session opened with EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering passing his condolences to Russia following the death of Boris Yeltsin. He also urged the Turkish government to protect religious minorities in the wake of three recent murders.
Action against counterfeiting Introducing a report on a proposed directive to introduce criminal sanctions against counterfeiters, the rapporteur Nicola Zingaretti for the PSE said that the volume of counterfeit goods had risen 1600% in a decade with the loss of 125,000 jobs. Counterfeiting affects everything from CDs and cosmetics to medicines (which can be fakes or of an inferior quality). Although people may think they are getting a "bargain" counterfeiting undermines legitimate business. It also reduces tax revenue threatening services and in the case of medicines undermines funding for research into new remedies. It also breeds organised crime - a situation not helped by the EU's current fragmented system of laws. According to the rapporteur "this directive is to fight organised crime". That is why patents and personal use are out of the scope. He stressed the risk linked to counterfeited medical products and the effects of piracy on EU economy. For the Greens/EFA in the debate David Hammerstein Mintz warned against the start of a "'witch hunt" whilst for the European People's Party Hans-Peter Mayer said "criminalisation is not aimed at citizens but at professional counterfeiters". A vote on the Enforcement of intellectual property rights will be held on Wednesday. Advanced therapy medicinal products This report by Slovak European People's Party member Miroslav Mikolášik aims to set a legal framework for genetic and cell therapy and tissue engineering. The stated purpose is to ensure common stands so that people are treated safely whilst also providing a legal framework that will boost innovation and research. This type of treatment could offer the hope of treatment for many diseases, although it raises many ethical issues - issues that a majority of MEPs believe should be settled at the national level. This will take into account the cultural differences between EU members. This is particularly reflected in excluding products derived from embryonic stem cells from the scope of regulation. Mr Mikolášik commented "as a rapporteur I had to respect diversity of 27 legislations". For the Greens/EFA Hiltrud Breyer hoped that the vote on this proposal "will prove to be a touchstone" in that in might constitute the "incorporation of European values in legislation." Ensuring the "non-commercial of the human body" is essential, and it is also important to "avoid genetic interventions" she told the house. The vote is on Wednesday with the rapporteur warning it would be "close". Cheaper and faster bank transfers? Cheaper and faster bank transfers could be on the way with a proposed directive on payment services in the EU's internal market. The purpose is to make international payments in euro as simple as domestic payments and improve consumer protection and encourage more open competition. MEPs welcomed the role of the Parliament in pushing for a balance between the market and the consumer. The report - by Jean-Paul Gauzès of the European People's Party - was adopted in a vote on Tuesday. Mikolášik report: more
Tuesday: safety at sea, AIDS, budget adopted
MEPs backed measures on maritime safety With thousands of miles of coastline and 350 million Europeans travelling by sea each year, unsafe ships can be a real danger. MEPs Tuesday debated five reports relating to safety at sea including more inspections and increased insurance. MEPs also voted to approve most of the EU's 2005 budget through the "discharge" procedure. Members backed a report on the need to fight the growing spread of AIDS in Europe over the next three years.
"A chain of maritime safety needed" The "Erika" and "Prestige" maritime disasters have in recent years highlighted the dangers to Europe's coast from old or rusting ships getting into distress. The recent sinking of a cruise liner in Greece demonstrates that safety at sea is of prime importance. The five reports backed by MEPs relate to the European Commission's proposals for a whole cycle of maritime safety. To prevent accidents a system of inspecting all ships was supported in a report by Dominique Vlasto of the European People's Party. She said this will eradicate the "rusting ships that pollute our seas". To deal with the effects of possible accident compulsory insurance for passengers is supported in a report by Paolo Costa of the Liberal ALDE Group. The danger of old, heavily laden ships cruising the seas looking for a European port to take them in when in distress is also anticipated. In the past some countries have been unwilling to let ships in distress approach their coastline for fear of an environmental catastrophe. In the debate MEPs supported a report by ALDE member Dirk Sterckx which advocates an independent authority to designate a place of refuge for a vessels in distress. MEPs also supported a report to improve "classification societies" (private organisations which carry out inspections and certification of ships (drafted by Luis De Grandes Pascual of the EPP) and support technical investigation into maritime disasters. Jaromir Kohlicek for the European United Left drafted the latter. Mr Pascual told his fellow members the measures were necessary as "we need a complete chain of maritime safety". All these reports will be put to the vote Wednesday. In March MEPs passed two other reports on maritime safety. Budget approval but many MEPs want more national oversight Members voted yesterday to give their approval for the €105 billion the EU spent in 2005. This procedure, known as the "budget discharge" is where Parliament approves the overall implementation of the budget. They also granted the discharge to all the EU institutions - including the Parliament - for the discharge of the budget in 2005. In the debate the rapporteur Salvador Garriga Polledo for the European People's Party told the House that 2005 had been a difficult year in that it was "the first full budgetary year in the enlarged Union" - a reflection of the 10 new countries that joined the EU the year before. However, the issue of oversight of how EU money is spent again proved to be a contentious point. Mr Polledo praised the UK and the Netherlands for their willingness to make annual statements about the management of EU funds but he criticised the majority of other countries. It was this point that led 161 MEPs from the ALDE and Green groups to vote against the discharge for the Council. ALDE member Jan Mulder led the charge "it was high time that Parliament shows that it does take the correct spending of taxpayer's money very seriously" he said. HIV/AIDS: treatment and prevention must be a "top priority" The number of people infected with the AIDS virus has almost doubled since 1998 with more than half of the new cases being in the heterosexual community. Against this background MEPs yesterday adopted a report on the prevention and treatment of the virus over the next three years. The man who drafted the report - Georgs Andrejevs of the ALDE group called upon EU governments “to put the fight against HIV/AIDS on top of the list of priorities". In a bid to collect date on the spread of the virus he urged all EU countries to report their data on HIV/AIDS to the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control. Mr Andrejevs also told the House that “access to anti-viral drugs (for treatment) differs from Member State to Member State". For the Socialist PES Group Michael Cashman was forthright on the issue of prevention: and “to those who say that condom use is not effective in preventing the transmission of the HIV virus, I say they do a great deal of damage and in fact they cost lives". He also called for cheaper more widespread treatment. Also in the debate Hungarian Socialist Zita Gurmai pointed out that women and children are increasingly affected. Maritime safety: background Interview: Budget Control Committee Herbert Bösch AIDS: more info
Wednesday: India's President and EU-US relations
Politics and poetry at the hemicycle, India's President Abdul Kalam Europe's relations with the outside world were in focus yesterday with the Indian President A.P.J. Abdul Kalam addressing the house and a debate on transatlantic relations ahead of the 30 April EU-US summit. In the debate leaders of the main political groups agreed on the need for closer trade relations, legal means to fight terrorism and a commitment to combating climate change. MEPs later gave Dr Kalam a standing ovation for a speech that mixed politics, spirituality and poetry.
Ahead of summit, MEPs debate relations in Washington There was agreement across the house on the importance of the transatlantic relationship although differences as to how to deal with the US. The stated purpose of the summit is to establish a "single transatlantic market place" by 2015. As well as trade relations MEPs also discussed visa restrictions, the need for a legal basis for the fight against terrorism and the importance of tackling climate change. Joseph Daul for the European People's Party told MEPs that "we owe a great deal to Americans...if we had not had the Marshall Plan we have not been where we are now." Mr Daul suggested that Parliament's President Pöttering should invite Nancy Pelosi - the new speaker of the US House of Representatives - to the European Parliament. For the Socialist PES group Jan Wiersma referred to the Democratic Party's control of Congress saying that "everyone can see that a new wind is blowing in Washington" - thus providing an opportunity for greater cooperation. Mr Wiersma also said that Paul Wolfowitz should resign his position at the World Bank over the recent controversy over the promotion of his partner. Graham Watson for the Liberal ALDE Group told MEPs that the current US Administration had damaged transatlantic relations through overt unilateralism. Brian Crowley for the Union of Europe for the Nations said the economic relations between American and Europe are "the most important that exist in the world". The debate yesterday morning had begun with the European Council and Commission making statements on the current state of play in EU-US relations. As well as bilateral issues the joint global threats that both sides face were noted as Iran's nuclear programme, Afghanistan and Kosovo. A resolution reflecting the debate was later passed by MEPs. India's President lauds EU and calls for "World Knowledge Platform" Parliament's President Hans-Gert Pöttering gave President Kalam a warm welcome underlining his commitment to technology, science and economic development. In a 40 minute speech interspersed with philosophical and spiritual references, Dr. Kalam told MEPs that India maintains a "unique unity amongst diversity" similar to the European Union. He described the Union as "an inspirational model and an example to emulate for every region in the world". MEPs applauded when Kalam recited a poem of his own composition, "Message from Mother Earth", part of which states that we should "Never to turn human knowledge, against ourselves or others". His essential message was the need for three "Indo-European missions" which include:
The creation and evolution of enlightened society based on education and religion. This "universal mind" will set in train economic and social changes according to Dr Kalam.
Energy independence in the face of growing shortages and environmental damage.
A "World Knowledge Platform" that would unite the latest technologies available to mankind put them to use in areas like water supply, healthcare and food production. As MEPs stood and applauded President Pöttering called it "one of the most extraordinary speeches we have ever listen to" and thanked the Indian President for emphasizing themes of "listening to each other, understanding, respecting and cooperating". Advanced therapies: MEPs support compromise on ethical issues MEPs voted to adopt a report which supports putting decisions over ethical issues involving gene therapy firmly in the hands of national governments. Based on a report by EPP member Miroslav Mikolášik the final draft represents a compromise between the Germany Presidency of the EU, the PES group, the Liberal ALDE bloc and the European United Left (GUE/NL). In the debate on Monday, some speakers, including Mr Mikolášik, had opposed the compromise. He argued in favour of a more generally restrictive approach therapies using embryonic stem cells. For the PES group Dagmar Roth-Behrendt said that the compromise would go a long way to meeting the expectations of "thousands of patients awaiting treatment based on advanced therapies". Also on Wednesday
a vote in favour of the establishment of a temporary committee on climate change
a call for the abolishment of death penalty
a debate and vote on the progress of Croatia
a debate on the crisis in Ukraine
human rights annual report
Maritime safety
Air security Indian President Focus on EU-India relations EU-US relations Temporary Committee on climate change
Thursday : Russia, Zimbabwe, BBC journalist and Geremek case
MEPs pledged support for BBC journalist Alan Johnston The last day of April's Plenary in Strasbourg was dedicated mainly to human rights. MEPs spoke out on the situation in Zimbabwe and on breaches of human rights, democracy and the rule of law in Russia. The kidnapping in Gaza of BBC journalist Alan Johnston also continued to preoccupy the house. Parliament also called once more for a universal moratorium of death penalty and adopted its 2006 annual report on Human Rights in the World.
Fundamental freedoms under threat in Russia MEPs held a lively debate about the violent repression of demonstrations in Russia with most of the speakers cited continuing breaches of human rights and fundamental freedoms in Russia. They condemned them and warned of the growing seriousness of the situation. Gabriele Stauner for the European People's Party (EPP) said Russia "is not acting as a responsible member of the Council of Europe". Others focused on the freedom of the press, evoking the case of murdered Russian journalist Anna Politovskaya. "Journalists are afraid" said Milan Horacek for the Greens while Panagiotis Beglitis for the Socialist PSE warned of a "new intolerance to the dissidents" and said that "even if Russia is a strategic partner of EU, in future negotiations on a new agreement we will have to take into account what is happening". Marcin Libicki for the Union of Europe for the Nations noted "Russia's lack of democratic tradition". Former Russian President Boris Yeltsin, who died this week, was also remembered by PSE member Józef Pinior. After the debate, MEPs approved a joint resolution on the subject. MEPs call for release of kidnapped BBC journalist A resolution calling for the immediate release of BBC correspondent Alan Johnston was unanimously passed by MEPs on Thursday. Mr Johnston has been missing since 12 March. In the debate Richard Howitt for the PSE group called the BBC a "symbol of integrity" in the media and expressed solidarity with the journalist's family. Many speakers in the debate shared the view of Swedish Green MEP Carl Schlyter who said the kidnap "goes against the interests of the Palestinian people. Mr Johnston was living in Gaza and he was telling the story of the Palestinian people to the world" he said. Liz Lynne for the Liberal ALDE called on the Palestinian authority to "work to put an end to the attacks the journalists are suffering". Resolution condemns situation in Zimbabwe Robert Mugabe's ambitions to run for election against as President of Zimbabwe were condemned in a resolution backed by five of the Parliament's five largest groups. It also deplores efforts to intimidate the political opposition. On developments in Zimbabwe Geoffrey Van Orden for the EPP told the house that "something positive has happened. The latest violence from Mugabe regime has awakened reactions in the neighbouring countries. Now they see Mugabe as a dictator and don't accept the explanation that the problems come from outside". Max van den Berg for the PSE said the "EU has rightly imposed sanctions to Zimbabwe. But we want these sanctions to be extended". The situation in Zimbabwe continues to deteriorate: life expectancy is now among the lowest in the world at 37 for men and 34 for women. Twenty per cent of adults are HIV positive and the World Food Programme estimates that over 4.5 million suffer from malnutrition. Announcement on Polish MEP Geremek Polish MEP and veteran of the Solidarity movement Bronislaw Geremek of the ALDE group could be facing a legal challenge to his mandate as an MEP after his refusal to sign a new Polish declaration stating that he has never collaborated with the Communist-era security services. A spokesman for the Polish government had indicated that Mr Geremek's mandate as one of Poland's 54 MEPs could as a result become null and void. Parliament's Hans-Gert Pöttering made a statement to MEPs on the issue in which he said that "The Polish Constitutional Court is currently examining the law on which the withdrawal of the mandate of Mr Geremek is based. A decision of the Court is expected during the next weeks". Mr Pöttering also said that the Conference of Presidents (where the leaders of the political groups meet) had "stated its sympathy and solidarity with our colleague Bronislaw Geremek". Also on Thursday
MEPs urged Polish authorities to refrain from proposing a law banning 'homosexual propaganda' in schools (resolution)
Parliament supported a regulation providing for special Rapid Border Intervention Teams to provide technical and operational assistance over the external borders of any EU member.
approved a proposal to allow "Regional Advisory Councils" for fisheries to be funded in a
EN
1
PHOTO
20070420PHT05547.jpg
EN
2
PHOTO
20070424PHT05781.jpg
EN
4
PHOTO
20070424PHT05824.jpg
EN
8
PHOTO
20070425PHT05866.jpg
EN
13
PHOTO
20070426PHT06112.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420IPR05538 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070417BKG05371 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420STO05493 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420IPR05675 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420IPR05688 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420FCS05498 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420IPR05683 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420IPR05687 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
