Development: Louis Michel quizzed about his "election leave"
Institutions
2007-05-03 - 15:50
Members of the EP Development Committee expressed differing views at the reasons given by Development and Humanitarian Aid Commissioner Louis Michel for taking unpaid leave in order to stand in the Belgian parliamentary elections on 10 June. For his part, Mr Michel told MEPs "there's a good chance I'll be back at the Commission" the day after the poll.
"A Commissioner remains or should remain a politician in order to serve the interests of the Union and its citizens. The European Commission is not an administrative body made up of the politically asexual", was Mr Michel's answer to MEPs who accused him of violating the Treaty, which states that Commissioners shall "be completely independent in the performance of their duties".
During his period of leave from 12 May to 10 June, Mr Michel will be replaced by Olli Rehn, who will thus simultaneously hold the portfolios for enlargement as well as development and humanitarian aid.
According to Mr Michel "the ability of a Commissioner to carry forward the European project is tied to his political stature - this is what makes him different from a director-general". And, he added, the opinion of the EP's legal service as requested by the Development Committee "testifies to my good faith in this matter".
"My first choice is the Commission until 2009", said Mr Michel in reply to Maria Martens (EPP-ED, NL) and Jan Zahradil (EPP-ED, CZ), who asked him to state his intentions following the elections. "There's a good chance I'll be back at the Commission, although we shouldn't anticipate the election results", he added. Louis Michel is last on the list of the Mouvement réformateur (MR, the party of French-speaking liberals).
Commissioners' code of conduct
The question of a reform of the Commissioners' code of conduct - which Commission President José Manuel Barroso invoked to authorise Mr Michel's leave - was raised by several MEPs.
Thierry Cornillet (ALDE, FR) felt "we could have spared ourselves a debate on Commissioners being committed politicians", although an amendment of the code of conduct should be considered later. Toomas Savi (ALDE, EE) also said he had "no personal objection" to Mr Michel's leave but that the code of conduct needed to be clarified.
Ana Gomes (PES, PT) was concerned at the precedent that might be created, thus hinting at the possibility that other Commissioners might do the same. "That would create a problem of governance at the Commission", she believed. The case of Anna Diamantopoulou, the Greek Commissioner for Employment and Social Affairs in the Prodi Commission, was "different, since she resigned following her election to the Greek parliament", added Ms Gomes.
The Commissioner's leave comes at a crucial point in negotiations on the economic partnership agreements with the 78 African, Caribbean and Pacific countries, which led Max Van den Berg (PES, NL) and Frijthof Schmidt (Greens/EFA, DE) to say "this leave implies that your priorities are different from ours".
2007-05-02 Committee on Development Chair Josep Borrell Fontelles PES ES
20070430IPR06173
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
