MEPs say fresh boost needed for fight against AIDS
Public health
2007-04-24 - 13:53
Have the therapies that prolong the lives of AIDS patients (but still fail to cure them) led Europe to become complacent? Anyone might think so, as least so far as gay men are concerned. In recent years there has been an upturn in the number of infections in Europe. Half the new cases are people under 25 years old. MEPs firmly support a new action plan proposed by the European Commission.
In an own-initiative report by Georgs Andrejevs (ALDE, LV) adopted by the European Parliament, MEPs stress the need to renew efforts to combat AIDS, not only within the EU but in neighbouring countries, too.
Epidemic
Europe's figures are low compared with those of sub-Saharan Africa, where two-thirds of the world's 40 million people with the infection are to be found. However, the numbers in Europe are still worrying given our potential for prevention and information.
In 1998, western Europe diagnosed 42 new infections for every million inhabitants. In 2006 the proportion reached 74 - nearly double - or 26,000 new cases a year, in addition to the 700,000 already infected. However, the resurgence is even more spectacular in the neighbouring countries of eastern Europe and central Asia, where around 270,000 new cases were recorded in 2006 alone, of which 90% were in Russia and Ukraine.
Received ideas
According to a Eurobarometer survey in February 2006, 45% of EU citizens still believe that the disease can be caught by drinking from the glass of a person who has AIDS or is HIV-positive. This shows how much information work still needs to be done, both to spell out the real risk factors and to combat discrimination.
56% of new cases in the EU are heterosexuals, of whom three quarters are immigrants or migrants, often infected in countries where the disease is widespread. The number of new cases among intravenous drug users is declining, which seems to confirm the effectiveness of programmes to provide sterile syringes and needles. However, new cases are growing among men who have had sexual relations with other men.
The House asks Member States to consider giving a mandate, in accordance with Articles 300 and 308 of the EC Treaty, and limited in scope and time, to the Commission on behalf of the EU to negotiate with the pharmaceuticals industry an agreement aiming at lower prices for ARV drugs in the European Union. MEPs call on the Member States to respect the sexual and reproductive rights of people living with HIV/AIDS.
Multi-targeting information campaigns
MEPs call for information and prevention campaigns targeted at high-risk groups, notably migrants and immigrants, and sex workers and their clients. They want to see measures to promote condoms, drug substitution treatments, sterile needle and syringe supplies, voluntary screening, health programmes for women, simultaneous programmes to combat AIDS and tuberculosis (a third of HIV-positive patients die of tuberculosis) and programmes to fight homophobia and stigmatisation.
The report reiterates that every human being has a right of access to health care. It argues that palliative care should be expanded, along with social integration programmes for people infected with the virus, and that sex education should be available to all citizens. The House urges the Member States to ensure universal access to education and the provision of instruction in the preconditions for personal growth, including an ability to live together in society and ethical principles, the provision of life-skills and sex education, including responsibility and respect for one's partner and action to promote increased safety in schools for all children, to increase protection against violence, abuse, rape, the dangers of sexual promiscuity, unintended pregnancy and sexually transmitted infections including HIV, in the closest possible association with schools, other educational resources, the social services and services that combat juvenile delinquency.
The report strongly encourages the Commission and the Member States to subsidise and provide money for research and development of microbicides and female condoms which give women the power to protect themselves and a male partner from HIV/AIDS with or without the partner's agreement, since condoms continue to be the most well known and widely available protection against HIV/AIDS and sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), but require a male partner's agreement.
More funding for research
AIDS research gets too little funding, say MEPs, who want to see more development work done on microbicides and female condoms. They object to the high cost of new medicinal products, and say that small changes to them should not lead to a proportional prolongation of licences.
MEPs also advocates better access for NGOs to Community funding and better co-operation with civil society through a future European forum and national forums.
To help Europe's neighbouring countries, MEPs in the committee urge the use of all political and financial instruments available under the European Neighbourhood Policy, the Nordic Dimension and the TACIS programme (aid for the ex-USSR states) as well as the creation of public-private partnerships.
20070420IPR05675 Combating HIV/AIDS within the European Union and in the neighbouring countries, 2006-2009 Adopted text will shortly be available
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5386492
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
