ECB’s Papademos: ‘firm and timely action’ warranted to ensure price stability
Economic and monetary affairs
2007-04-24 - 06:31
ECB Vice-President Lucas Papademos told MEPs on Monday that “firm and timely action is warranted to ensure price stability over the medium term.” Presenting the ECB’s annual report for 2006 to the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee, he made a call for wage moderation, and warned that some financial markets were “vulnerable to a reappraisal of risks.”
Reviewing the ECB’s economic and monetary policy analysis , he said “upside risks to price stability prevail over the medium to long term”, while ECB interest rates were moderate. The ECB would continue to “monitor very closely all developments.” Responding to MEPs questions, he said that the euro exchange rates were one factor among many the Bank considered in assessing inflation prospects, but it was not one to be seen in isolation.
Asked by Benoit Hamon (PES, FR) about his call for wage moderation , Mr Papademos said the Bank’s recommendation was that wage agreements should take account of productivity developments, competitiveness and the still high rates of unemployment, to ensure they supported more employment and growth – “otherwise the result would not be positive.”
Assessing vulnerabilities in financial markets , he said “low levels of long term yields and credit spreads in some markets make them vulnerable to a reappraisal of risks”, while “unabated growth in the volume and complexity of new financial instruments” combined with lightly regulated and highly leveraged financial institutions in the same markets could have unforeseen consequences if there were disruptive adjustments, as it was not always clear where the risk exposure ultimately lay. Finally, “rapid re-leveraging” in the euro corporate sector with the surge in leverage buy-outs “makes a turn in the credit cycle increasingly probable.”
Asked by Alexander Radwan (EPP-ED, DE) and Ieke van den Burg (PES, NL) about the ECB’s view on hedge funds and whether the Commission should take action, Mr Papademos said the ECB favoured an indirect approach with regulated banks assuring themselves of the financial soundness of the hedge funds they were lending money to. But to work best this would require “appropriate means and appropriate disclosures.”
Olle Schmidt (ALDE, SE) asked about the Bank’s two-pillar approach to interest rate policy and how it balanced economic analysis with monetary data. Mr Papademos said that aim was not to do two separate surveys then add them together with an arbitrary weighting to get a total. Rather, monetary analysis was used to “complement and cross-check” the results of the economic analysis. He stressed that “monetary developments bear a close relation to long term inflation trends.”
2007-04-23 Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs Chair Pervenche Berès PES FR
20070423IPR05716 Full text of Mr Papademos's opening statement ECB Annual Reports - complete documents
EN
1
LINK
http://www.ecb.eu/press/key/date/2007/html/sp070423.en.html
EN
2
LINK
http://www.ecb.eu/pub/annual/html/index.en.html
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
