Lebanon needs functioning institutions to guarantee democracy
External relations
2007-04-16 - 09:47
The European Parliament ad-hoc delegation visiting Lebanon from 13 to 15 April stated on Sunday at a press conference that all Lebanon's institutions need to function properly to underpin the democratic system. MEPs therefore expressed disappointment at the current paralysis of the Lebanese parliament and the constitutional council.
This delegation, made up of eight MEPs and led by Véronique De Keyser (PES, BE), first went to the south of Lebanon to see the damage caused by the recent war with Israel (July-August 2006) before holding talks with Prime Minister Fouad Siniora and other representatives of the country's political majority (Current for the Future, Lebanese Forces) and the opposition (Free Patriotic Movement and Hezbollah). The delegation also met representatives of Lebanese civil society and the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) to learn more about the social, economic and humanitarian situation in the country.
In southern Lebanon, the delegation took the opportunity, during a visit to the headquarters of UNIFIL in Naqoura, to express its gratitude for the mission being carried out by EU troops, who are making a major contribution to security in the region. During their talks with the various political representatives, the delegation voiced grave concern at Lebanon's political instability. MEPs were glad to hear from all parties that they ruled out any recourse to civil war, although there is no sign of a negotiated political settlement at the moment.
Call for a properly functioning parliament
MEPs stressed that it was important for the parliament and also the other political institutions of the country, such as the constitutional council, to function properly. They particularly criticised the fact that Lebanon's legislative body is currently paralysed and they impressed upon all those whom they met that only a functioning parliament can provide a foundation for parliamentary democracy. The delegation appealed for the plenary sessions of the parliament, which has not met for several months, to be resumed.
MEPs are concerned that the current political instability may create a risk of external interference in Lebanon's internal affairs. They also stressed that each day of paralysis only postpones the socio-economic reforms which are so urgently needed in Lebanon.
Backing for international tribunal
The delegation gave its firm backing for the establishment of an international tribunal on the assassination of former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri. It welcomed the fact that all political parties have supported the principle of establishing a tribunal and called on them to reach an agreement as soon as possible on this matter. An internal agreement on the tribunal could, believe MEPs, circumvent one of the most contentious issues in Lebanese politics. However, they point out that the tribunal alone cannot resolve all the country's political problems.
MEPs reassured their contacts about the support of Europe and the international community for reconstruction in Lebanon, the peace-keeping operations in the south and the UN investigation into the assassination of Mr Hariri. They nevertheless emphasised that no external force could resolve Lebanon's internal political difficulties, which the Lebanese themselves will have to settle. The delegation therefore appealed to all parties to move towards a re-launch of the dialogue for national unity as a means of overcoming their differences.
The European Parliament delegation consisted of the following Members: Véronique De Keyser, Chair, (PES, BE), Bastiaan Belder (IND/DEM, NL), David Hammerstein Mintz (Greens/EFA, ES), Jana Hybaskova (EPP-ED, CZ), Guntars Krasts (UEN, LV), Louisa Morgantini (EUL/NGL, IT), Emma Nicholson (ALDE, UK), Béatrice Patrie (PES, FR).
2007-04-12 Chair Véronique de Keyser PES BE
Ad-hoc delegation to Lebanon
20070410IPR05076
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
