MEPs from EP's Agriculture Committee visit Ireland
Agriculture
Ireland
2007-04-24 - 18:53
Mairéad McGuinness, Dr Edward O'Riordan and Neil Parish
A delegation of MEPs from the European Parliament's Agriculture Committee paid a three-day visit to Ireland to 'look at Irish agriculture and to listen to farmers' in the words of the Committee's Chairman, Neil PARISH (EPP-ED, UK). The delegation included Irish MEP Mairéad McGuinness (FG), together with MEPs from the Netherlands, Germany, Portugal and Poland.
Led by the Chairman of the European Parliament Agriculture Committee, Neil Parish, the delegation visited a dairy farm (Mark and Phyllis Cassidy), a cattle and poultry farm (Dermot Crinnion) and a farm owned by Colum McDonnell, Chairman of the International Farmers' Association's (IFA) Grain Committee. They also paid a visit to the European Food and Veterinary Office, Teagasc's Research Centre in Meath (Irish Agriculture and Food Development Authority), the Centre for Renewable Energy in Dundalk, Bord Bia (Food Board), the Irish Dairy Board and Newgrange (where a lunch was hosted by Glanbia (producers of dairy products). The delegation ended their trip by meeting senior Government officials in the Department of Agriculture and participating in a working lunch with representatives of the IFA and Macra na Feirme (group representing Irish farmers).
Speaking after the visit, Mr Parish commented that "we were particularly interested in the issue of cross-compliance and in the need to simplify procedures, working out whether complications are the cause of the European Union or of the Irish authorities. We put ourselves in the role of 'honest broker' for this visit."
Mairéad McGuinness commented that "farmers appreciate that checks and balances are a necessary part of the system to reassure European taxpayers that their contributions are being used to best effect. However, the excessive red tape in the current system is delivering for no one ..[..].. What we need is a system that would help farmers to comply rather than the current one that seeks to catch them out.”
2007-04-11
20070419IPR05476 Committee of Agriculture and Rural Development European Parliament Office in Ireland
EN
1
PHOTO
20070425PHT05844.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/committees/agri_home_en.htm
EN
3
LINK
http://www.europarl.ie/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
