Croatia: good progress towards accession and some issues remain
Enlargement
2007-04-25 - 14:46
Croatia, a candidate country for accession to the EU since October 2005, has made major progress in its preparations, according to the EP. However, the House believes it must make further efforts in areas such as cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), reform of the judiciary and the transition to a market economy. A revised institutional framework should enter into force by the end of 2008 in order to accommodate Croatia in the EU, say MEPs.
In an own-initiative report adopted with an overwhelming majority and drafted by Hannes Swoboda (PES, AT), the House "congratulates the Croatian authorities for the rapid progress made so far in accession negotiations". MEPs stress that key pieces of legislation in crucial areas such as public administration, the administration of courts and anti-corruption policy have already been adopted.
This central European country of less than 4.5 million inhabitants is thus on course to become a member of the European Union once the accession criteria are met and negotiations are completed, thus validating the argument that the future of the western Balkans lies within the EU. MEPs nevertheless stress that the current institutional framework (Nice Treaty) does not provide an adequate basis for further enlargements. This issue should be solved by the end of 2008 at the latest, according to MEPs.
Environmental standards and market economy
Nevertheless, the EP exhorts Croatia to make further efforts on several fronts. It must first strengthen its capacity to implement Community environmental legislation. The application of the Aarhus Convention on public access to environmental information and the ratification of the Kyoto Protocol on the reduction of greenhouse gases are among the top priorities.
The House urges the Croatian authorities to take into due consideration the concerns raised by local communities and public opinion with regard to controversial industrial projects which might pose a threat to the environment or public health, and calls on them to set up a clear and transparent procedure whereby all stakeholders, and not merely investors, can be informed and consulted.
MEPs also point out that having "an open, competitive market economy is a fundamental requirement for EU membership". Croatia must thus comply with the agreed targets for the sale of "minority and majority state-owned interests in companies" and for the reduction of state subsidies in the shipbuilding and steel industries in particular. The committee appeals to Croatia to authorise the acquisition of real estate by EU nationals, with the exception of the exempted areas.
Cooperation with ICTY and judicial reform
In addition, the committee calls on Croatia to cooperate fully with the ICTY. Croatia's institutions and political parties should counteract the public's perception of the ICTY, say MEPs, who deplore the Government's offer to support the defence costs of Croatian army generals.
MEPs also attack the "persisting bias amongst some judicial staff against non-Croatian nationals" and the insufficient protection of witnesses against intimidation. They point out that thorough reform of the judicial system and police are requirements for Croatia's accession. The reform of procedures for appointing judicial staff is expected to provide "sufficient guarantees for a professional and independent judiciary", while a Working Group has recently introduced an obligation for judges to declare any interests and the possibility of transferring them to overburdened courts.
Border with Slovenia, integration of minorities
MEPs urge both the Croatian and the Slovenian governments to exploit all the opportunities available in order to reach an agreement on all their pending border issues, taking into account the agreements reached so far and the conclusions of the European Council of 17-18 June 2004 (which notes Croatia's decision not to apply to the EU Member States any aspect of the Protected Ecological and Fisheries zone), and invite them to abstain from any unilateral action which might undermine such an agreement .
MEPs also propose to "recourse to the good offices of a third party if solutions cannot be found bilaterally to outstanding border disputes".
Another point raised by the EP is the integration of minorities into everyday life and the idea of including in pension calculations the years worked by people who lived in the Republika Srpska Krajina during the conflict.
Lastly, the House voices concern at the flagging public support for EU accession in Croatia and welcomes the fact that the Government and the opposition are joining forces in explaining to the public the economic, political, social and cultural benefits resulting from the accession process.
20070420IPR05684 Croatia's 2006 progress report
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5420032
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
