The Week Ahead 23-29 April 2007
Institutions
2007-04-20 - 09:44
Plenary Session - Strasbourg
Republic of India. President Dr A.P.J. Abdul Kalam will address a formal sitting of Parliament. (Wednesday)
Advanced therapies . Parliament will take a first-reading vote on proposed EU rules for new therapies such as tissue engineering or gene therapy. (Debate Monday, vote Wednesday)
Enforcing intellectual property rights. A proposal that all Member States treat commercial-scale infringement of intellectual property rights as a criminal offence, with appropriate punishments, comes to first reading. (Debate Monday, vote Wednesday)
Transatlantic relations. Ahead of the 30 April EU-US summit, and further to their 18 April briefing of US Congressmen on CIA renditions, MEPs will debate transatlantic relations with Commission and Council and adopt a resolution. (debate and vote Wednesday)
Airline security. EU rules on security checks at airports, the use of ‘sky marshals’ and the ban on liquids in aircraft cabins come to second reading. (Debate Tuesday, vote Wednesday)
Maritime safety. Five draft directives, on port state control, maritime traffic monitoring, accident investigation, ship inspection bodies, and liability of passenger carriers for accidents at sea, will get their first reading. (Debate Tuesday, vote Wednesday)
Illegal immigration. MEPs will take a first-reading vote on the creation of border intervention teams, overseen by the Frontex border control agency to help deal with big influxes of illegal immigrants (Debate Wednesday, vote Thursday)
Human rights. Parliament's annual human rights report, which this year is especially critical of Russia and China, will be put to the vote. (debate Wednesday, vote Thursday). Russia will also be the subject of an urgent debate (Thursday).
Ukraine. MEPs will debate recent developments in Kiev with the Council and Commission. (debate Wednesday)
Homophobia in Europe. MEPs will debate this phenomenon with the Commission and the Council and adopt a resolution. (debate Wednesday, vote Thursday)
20070420IPR05482 The Agenda
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071700AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
