More effort needed to promote decent work for all
Employment policy
2007-05-23 - 13:55
MEPs gave strong backing to a report by the Employment and Social Affairs Committee which seeks to promote decent work for everyone, both inside and outside the EU. The report urges EU Member States and candidate countries to ratify and fully implement all relevant conventions of the International Labour Organisation (ILO) and calls for a decent work development programme and minimum wages.
The own-initiative report voices disappointment that most countries have not ratified the ILO Conventions on health and safety at work, maternity protection and migrant workers.
It argues that the implementation of ILO conventions should be part of the EU's neighbourhood and external policies and also calls for a decent work development programme funded by the EU in cooperation with the ILO.
In addition, the EU should consider setting up mechanisms to monitor the parallel evolution of trade and decent work at European and international level.
Trade preferences with countries "which seriously and systematically breach fundamental social rights" should be temporarily suspended, says the report. It also proposes that the ILO be authorised to submit expert reports to the World Trade Organisation (WTO) in cases where the violation of international conventions is disputed and where the ILO's decisions have to be taken into account. Moreover, compliance with international work standards should be part of the negotiations for the accession of new member states to the WTO.
To improve working conditions within the EU, MEPs call for broader access to lifelong learning, greater harmonisation of pension schemes and minimum wages "as a safety-net to prevent people from being exploited".
The report was drafted on behalf of the Employment Committee by Marie Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou (EPP-ED, EL).
20070516IPR06771 Promoting decent work for all Text, as adopted by the EP on 23 May, will shortly be available here
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5386772
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
