MEPs urge EU action on health services
Free movement of services
2007-05-08 - 17:22
The Internal Market Committee adopted on Tuesday a report on the consequences of excluding health services from the Services Directive, urging the Commission to propose "an appropriate instrument" to codify the case law of the Court of Justice, but stopping short of calling for separate legislation on health services. The own-initiative report, as amended, was backed by 20 votes in favour to 18 against with 2 abstentions.
Anticipating possible legislation on patients' mobility in the EU and reacting to a Commission consultation document on "Community action in the field of health care services" members of the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection voted on a series of recommendations on EU action in the health sector.
Bearing in mind the progressive increase in cross-border mobility of patients and health professionals, MEPs agreed that - with regard to access to health services - Member States should treat all EU residents on an equal basis, "regardless of whether they are private or public patients". That said, while patients should be free to choose health care in another country, "medical tourism should not be actively encouraged". Moreover, the Committee argued, "patient mobility cannot be allowed to grow unchecked without concurrent and clear rules governing liability for the provision of cross-border health services".
Noting how difficult it is to obtain clear and precise information on health care, the Committee called for the creation of "single points of contact" for patients, health professionals and healthcare institutions.
A place in the Services Directive for health?
Since "Treaty rules [...], as well as the jurisprudence of the ECJ, apply to health services, health service providers are fully entitled to establish and provide services in any Member State, following national and EU rules" says the report. In adopting a paragraph drafted by Toine Manders (ALDE, NL), members went one step further. The Commission, they suggested, should issue "a proposal to reintroduce health services into Directive 2006/123/EC" - i.e. the services directive.
In the same vein, the Committee turned down the rapporteur's call for a separate directive on health services, choosing instead to ask the Commission to propose "an appropriate instrument with a view, in particular, to codifying the [pertinent] case law of the ECJ".
It was because of the adoption of Mr Manders' amendment, according to Evelyne Gebhardt (PES, DE), that the rapporteur, Bernadette Vergnaud (PSE, FR), and the other Socialist MEPs voted against the final report. "We had a majority in the Parliament in favour of excluding health services from the services directive", said Ms Gebhardt, who was the rapporteur for the services directive itself. It now goes to a vote of the full Parliament at the 21-24 May plenary session in Strasbourg.
Procedure: Own-initiative report -- Plenary vote: May II, Strasbourg
2007-05-07 Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection Chair Arlene McCarthy PES UK
20070507IPR06335
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
