Small manufacturers and disabled users to benefit from new road vehicle standards
Transport
2007-05-10 - 12:58
At a second-reading vote on Vehicle Type Approval, Parliament approved, with amendments, new rules on the manufacturing standards of road vehicles. These will raise environmental and safety standards as well as making it easier for producers to sell their vehicles Europe-wide. Thanks to MEPs, the legislation will take more account of the needs of disabled car users.
European Community Vehicle Type Approval rules date back to the 1970s. The benefits include consistency of environmental and safety standards and a level playing field for companies wishing to sell across Europe, reducing potential barriers to trade.
Cars have been able to take advantage of a single European Type Approval legislation for a number of years; however the new legislation will introduce it for buses, coaches, trailers and trucks, where previously only national approval was available.
Overall this directive will have major benefits for vehicle safety, environmental performance and European competitiveness. It is a further important step in the completion of the internal market.
Higher safety standards
To obtain approval, manufacturers will have to comply with stricter technical requirements and some devices will become compulsory, including ABS (anti-blocking systems for brakes), new and more efficient rear mirrors, improved light-signalling, edge protection and anti-splashing devices for tyres.
Small manufacturers can produce more with simpler test procedures
The revised legislation will also benefit companies that produce cars at relatively low volumes - generally manufacturers of more specialist cars. They will now be able to produce 1000 cars per annum with simplified and less expensive test procedures; double the previous figure of 500. This will save small manufacturers from disproportionate costs and encourage newcomers to the market.
Special rules for wheelchair accessible vehicles
Under the new legislation, buses and coaches will have to provide easy access to persons with reduced mobility.
In amendments adopted today - which had been agreed in advance with the Commission and Council by Parliament's rapporteur, Malcolm HARBOUR (EPP-ED, UK) - Parliament voted to ensure that wheelchair accessible vehicles (WAVs) have their own category of safety testing specifications, thereby giving them clear rules and unlimited production numbers.
According to Mr Harbour, "This is a fantastic result for the disabled consumer and for the manufacturers of these vehicles. We have given a boost to this important industry whilst ensuring that the safety of these vehicles is in no way compromised".
MEPs also voted to bring the directive into line with the new rules on comitology, to ensure Parliament has a say in any technical details decided after the legislation is passed.
20070507IPR06412 Text, as adopted by the EP, will shortly be available here Car industry: harmonised approval of vehicles, trailers, systems (repeal., repl. direct. 70/156/EEC)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
2
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=235002
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
