Aid for trade should focus on Least Developed Countries say MEPs
External/international trade
2007-05-23 - 13:55
In a report adopted by 598 votes in favour to 33 against with 32 abstentions, drafted by David MARTIN (PES, UK), the EP says that Aid for Trade is needed to enable all developing countries, particularly least developed countries (LDCs) to better integrate into the multilateral trading system and to use trade more effectively in promoting the overarching objective of poverty eradication in the context of sustainable development.
According to the EP, the principles of the 2007 Joint European Strategy on EU's Aid for Trade (Aft) should be to prioritise LDCs and the most vulnerable developing countries. Aft should be expeditiously implemented regardless of the conclusion of the Doha Round. Country ownership is crucial : Aft must be recipient-driven and be designed and implemented as an integral part of developing countries' own economic and developmental strategies. Another issue underlined by the report is the timeliness and predictability of the delivery of funding. AfT should be delivered in time to address both short- and long-term priorities.
Financial resources to be allocated
The report recalls that the EU has committed to increasing its overall ODA to 0,56% of GDP by 2010, which corresponds to EUR 20 billion in additional aid (49). The EP calls on the Commission to explain in a specific work programme how it is going to implement its pledge to increase current and planned Community funding to support AfT from the current average of approximately EUR 850 million per year to EUR 1 billion per year 52).
David MARTIN (PES, UK, Labour), rapporteur said: "On the substance, Aid for Trade is a vital tool for linking developing countries to the global economy. However, I want to stress at the outset that it is not a substitute for the Doha Development Round, but a complement to it. It is clear that liberalising markets is not sufficient in itself to link developing countries into the global economy. You just have to look at the experience of the last 40 years: LDCs have seen their share of world trade almost halved from 1.9% to 1%, and this is despite tariff reductions following the Uruguay Round and other tariff reductions and recent efforts such as the European Everything but Arms scheme, which gives duty-free and quota-free access to developing countries. Therefore, liberalisation, which I would argue is important, clearly of itself has not been enough to engage the developing countries fully in the global economy.
I also do not argue – and I want to make this clear – that Aid for Trade is of itself a panacea. However, it is quite clear that there is now a growing consensus on the benefits that Aid for Trade might bring. The WTO ministerial meeting in Hong Kong in December 2005 set out an ambitious work programme for Aid for Trade and called for more assistance to help developing countries into the global economy. This followed Mr Barroso’s commitment at the G8 Summit in Gleneagles of GBP 1 billion of European Union money and GBP 1 billion of Member States’ money to assist in the Aid for Trade budget line."
MEPs recognise, however, that as the pledge is only to be in relation to trade related assistance, there is a danger that available finance may be pushed toward this narrower strand of AfT in order to fulfil this target, and may prevent AfT being genuinely demand-led where countries or regions prioritise trade related infrastructure and adjustment; calls on the Commission to address this concern in the joint strategy.
20070516IPR06763 The EU's aid for trade Text, as adopted by the EP on 23 May, will shortly be available here
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5386662
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
