Fruit and vegetables: aid tailored to farmers' needs without bigger EU budget
Agriculture
2007-05-08 - 13:56
Parliament's Agriculture Committee believes it is possible to boost the competitiveness of the fruit and vegetables sector by providing flexible forms of aid tailored to the various products and situations in the Member States - and without a significant increase in the EU budget. This was the message of the report by Mabel Salinas adopted on Tuesday by an overwhelming majority.
Falling consumption in the EU, rising imports and declining prices as a result of pressure from big distributors are the problems weighing on the European market in fruit and vegetables. The European Commission proposed in January to improve the competitiveness of this sector by giving producer bodies more influence, incorporating the various existing forms of aid into the single payment per hectare system (not linked to production volumes) introduced for other sectors in 2003, safeguarding the environment better and boosting consumption, especially among young people, while still remaining "budget neutral".
By adopting the consultation report by María Isabel Salinas Garcia (PES, ES) with a few amendments, the Agriculture Committee has given its go-ahead to the general thrust of the reform. However, it believes it is possible to provide more flexible aid, better tailored to producers' needs, especially in crisis periods, while meeting the challenge of remaining budget neutral.
Security fund to manage major crises
To enable producer organisations to manage major crises better (e.g. when prices fall), the Agriculture Committee puts forward once again the idea of a Security Fund, which was supported by the EP in an own-initiative report in May 2005. It argues that Member States should set up funds of this kind, to be financed two-thirds by the EU (with a possibility of using up to 0.5% of national reserves) and one-third by producer organisations (POs), which would fund measures for withdrawal from the market, green harvesting etc. These funds would also be open to producers who were not members of POs.
MEPs are also proposing to set up a body to monitor prices so as to anticipate crises better.
Strengthening producer organisations
To strengthen POs against the power of major distributors and to encourage more producers to join these bodies, the committee is asking for Community co-financing of operational funds to be increased from 50% to 60% in more cases (merging POs, integrated production, etc). It also recommends putting a ceiling on Community aid to these POs of 6% of the value of the production placed on the market.
According to MEPs, the POs should also be able, on a voluntary basis, to finance operations to promote the consumption of fruit and vegetables, e.g. through campaigns in schools.
Flexible support tailored to different producers
MEPs want more flexibility in the way aid is decoupled from production, with transitional periods to allow the sector time to adapt, especially the processed foods sector (tomatoes, citrus fruits, etc.).
The Agriculture Committee says it is important to find a solution suited to the new Member States, whose products receives less support and where POs are having difficulty developing in countries which have recently eliminated socialist cooperatives. It fears in particular that the single payment scheme may destabilise the red fruit sector in Poland, which accounts for 50% of Community output.
MEPs therefore call for the introduction of a specific aid per hectare for strawberries, raspberries, cherries and berries on the model of the existing one for nuts. This aid of €120.75 per hectare would apply to a maximum guaranteed area of 165,000ha and would cost the Community bduget €20 million per year.
More control over imports, better guarantees for consumers
MEPs also wish to tighten up controls over imports from non-EU countries. They are calling for a strengthening of the EU's ability to respond to crises caused by excessive competition from imports, by making it easier to trigger the special safeguard clause that enables additional import duties to be slapped on, while keeping the possibility of granting, where necessary, export refunds in the fruit and vegetables sector until a formal commitment to eliminate such refunds has been taken by the EU within the WTO.
At the same time they believe it is important to support the process designed to coordinate at Community level the negotiation of plant-health protocols with non-EU countries.
Lastly, the committee calls for stronger quality and labelling standards, in amendments proposing the introduction of indications of origin and suggesting that the European Commission look into the idea of introducing a European quality label.
The report was adopted by 37 votes to 2 with 2 abstentions, with some amendments.
Procedure: Consultation -- Plenary vote: 7 June, Brussels
20070507IPR06315 EP press release of 22/03/2007: How can the fruit and vegetable sector be made more competitive?
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070319IPR04293 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
