MEPs urge Denmark to act over 1968 nuclear air crash
Petitions
2007-05-10 - 13:53
Parliament voted by 544 votes to 29, with 40 abstentions, in favour of a resolution tabled by the Petitions Committee calling on Denmark to take belated action in relation to the alleged health consequences of the 1968 crash in Greenland of a US plane carrying nuclear bombs.
On 21 January 1968, a US B-52 bomber with several nuclear weapons on board crashed near the Thule Air Base in North-Western Greenland, releasing several kilos of weapons grade plutonium. The plutonium contaminated the immediate snow and ice at the crash site and was carried by high winds and water over an extensive area.
After clean-up operations - in which Danish workers volunteered to participate alongside US personnel - the US conducted regular medical monitoring of its air force staff. No similar monitoring was conducted by the Danish Government of the Danish civilian workers or the Greenlanders, many of whom continued to work at the Thule base and live in the area for several years thereafter.
Petition to the European Parliament
Parliament has taken up this issue as the result of a petition sent in by a Mr Jeffrey Carswell, who was involved in arranging for the removal of contaminated debris, was later diagnosed with cancerous conditions relating to the oesophagus and stomach and has had eight major operations. He argues that his health problems are linked to radiation contamination following the crash and that many Thule survivors developed similar radiogenic conditions.
Mr Carswell complains that the Danish authorities failed to evacuate the workers from the site at the time, to warn them or to inform them about the extensive radiation, or to make the necessary follow-up medical tests and examinations, as required by Council Directive 96/29/Euratom on safety standards relating to ionising radiation. He also says Denmark has refused to allow public access to the 1968 scientific records of the case.
Euratom Treaty does apply in this case, says Parliament
A key legal question is whether the Euratom Treaty applies to this case, as Denmark was not a member of Euratom in 1968. Both the European Commission and Denmark have consistently refused to recognise the applicability of this treaty. Parliament today backed the view of its Petitions Committee that the treaty does apply. In its resolution, Parliament says it "doubts that the Kingdom of Denmark has fully complied with its obligations under Directive 96/29/Euratom in relation to the Thule crash and its after-effects". It therefore calls on Denmark to initiate surveillance and intervention measures in relation to the after-effects of the crash and to make arrangements for the monitoring of exposure.
MEPs also call on the European Commission to bring forward a proposal addressing the public health and environmental implications of the use of nuclear energy for military purposes, given that existing EU law appears to be lacking in this area.
20070507IPR06415 Text, as adopted by the EP (10 May) will shortly be available here Environmental protection from radiation following the crash of a military aircraft in Greenland (Petition No 720/2002)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
2
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5303862
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
