May Strasbourg session 21-24 May
Institutions
2007-05-21 - 16:04
European Parliament, Strasbourg
May's plenary session was marked by the vote on roaming charges which could dramatically reduce the cost of making phone calls abroad. The session also saw debates on the future of the draft Constitutional Treaty with Italian Prime Minister Romano Prodi and Dutch PM Jan Peter Balkenende. MEPs also debated the situation in Palestine, Kashmir and Nigeria. International Trade and the LIFE+ environmental programme were also discussed. Read about each day in plenary in more detail below.
Opening day of Plenary: energy efficiency, violence, environmental protection
Increased energy efficiency through greater use of hydrogen, the Daphne programme against violence and environmental reports were on the agenda for the first day of the May plenary. MEPs want the EU to produce 25% of its energy from renewable sources by 2020. The Daphne programme deals with domestic violence against women, young people and children. The case of Madeline McCann, the missing British school girl, was also raised.
Hydrogen - post-fossil future backed by MEPs
A written declaration, signed by over 50% of MEPs on the "hydrogen economy" was adopted by the House. It calls for the European Union to pursue a post-fossil fuel, post-nuclear. The declaration calls for a 20% increase in energy efficiency by 2020, a 30% reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 2020 (compared with 1990 levels) and finally for the EU to produce 33% of electricity and 25% of overall energy from renewable energy sources by 2020.
Missing schoolgirl Madeleine McCann
Also at the beginning of the session, British Labour MEP Gary Titley raised the case of three year-old Madeleine McCann, missing for nearly three weeks since her disappearance during a family holiday in Portugal. Mr Titley said that though the case had been widely covered by the media in the UK and Portugal, publicity across the EU might be helpful in tracing the missing girl.
Daphne - support for tackling violence
MEPs backed the Commission's proposal for a programme to run over the next six years to fight violence. However, they rejected plans to widen the remit of Daphne so it would tackle drug abuse. Now in its 10th year Daphne provides funding for projects that tackle domestic violence, violence against women and children and support for victims of trafficking.
MEPs want Daphne to support a "European Year against violence against women". They also call for a help desk service to NGOs and other organisations to be continued, and for the establishment of a "think tank" to provide guidelines to the Commission on the social, cultural and political context for the selection of projects.
MEPs breathe LIFE+ into Environment policy
MEPs discussed a compromise agreement reached with ministers on funding for environmental projects over the next six years, which groups together the former LIFE programme, the "Forest Focus", urban development programmes and support for environmental NGO's.
Parliament's rapporteur French Green/EFA member Marie-Anne Isler Béguin said the €1.9 billion funding over the next six years "is only a drop in the ocean compared with the Union's annual budget". The report was formally adopted on Tuesday.
In other debates, Parliament discussed a report by French Liberal Anne Laperrouze on the quality of surface water (rivers, lakes and coastal waters), and by French Socialist Bernadette Vergnaud on the consequences of the exclusion of health services from the recently adopted Services Directive.
20070521FCS06814
Tuesday in Plenary: Romano Prodi, Palestine, Trade
All smiles for Italian PM Prodi prior to his address to MEPs Italy's Prime Minister Romano Prodi used his address to MEPs on Tuesday to set out his vision of how the EU should proceed with ratification of the Constitution. Speaking ahead of the June European Council he told MEPs that "from now to the 2009 elections, Europe's future is at stake". MEPs later debated the violence in the occupied Palestinian territories, Israel and Lebanon which has left scores dead. They condemned the bloodshed while pledging support for the Palestinian National Unity Government.
Mr Prodi was greeted by President Pöttering in Italian who said that "Italy is a country which has always been avant guard in the European integration."
Prodi's speech was forward looking with his main thrust underlined in the conclusion: "We cannot run the risk of becoming a footnote in the Western world." He strongly opposed any watering down of the draft constitutional treaty.
On Institutional reforms Mr Prodi said that the post of Minister of Foreign Affairs is vital to strengthening Europe's image, defending the European social model and the realization of the European space of freedom, security and justice. He called for clarity, asking whether, in former Commission President Jacques Delors' words, the EU really wished to proceed with "a masked face...fearing to show the real Europe to our citizens." No, he said, "Let's show this Europe with pride, not negative rhetoric."
On the possibility of a "multi-speed Europe" Mr Prodi said that "being European is the best way of being far sighted. Nobody should block other people's aspirations too much and for too long" and "I believe we do not necessarily have to proceed all together at the same speed."
Debate on Palestine: support for Unity Government
All sides of the House expressed grave concern at the events unfolding in the occupied Palestinian territories, which were recently visited by a delegation of MEPs.
Spanish MEP José Ignacio Salafranca of the European People's Party and European Democrats (EPP-ED) called the situation a "grave crisis", stating his view that the "Government of national unity is the Palestinians' main hope". He called for the EU to "shake off its lethargy and take a step in the right direction" and to support Solana's mission to Lebanon. What is needed, he said, is some "common sense" in a "barbaric" situation.
Italian Socialist Pasqualina stressed the urgent need to change EU policy - to restore financial assistance to Palestinian territories and to engage with Hamas ministers. She also criticised what she described as "disproportionate retaliation" by Israel.
For the Liberal ALDE Group Chris Davies focused his criticism on Israeli actions. He spoke of "10,000 Palestinian prisoners", and said: "We seem to ignore every Israeli illegality but expect the Palestinians to behave like saints. " He stressed, as did Caroline Lucas (Greens-EFA, UK) that Parliament's recent delegation had concluded that the Palestinian Unity Government had met the requirements of the international community.
Others, notably Czech member Jana Hybášková (EPP-ED), emphasised homemade Palestinian problems and criticised what she described as naivety in believing that peace could be brought to the region by dealing with known extremist organisations in Palestine. The aim should be a viable democratic Palestinian state, recognising Israel, she said.
For the Union for Europe of the Nations Group Ryszard Czarnecki stressed the need to eliminate hate-filled messages from educational textbooks.
Speaking for the Council and the German Presidency Günter Gloser, Minister of State for Europe said that the Palestinian National Unity Government had still not passed the "litmus test" of the Quartet (the US, Russia, the EU and the UN): Namely that it had not fully renounced violence.
He did however, point to some points of optimism namely that the EU has good contact with Palestinian Finance and Foreign Ministers and that in May the Arab League endorsed the 2002 Saudi peace offer. This envisages Israel returning to its 1967 borders in return for peace treaties, recognition and the return of Palestinian refugees.
Trade - call for gradual liberalisation with African, Caribbean and Pacific states
A report calling for "duty-free, quota-free market access" for incoming goods from Africa, the Caribbean and Pacific states to the European market was the demand of a report debated on Tuesday. With the EU negotiating new Economic Partnership Agreements with these states before 1 January 2008, the report calls for the "pacing, timing and scope of liberalisation to be gradual". The own initiative report drafted by British Conservative Robert Sturdy will be voted on Wednesday.
EP Live PM Prodi in full
Wednesday in Plenary: Roaming charges, Dutch PM, Nigerian elections
Dutch Prime Minister Jan Peter Balkenende in Strasbourg Midweek in Strasbourg saw MEPs adopt new legislation that should dramatically lower the cost of using mobile phones abroad. By agreeing to cap charges at 49 cents a minute MEPs believe European consumers will get a much cheaper deal. Also on Wednesday Dutch PM Jan Peter Balkenende outlined what he saw as the next steps in the Constitutional impasse. He called for a more "step by step" approach. MEPs also expressed concern over the "deeply flawed" Nigerian election.
Cheaper phone calls in sight
MEPs voted in favour of a proposal that will cap incoming phone calls at €0.49 a minute excluding VAT and €0.24 per minute for calls received while abroad. This will represent a substantial decrease in current practices where prices can be as high as €3 per minute. The levels agreed have to be finalised by EU ministers on 7 June and could be in effect for this summer.
Speaking in the debate Parliament's rapporteur Paul Rübig of the European People's Party and European Democrat Group said that "millions of customers are waiting for the first offer" from telecom companies. Speaking for the Council of Ministers, German State Secretary Joachim Wuermeling indicated his belief that the regulation could enter into force by the end of June.
Dutch PM Balkenende: new Treaty should not be called a Constitution
As Prime Minister of one of the countries that rejected the Constitutional Treaty in a referendum in May 2005, Jan Peter Balkenende was circumspect in his message to MEPs.
He lauded the success of the Union - in particular enlargement but said that the public needed time to get used to the new-look EU - "things have changed quickly...too quickly for some people’s tastes." he told MEPs. However, he reminded MEPs that in 2006 75% of Dutch people still supported EU membership.
On the use of the word "Constitution" he said that in the Netherlands it was associated with a nation state. According to the Dutch PM this meant that if people were asked whether they were in favour of a Constitution for the EU, it was like asking did they want it to assume the character of a state. "This is why the Netherlands is so insistent that the new Treaty not be called a Constitution" he said.
As well as changing the name Mr Balkenende also favours a "step by step" approach with small but significant changes like in previous EU Treaties. A greater role for national and the European Parliament and qualified majority voting - but with clear limits.
Nigeria's "flawed" election
MEPs debated the Presidential elections and state elections held in April in Nigeria. An EU Election Observation Mission (which includes several MEPs) concluded that the elections were deeply flawed due to poor organisation, lack of transparency, widespread procedural irregularities, and significant evidence of fraud.
They also found that polling stations opened very late or not at all, they lacked sufficient materials, and had an insufficient number of election officials, most of them without adequate training. In the aftermath of the election around 200 people were killed. The official results of elections have not been announced yet. The Rübig report: Info on Rübig Interview with Rübig Dutch PM in full Motion for resolution on Nigeria Preliminary findings of EU Election Observation Mission in Nigeria
Thursday Plenary: Kashmiri peace efforts welcome but action on human rights needed
Kashmir: the face of the present, but of the future? For nearly 6 decades the dispute over Kashmir has poisoned relations between India and Pakistan. With both states being nuclear powers the need for settlement is more necessary than ever. Thursday saw MEPs debate a report by Liberal ALDE member Baroness Nicholson, which welcomed and encouraged bilateral talks between India and Pakistan to find a solution to the Kashmir conflict. It also criticises Pakistan for a lack of progress on democracy and human rights. MEPs held up the EU as model of conflict resolution.
Kashmir: a problem the world cannot ignore
Baroness Nicholson told fellow MEPs that "the plight of the (13.4 million) Kashmiri people has been a concern to the international community for nearly 60 years". The two sides have fought three wars in which thousands have died and thousands more made homeless. An earthquake in 2005 brought further misery to the region. Kashmir is vast, it is more than three times the size of Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg combined.
Explaining the current state of affairs she said that "the EU strongly supports regional integration, trade liberalisation and economic cooperation. It has cooperation agreements with India, now the world's largest democracy, and Pakistan, who with the latter's Afghanistan border dispute and focuses on the war on terrorism, has become a key ally. Both nations are nuclear powers".
The latest truce and ceasefire were agreed in 2003 with a further round of peace talks in January this year.
"One of the oldest conflicts in the world"
Speaking in the debate British European People Party and European Democrat MEP Charles Tannock reminded MEPs that Kashmir was "one of the oldest conflicts in the world". He believed that the EU "can play a role as a genuine broker for peace" in the region. He welcomed the recently established bus service between Indian and Pakistan Kashmir as a sign of some hope for progress. For the Socialist PSE Group German MEP Jo Leinen used the example of France and German post war reconciliation as a model for India and Pakistan. He also noted an absence of democracy and human rights abuses in the area.
Several MEPs raised the possibility of Kashmir having the possibility of future self determination.
The report adopted by MEPs states that the resolution of the conflict "can best be achieved jointly by a constant engagement between the governments of India and Pakistan..."
Human rights questions
The report is clear in voicing its concern over human rights abuses on both sides of the border in Kashmir.
In Pakistan it voices concerns over fundamental freedoms and in particular the rights of women, children and minorities. It is also concerned at report of torture, mistreatment, discrimination and corruption in Pakistani controlled Kashmir.
In the part of Kashmir controlled by India the report calls on the Indian government to "put an end to all practices of extrajudicial killings, 'disappearances', torture and arbitrary detention in Jammu and Kashmir," and to establish an "independent commission of inquiry into serious violations of human rights by Indian security forces".
MEPs also want international organisations to have unrestricted access to all parts of Kashmir to assess the situation.
Democratic comparisons
The report notes that India is the world's largest secular democracy and has devolved democratic structures at all levels" while "Pakistan still lacks full implementation of democracy in [Azad Jammu & Kashmir, and has yet to take steps towards democracy in Gilgit and Baltistan.
Fight against terrorism
Since 9/11 Pakistan has been one of the West's key allies in the war on terror. The report calls on all EU members to intensify efforts to identify any of their citizens who may be travelling to Pakistan intent on joining terrorist networks. It welcomes steps by Pakistan and India to combat terrorism and share intelligence
EP press information EP draft report & resolution
EN
1
PHOTO
20070521PHT06841.jpg
EN
2
PHOTO
20070523PHT06993.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/eplive/public/freetext_page_direct/20061120FTX00012-2101/default_en.htm
EN
5
PHOTO
20070524PHT07067.jpg
EN
9
LINK
http://www.minaz.nl/english/news/index.html
EN
11
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/external_relations/human_rights/eu_election_ass_observ/nigeria/preliminary_statement_23_04_07.pdf
EN
12
PHOTO
20070524PHT07076.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516IPR06759 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A6-2007-0155 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070522IPR06989 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070521STO06820 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT MOTION B6-2007-0201 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516IPR06777 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A6-2007-0158 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
