Arab world reform: a European perspective
External relations
2007-05-10 - 12:58
Any outside attempt to impose reforms, without the partner countries having a sufficient stake in the processes and means employed to achieve them, “is bound to fail”. This, for the European Parliament, was the point of departure for an own-initiative report -- drafted by Michel ROCARD (PES, FR) - on “Reforms in the Arab world: what strategy should the European Union adopt?”, endorsed by a wide majority of MEPs.
As MEPs see it, the EU – in defining its position on Arab world reform – must take into account cultural, historical and political differences, respecting, at the same time, the will of the Arab people. Forcing them to copy European models, argues the report, “may prove to be counterproductive" change, in order to be legitimate, must be supported by the peoples concerned. Supporting the development of civil society and respect for fundamental rights, the report underlines, “must not be confused with the choice of regime nor with the procedures for choosing leaders”.
Given that the weakness of the reform effort in the Arab world results partially from disputes between various states, reads the report, “ the EU should make every effort to facilitate the political and economic integration of the Arab countries”. It should avoid, in doing so, “any feeling of superiority or the impression of giving lessons.”
Encouraging reform
Keeping in mind such provisos, the report goes on to urge the Commission “to give more encouragement in the Arab world to the movement for the reform of the rule of law by legal means” and to “political reform seeking to legalise the action of opposition movements on the basis of the existing institutions.” Citing the need to engage with reform movements at the regional level, the report also calls for Europe “to give visible political support to the actors in civil society, in associations and in religious life, and in particular to those political organisations which promote liberal democracy by non-violent means, excluding sectarian, fundamentalist and extremist nationalist forces but including where appropriate, secular actors, in particular secular Islamists". The EP draws a line on this issue, however, noting that efforts to engage with the Arab world “should not include persons, organisations' and states which condone terrorist activities and deny the State of Israel’s legal right to exist.” That said, the report "welcomes" the Saudi peace initiative approved in March summit of the Arab League and calls on the Council "to deal with this proposal at the next meeting of the Quartet".
“ The current path of political Islam does not appear to be providing appropriate answers to the problems of political reform”, the report notes elsewhere. MEPs hope that Arab countries can "guarantee the independence and separation of institutions and political power from the religious authorities".
In their report, MEPs also address questions of religion in the Arab world and the fight against terrorism. On the first of these, the report expresses its hope “for greater commitment on the part of Arab countries to religious freedom, or the right of individuals and communities to freely profess their beliefs and practise their faith.” On the second – while acknowledging that the fight against terrorism is an important aspect of the Euro-Arab relationship – the report notes that it is vital “that the fight against terrorism does not overshadow or hold back a host of other topics of common interest.”
In that vein, the Parliament calls on the EU to encourage exchanges of students, teachers, academics and researchers between European and Arab countries and to facilitate such exchanges “through an adapted and more flexible visa regime”.
20070507IPR06400 Text, as adopted by the EP, will shortly be available
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
