50 years of the EU: Nobel Prize winners celebrate at the European Parliament
European citizenship
2007-05-16 - 12:51
Nobel prize Laureates in Parliament's hemicycle
On 9 May - Europe Day - the European Parliament welcomed European winners of the Nobel Prize to a debate in Brussels. The event formed part of the celebrations to mark 50 years since the signing of the inaugural Rome Treaty. In this special commemorative focus to mark the occasion we begin with laureates' remarks to MEPs. It continues with interviews with some of the Nobel Laureates winners which you can read in our focus. See the sections below for the interviews.
The event was an opportunity to debate the past, present and future of the EU, focusing on scientific, intellectual and cultural achievements. The proceedings were opened by Parliament's President, Hans-Gert Pöttering, who briefly explained the laureates' importance to the EU project.
He said that the efforts of Betty Williams and Mairead Corrigan to promote peace in Northern Ireland highlighted the importance of reconciliation - a key to the history of post-war Europe. Amnesty International's tireless work for human dignity illustrated another "pillar of the European Union" as did Lech Walesa's struggle for human rights in Poland. The work of physicist Carlo Rubbia was important to the search for clean energy, while Rita Levi-Montalcini's medical research contributed to cancer research. Jack Steinberger and Martinus Veltmann were not only leading physicists but also, respectively, a committed disarmament campaigner and a big supporter of Esperanto. Paul Josef Crutzen's work on ozone depletion was especially topical. John Hume and David Trimble were lauded for their work on the Northern Ireland peace process. "What happened at Stormont yesterday is a testament to your achievements", said Mr Pöttering. Reinhard Selten's contribution to economics and Timothy Hunt's work in medical research were also outstanding examples of European research. In all cases, said President Pöttering, "your work is built on a vision of the future, and on our 50th anniversary we too should be looking to the future". He said, "we seek inspiration from the courage of the founding fathers" of the EU "but also from you, winners of the Nobel Prize, who have made such a tremendous contribution to Europe's achievements over the past 50 years. You should give us courage to work for a new breakthrough" on the constitution. Nobel Prize winners address the European Parliament Rita Levi-Montalcini was joint winner of the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine in 1986 for discoveries of growth factors. She said the EU's "enormous developments can be extended further, not just throughout Europe but across the whole planet". Prof. Sir Timothy Hunt jointly won the Noble Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 2001 for the discovery of cyclins, a class of proteins. He told MEPs that, after visits to Paris and Rome in his youth, he had "never understood those of my countrymen who have such a suspicious attitude to the rest of Europe". He praised "the advent of the ERC" (European Research Council), which "promises to really strengthen European science" but said science must be free to pursue its own ends in academic institutions. He concluded by saying "it is a shameful fact that among the top 20 universities in the world, 15 are in the US, 1 in Japan, 3 in the UK and 1 in Switzerland. Think about that!" Prof. Reinhard Selten was jointly awarded the Nobel Prize for Economics in 1994 for contributions to game theory. He highlighted the success of economic and monetary union and stressed the importance of preserving the "independence of the ECB". He added that a major obstacle to a European identity was "the language problem", arguing that the answer was not the "domination of one national language" but for everyone to learn Esperanto. Professor Carlo Rubbia , who won the 1984 Nobel Prize for Physics, recalled that the EU was born out of the tragic events of the 20th century and WW2. He stressed the "indispensable and fundamental role of science in development". The EU, he said, had strongly supported fundamental research in an international context, notably CERN, European Organization for Nuclear Research. Professor Martinus Veltman , who won the Nobel Prize for physics in 1999, said that he was an enthusiastic supporter of Europe also citing the CERN example. He noted that CERN has only two working languages - English and French. He said this could be applied to the EU institutions as a "way of saving money" arguing that those that had created the euro would have "the sense to solve this problem". Finally, Professor Veltman quoted Jean-Paul Sartre who he said had said: "The suffering of the Palestinian people justified terrorism". Professor Veltman said "You should not boycott people living in a concentration camp". Dick Oosting , representing Amnesty International, which won the Nobel Peace prize in 1977, said "the EU has an important role to play as a peace project, a union based on values and as a force for change in the world." He said "the EU must close the gap between values and attitudes, the EU needs to be credible" on climate change and security. John Hume (a former MEP), who won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1998, called the EU "the best example in the history of the world of conflict resolution." It is based, he said, on three principles: Respect for difference, institutions which respect this difference and the healing process. The countries of the EU are "working together in their common interests."
"Now that the position in Northern Ireland is in my view firmly and finally settled, we can join in this celebration without embarrassment" said Lord David Trimble , winner of the Nobel Peace Price in 1998. "We must not build a world of competing blocs (and) "we cannot ignore the divisions and conflicts that exist in various parts of the world." He said the aid that we give should begin to enable economies elsewhere and societies elsewhere in the world to enter into the marketplace on an equal basis The co-recipient of the 1976 Nobel Peace Price, Mairead Corrigan Maguire , expressed "tremendous solidarity with the people of Northern Ireland" and said today was "surely a day for celebration and to give thanks because we are on the way to peace." She said, "What the Israelis are doing in Palestine is building an apartheid system. The European Parliament has a responsibility to do more than just pay lip service and rhetoric." Betty Williams , the other winner of the 1976 Nobel Peace Prize, focused on the problem of child poverty. "Every 6 seconds, somewhere in our world, a child dies of hunger and preventable diseases." She called on the EP to help "turn this unbearable situation of pain and death around." Lech Walesa , awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1983, said that the EU was on the "final straight" towards becoming fully united, but that "we have to come up with ideas worthy of those from 50 years back", and in particular "a vision which will enable us to deal with the problems that come our way." Mr Walesa called for "10 commandments of values to solve all our problems." We've taken a very material approach - tanks, missiles, business, dollars" and now is the time to focus on the common values held by the members of the EU.
Below you can read a full record of the interviews which took place in the European Parliament on 9 May
20070514FCS06595
John Hume: 1998 Nobel Peace Prize winner
Hume: "duty of all true democrats to implement the will of the people" John Hume won the 1998 Nobel Peace prize along with David Trimble for his peace efforts in Northern Ireland - notably for the part he played in the '98 Good Friday agreement. He was leader of the Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP), a position he held from 1979 until 2001. Mr Hume also served as MP in Westminster, as an MEP, and as a member of the Northern Ireland Assembly. On the day before the interview a new power sharing government had been sworn-in in Northern Ireland. This dramatic step was hailed as a milestone in the peace process in Northern Ireland.
What are your personal feelings about coming to the Parliament?
Well obviously I'm very pleased to come to the Parliament today. When I first came to this Parliament in 1979 for my first meeting in Strasbourg, I went for a walk, I crossed the bridge from Strasbourg and France to Kehl in Germany I stopped and I meditated and I said to myself: "there is France there is Germany". If I'd had stood on this bridge 30 years ago at the end of the second world war, the worst half century of the history of the world, and you'd said "don’t worry its all over, you'll be in a united Europe in about twenty years" time. I'd have thought they would have said there is something wrong with my head, but it is what happened. The European Union is the best example in the history of the world of conflict resolution.
The peace process in Northern Ireland is often held as an example of victory of politics over violence. What do you think was the most important factor in bridging the divide between the communities?
Well the most important factor was of course that the representatives of all sections of community got into dialogue together and reached agreement and that the last word was with the people and not the politicians. In the joint referendum in the North and South of Ireland in one day the overwhelming majority of people voted for the Agreement. Therefore it is now the duty of all true democrats to implement the will of the people and no paramilitary organisation can now claim, as they always have done in the past, they are acting in the name of the people.
Do you think that the lesson of Northern Ireland could be applied to other conflicts in Europe - like in former Yugoslavia for example?
Well I think that the conflict resolution in Northern Ireland or anywhere where conflict is resolved can be a value to all the areas where there is a conflict and I think that the major point to make anywhere for that conflict is that it is people who are divided not the territory. Without people any territory is only land and when people are divided violence not only has no rule to play in solving the problem, but makes the problem far more difficult to resolve. The only way to resolve any problem between people who are divided is dialogue.
Nobel Prize website
Lord Trimble: 1998 Nobel Peace Prize winner
Trimble: "a sea change in attitudes" David Trimble won the Nobel Peace prize along with John Hume in 1998 for his efforts to secure peace in Northern Ireland. In particular for his role in the '98 Good Friday agreement between both the Nationalist and Unionist communities. He was an MP in Westminster from 1990 until 2005 and First Minister of Northern Ireland between 1998 and 2002.
What role do you think the European Union played in the peace process in Northern Ireland?
One of the things that made it possible for us to get an agreement is that over the years from the early 70s when the troubles began to mid late 90s when we started to approach the settlement, there had been I think a sea change in attitudes towards national issues in Western Europe and particularly also in Ireland. And it came to the situation towards the end of the '90s when people increasingly felt that this rather old fashioned territorial nationalist conflict was inappropriate in the world that we had. There were also particular programs from the European Community in the terms of promoting economic development and reconciliation and those were very valuable and very much appreciated. From the point of view of the great mass of the population, I think probably cheap foreign travel was probably more important than anything else in making people realize that the problem we had in the British Isles was really an insignificant problem compared to the world beyond.
The Peace Process in Northern Ireland is often seen as the victory of politics over violence, if you had to pick just one factor, what was the most important thing in bridging the gap between the communities?
Every situation has its own particular circumstances, its own history, its own personalities. Each of these situations at the end of the day can only be solved by the people who are there. It was the change of opinion whereby people realized that they could no longer achieve victory for their particular group and their particular viewpoint and that there would have to be accommodation. It's a very simple point to make but is remarkable how long it took for different groups to realise this - and different groups came to it at different times. If I was feeling a bit mischievous I would look at events in Belfast this week and say we can see how long it took for certain ones to come to those conclusions!
Do you think the lesson of Northern Ireland could be applied to other conflicts in Europe - like the Western Balkans for example?
I think we are making substantial progress in the Balkans in recent years and when you consider the terrible events it's really heart-warming to see what has happened. Although I have to say the Balkans is an awful warning to us because it was clear - as Yugoslavia started to fall part that there were going to be very substantial trouble. The reaction of the international community was so slow and ineffective in the early stages that it did little to prevent the step upwards of violence, had there a been a more effective initiative taken at an earlier stage a tremendous amount of suffering could have been avoided. The desire to be recognised by the Community, the desire to be accepted by the Community, is of course a very powerful lever for change.
Professor Paul Crutzen: 1995 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
Crutzen: "I am a product of Europe myself" Professor Paul Crutzen, who won his Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1995 for his work on the hole in the ozone layer, believes that an 'escape route' might be necessary in order to stop the global warming. With climate change being a major issue in the European Union today and agitating the whole of the world, his suggestion might not be far from being executed.
Professor Crutzen, how do you feel being here today at the European Parliament?
Today is an important occasion of course as it commemorates 50 years of European unification. I grew up in The Netherlands, one of the founding nations of the European Union, and I am impressed with what has happened in the last 50 years. It is touching for me being here as well, since my ancestors where not from the Netherlands alone, but also from Germany, Poland and Belgium. So in some way I am a product of Europe myself.
How do you think your field of expertise can contribute to the challenges the EU is facing today?
I work in the field of atmospheric chemistry and climate research and that of course is very popular at the moment, maybe too popular. Especially in the last 20 years the EU has launched various research programmes and institutions that have been very fruitful, such as the European Research Council which is performing research organised by scientists and dedicated to excellence. I see that fantastic progress is being made but today we've entered a new phase.
The EU and the whole of the world are worried about our climate change. Concerning your efforts for the climate and the ozone layer in particular, could you elaborate on your proposed measures in order to provide an 'escape route' for global warming?
Well, it is assumed that I made a proposal of an escape route, but in reality I promised to study it. Nonetheless the idea is that if things get really bad, so if the climate heats up too much and the sea level rises more than we are expecting, we need to do something. I propose to conduct an experiment in which we put small amounts of sulphur into the stratosphere, which will reflect sunlight and heat back into space which will consequently cool the planet. But let me stress that I hope it will never be necessary to conduct this experiment. I hope that we are wise enough so that the emissions of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere will be reduced sufficiently, so that the temperature will not rise as much as would be needed to conduct the experiment.
Rita Levi-Montalcini: 1986 Nobel Prize winner in Physiology/Medicine
Levi-Montalcini: "It was an honour that I did not expect" The oldest living Nobel laureate, Rita Levi-Montalcini (born 1909 in Turin), was one of the guests on 9 May at the European Parliament for the 50th Anniversary of the Rome Treaty. She received the Nobel Prize in Physiology/Medicine in 1986, for her discovery of growth factors. She is founder of two institutions, the European Brain Research Institute (EBRI) and the Association in aid of African women.
What is your first reaction to being in the European Parliament on the 50th Anniversary of the signature of the Rome Treaty?
I am very happy to be invited here. It was an honour that I did not expect. I came to Belgium to work in 1938 to escape Nazi persecution as a Jew... I did come back to Belgium after that but this time is a celebration of the 50 years after the signing, a special celebration.
We understood that you went to United States to further your research?
Well, no... I did not go to the United States, I was invited for 6 months but eventually stayed there for 30 years as in the meantime I made the discovery that granted me the Nobel prize, related to the brain and the cell growth factor. Doing research is the USA is a marvellous opportunity, they have fantastic infrastructure, superior to Europe and even more particularly to Italy, because the USA recognises a person for his merit not for their party belonging.
What would you suggest for the EU to keep young researchers/scientists within its territory?
I do believe that in Europe scientists have excellent opportunities especially in Spain, in the UK, France and even in Germany, all better than in Italy.
Should Europe finance more research?
I do believe that the situation in Europe but especially in Italy could be much better.
In the last 50 years EU made a gigantic leap. Till what point should research be extended to serve mankind?
Well, it is what I am doing you know!. I am doing all I possibly can to help Africa and the developing countries. Science is not just about making discoveries and then getting recognition for them, but also we have the responsibility to help developing countries especially women in Africa. The Foundation in aid of African women, which I preside, attributes 1500 fellowships from school to post-secondary and post-university studies to help women pursue research and to improve their living conditions.
Last December, the EP supported a petition regarding patients' access to Multiple Sclerosis treatment. In your opinion should the EU address this issue, try to solve and make it one of its priorities?
It should not be a priority, but it certainly is an important issue, she stressed. Furthermore, we are still far to solve it, however, certainly we should try to improve the conditions of those who are suffering.
Reinhard Selten: 1994 Nobel Prize for Economics
Selten: "one should to try to further European identity" Reinhard Selten was awarded the Nobel Prize for Economics in 1994, along with John C.Harsanyi and John F.Nash Jr., for their pioneering analysis of equilibria in the theory of non-cooperative games . Among other important Nobel Prize winners, the EP welcomed Professor Selten on Europe Day. After his speech in plenary, we seized the opportunity to ask him some questions.
Game theory is often described as a branch of applied mathematics and economics that studies situations where multiple players make strategic decisions in an attempt to maximize their returns. Game theory has played a significant role in the social sciences, and is now also used in different branches of academia.
Your prize winning work was on Game Theory: can Game Theory be applied to EU politics?
One very good example are election campaigns. Parties compete for votes. And that is of course strategic, for example already the selection of the platform. It’s a very strategic move.
Another example would be coalition formation in Parliament. Parliament was elected and you know how many deputies every party has and now they have to form a coalition. There are some game theoretical methods in order to determine what the likely outcome of such a situation is. Again you have to put a little more than this knowledge about the number of deputies but there is a simple theory which explains quite well what happens in most cases
You are with us today to celebrate the achievements of European Nobel Prize winners: how do you feel about European identity?
One should to try to further European identity. Europeans should learn to feel that they are European as much as they feel today that they are for example German or French. This is because in the United States, if a Californian firm, maybe an electric power producer, takes over an electric power producer from New York, there is no uproar in NY. They have an American identity and they feel that they are Americans whether they are from NY or California, it doesn’t make that much difference.
How can EU politics contribute to a stronger European identity?
There is a lot to be done in order to achieve this goal. One thing is that we do have now European parties but the people in the member states don’t know or care much about them. The European Parliament has to achieve more power so that people really care about what happens in the Parliament and during EP elections.
At the moment, there are regional elections, community elections and national elections, which are the most important ones. But actually in Europe we should come to a point where the European elections are the most important ones. There is also some change of institutions needed. But this is not the only thing. Language is an important area in the development of such European identity. And there is no daily journal which is read everywhere in Europe.
Lech Wałęsa: 1983 Nobel Peace Prize winner
Walesa: "Europe faces new challenges - exactly as 50 years ago" Lech Walesa: electrician, trade unionist, political activist, political prisoner and later President of Poland. He is best known in the West as being co-founder of the "Solidarnosc" movement - the only democratic mass independent movement in the Soviet bloc. Imprisoned and kept under constant surveillance for his activities Solidarity eventually forced the Communist government to hold elections in 1989. A year later Lech Walesa was elected President of Poland - a post he held until 1995.
"Solidarity" was a movement of the people. What is the role of civil society now?
We need more participation, in a more organized way in all the political processes. Democracy is to participate in, to make a choice. When half of the population does not participate, it is hard to expect any real change for the better. That is why democracy is feeble, prone to demagogy and populism. Those not involved are poorly informed and they are unable to have any oversight.
Could you identify the problems democracy is facing nowadays?
The mechanisms we use now are already outdated. This political solution was good in a bilateral world divided into two blocs. We have had a democracy which was only about giving more and more rights to people. Democracy in a united Europe facing globalization should as also include obligations at different levels. Old democracy became obsolete with the end of division in Europe.
What may be the European key to success?
Europe needs some sort of Decalogue now. I do not mean the religious Decalogue. We all have to agree on universal cross-religious and non-religious sets of commandments. The message should reach the citizens, political parties, all sorts of institutions. We need clear and firm principles on what is acceptable and what is not. We all have to accept that common "modus operandi" in politics, social activity and the economy. And once it is adopted, we have to be ready to bear the consequences. Otherwise we will not be able to build real European unity, not to mention a sound response to globalisation.
Europe faces new challenges - exactly as 50 years ago. The idea then was really good: "let's unite, put the stress on the economy", that stimulated development and the latter led to dismantling the division of Europe. But the first plan has been accomplished and the idea depleted, now Europe urgently needs a brand new idea that will be equally great as the one we had 50 years ago.
EN
1
PHOTO
20070510PHT06562.jpg
EN
2
PHOTO
20070515PHT06673.jpg
EN
3
LINK
http://nobelprize.org/
EN
4
PHOTO
20070515PHT06681.jpg
EN
5
PHOTO
20070515PHT06679.jpg
EN
6
PHOTO
20070515PHT06703.jpg
EN
7
PHOTO
20070515PHT06701.jpg
EN
8
PHOTO
20070515PHT06687.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
