50 years of the EU: A celebration with European Nobel Prize winners at the European Parliament
European citizenship
2007-05-09 - 18:59
50 years of the EU: A celebration with Nobel prize laureates in the EP
Ahead of today's plenary session the European Parliament held a special event to mark the 50th anniversary of the European Union. A group of European Nobel Prize winners was invited to take part in a debate on the past, present and future of the EU, focusing on its scientific, intellectual and cultural achievements.
The proceedings were opened by Parliament's President, Hans-Gert Pöttering , who welcomed the guests and described briefly one of the reasons why each was of relevance to the European project, its values or the challenges facing it.
The efforts of Betty Williams and Mairead Corrigan to promote peace in Northern Ireland highlighted the importance of reconciliation - a key to the history of post-war Europe. Amnesty International's tireless work for human dignity illustrated another "pillar of the European Union" as did Lech Walesa's struggle for human rights in Poland. Mr Pöttering mentioned his visit to Warsaw last week to mark the signing of "Europe's first written constitution", between Poland and Lithuania in 1791, saying that its values of peace and democracy were also those of Europe's future.
The work of physicist Carlo Rubbia was important to the modern search for clean energy, while Rita Levi-Montalcini's medical research had contributed greatly to cancer research. Jack Steinberger and Martinus Veltmann were not only leading physicists but also, respectively, a committed disarmament campaigner and a big supporter of Esperanto. Paul Josef Crutzen's work on ozone depletion was especially topical.
John Hume and David Trimble were lauded for their work on the Northern Ireland peace process. "What happened at Stormont yesterday is a testament to your achievements", said Mr Pöttering. Reinhard Selten's contribution to economics and Timothy Hunt's work in medical research were also outstanding examples of European research.
In all cases, said President Pöttering, "your work is built on a vision of the future, and on our 50th anniversary we too should be looking to the future". Mentioning the efforts of the German EU presidency to find a solution on the question of the constitutional treaty, he concluded: "we seek inspiration from the courage of the founding fathers" of the EU "but also from you, winners of the Nobel Prize, who have made such a tremendous contribution to Europe's achievements over the past 50 years. You should give us courage to work for a new breakthrough".
Each of the Nobel Prize winners then delivered a short speech to the assembled MEPs.
The first to speak was Rita LEVI-MONTALCINI, who was jointly awarded the Nobel Prize for Physiology or Medicine in 1986 (along with Stanley Cohen) for their discoveries of growth factors. She believed that the EU's "enormous developments can be extended further, not just throughout Europe but across the whole planet". She wanted to see the "benefits of the EU spread to the whole world".
Prof. Sir Timothy HUNT jointly won the Noble Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 2001 for the discovery of cyclins, a class of proteins. He told MEPs that after visits to Paris and Rome in his youth, he had "never understood those of my countrymen who have such a suspicious attitude to the rest of Europe". Turning to science, he praised "the advent of the ERC" (European Research Council), which he believed "promises to really strengthen European science" but he issued a general appeal for science to be free to pursue its own ends in academic institutions. He was also concerned that people were nowadays "afraid to excel", seeing this as an obstacle to scientific achievement. He concluded by saying "it is a shameful fact that among the top 20 universities in the world, 15 are in the US, 1 in Japan, 3 in the UK and 1 in Switzerland. Think about that!"
Prof. Reinhard SELTEN was jointly awarded the Nobel Prize for Economics in 1994 for contributions to game theory. In his speech today he highlighted the success of economic and monetary union and stressed the importance of preserving the "independence of the ECB". He added that a major obstacle to a European identity was "the language problem", arguing that the answer was not the "domination of one national language" but for everyone to learn Esperanto.
Professor Carlo RUBBIA , who won the Nobel Prize for Physics in 1984, recalled that the EU was born out of the tragic events of the 20th century and the Second World War. He stressed the "indispensable and fundamental role of science in development". The European Union, he said, had strongly supported fundamental research in an international context. An example of this internationalism, he said was CERN: (The Organisation européenne pour la recherche nucléaire (English: European Organization for Nuclear Research). He listed the 22 European Member States of CERN plus the European Commission, India, Israel, Japan, Russia, Turkey, UNESCO and the USA.
Professor Martinus VELTMAN , who won the Nobel Prize for physics in 1999, said that he was an enthusiastic supporter of Europe also citing the CERN example. "CERN has played an important role in my life". However, Professor Veltman did point out that CERN has only two working languages namely English and French. He argued that this could be applied to the EU institutions as a "way of saving money" arguing that those that had created the euro would have "the sense to solve this problem". Professor Veltman also gave the example of the ease of building a personal computer in the US compared to the relative complexity in the EU. Finally, Professor Veltman quoted Jean-Paul Sartre who he said had said: "The suffering of the Palestinian people justified terrorism". Professor Veltman said "You should not boycott people living in a concentration camp".
Dick OOSTING , representing Amnesty International which won the Nobel Peace prize in 1977, said he felt "humble as the only laureate representing an organisation". He said "The EU has an important role to play as a peace project, a union based on values and as a force for change in the world." The challenges of climate change and security would have to be faced, "the EU must close the gap between values and attitudes, the EU needs to be credible". The non-respect for human rights, he said, risked undermining the EU's good efforts in the world, he concluded.
John HUME (a former MEP), who won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1998, called the European Union "the best example in the history of the world of conflict resolution." It is based, he said, on three principles: Respect for difference, institutions which respect this difference and the healing process. The countries of the EU are "working together in their common interests." The same principles are "at the heart of the resolution in Northern Ireland", Mr Hume added, because the "identities of both communities are respected."
"We are in a stronger position to shape the forces of [the] world", Mr Hume continued, because "the world is a much smaller place." He added that "the essence of our unity is respect for our diversity" and that "the time has come to create a whole world which can be summed up by those...words." Respect for diversity, Mr Hume concluded, will lead to "no war, no conflict any more."
"Now that the position in Northern Ireland is in my view firmly and finally settled, we can join in this celebration without embarrassment" said Lord David TRIMBLE , winner of the Nobel Peace Price in 1998. "We must not build a world of competing blocs", Lord Trimble continued, and "we cannot ignore the divisions and conflicts that exist in various parts of the world."
Lord Trimble added that the aid that we give should begin to enable economies elsewhere and societies elsewhere in the world to enter into the marketplace on an equal basis." "It would be tragic", Lord Trimble concluded, "if protectionism and locally powerful interest groups prevented Europe from making that progress which at the moment is just beyond our fingers' reach."
The co-recipient of the 1976 Nobel Peace Price, Mairead CORRIGAN MAGUIRE , expressed "tremendous solidarity with the people of Northern Ireland" and remarked that today was "surely a day for celebration and to give thanks because we are on the way to peace." Para-militarism, militarism and terrorism, "do not solve deep ethnic problems", Mrs Corrigan Maguire continued, challenging the role of armed forces in Iraq and Afghanistan, who are "struggling with the same problems [.]" Ms Corrigan Maguire concluded: "There are double standards going on here. What the Israelis are doing in Palestine is building an apartheid system. The European Parliament has a responsibility to do more than just pay lip service and rhetoric."
Elisabeth WILLIAMS , who was co-recipient of the 1976 Nobel Peace Prize, focused on the problem of child poverty, reminding the House that "every 6 seconds, somewhere in our world, a child dies of hunger and preventable diseases." It is time, she said, to "turn this unbearable situation of pain and death around." Mrs Williams called upon the European Parliament and her fellow laureates to help with this undertaking. "Common sense should tell us all that if we peace teach to future generations, then peace will indeed be practiced."
Lech WALESA , awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1983, said that the European Union was on the "final straight" towards becoming fully united, but that "we have to come up with ideas worth of those from 50 years back", and in particular "a vision which will enable us to deal with the problems that come our way." Mr Walesa called for "10 commandments of values to solve all our problems." We've taken a very material approach - tanks, missiles, business, dollars", and yet now is the time to focus on the common values held by the members of the European Union.
The ceremony ended with the playing of the European Hymn - Ode to Joy.
20070507IPR06397 13 European Nobel Prize winners at European Parliament on Wednesday, 9 May The Nobel Foundation EU at 50
EN
1
PHOTO
20070510PHT06562.jpg
EN
3
LINK
http://nobelprize.org/
EN
4
LINK
http://europa.eu/50/index_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070424BRI05802 ITEM-001-EN NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
