Human rights must be a core principle of EU-Russia relations say MEPs
External relations
2007-05-10 - 13:53
Russia remains an important partner for Europe, especially in energy relations, but this relationship must set democratic values and human rights as its core principle, says a resolution adopted by a large majority in the EP. The lifting of Russia's ban on Polish agricultural products is another demand of the House. On Estonia, it calls on Russia to "fully respect its obligations under the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations," guaranteeing the protection of embassies and diplomats.
The House reiterates its support for Russia's WTO membership, and welcomed the initiatives to achieve visa-free travel between the EU and Russia. It also welcomes intensified dialogue on energy issues, and stressed that equal access to infrastructure and investment, as well as "the principles of interdependence and transparency should be the basis" of cooperation in the energy field. These principles should be applied to major energy infrastructure projects, such as the Baltic gas pipeline .
However, MEPs express deep concern about the use of force by Russian authorities against protesters in Moscow and St. Petersburg and reiterated that "a robust defence of human rights and democratic values should be a core principle of any EU engagement with Russia". They also worried about continuing reports of the use of torture in prisons in Chechnya and the restriction of democratic freedoms, for instance, the freedom of the media, in the run-up to the upcoming elections, MEPs also want to halt the process of depriving some political parties of their legal status and their eligibility to participate in the upcoming legislative and presidential elections.
Anti-ballistic missile system
The House expresses its concern about declarations made by President Putin in reaction to the United States' plans to deploy components of its anti-ballistic missile system in Poland and the Czech Republic. MEPs demand a thorough discussion of these proposals, including the need for them, a threat assessment and the possibility of different areas of security both in the EU and NATO frameworks.
Polish meat and Estonian bronze
The Parliament welcomes the common line taken by the EU on the lifting of Russia's ban on Polish agricultural products (oral amendment moved by Charles Tannock (EPP-ED, UK)), which has blocked negotiations on a new EU-Russia Partnership and Cooperation agreement (PCA). The House also expects that Russia will lift the embargo on some Moldovan and Georgian products, such as wine.
The resolution also calls on the EU to "demonstrate solidarity with Estonia and speak with one voice in the context of recent events in Tallinn," and calls on Russia to "fully respect its obligations under the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations," guaranteeing the protection of embassies and diplomats.
20070507IPR06398 Text, as adopted by the EP (10 May) will shortly be available here MEPs in strong support for Estonia
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070509IPR06501 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
