Economic Partnership Agreements: MEPs call for less onerous conditions imposed on ACP countries
External/international trade
2007-05-23 - 14:49
The EU needs to reach new trade agreements with the African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) countries - known as Economic Partnership Agreements - by 1 January 2008. These would replace the current system of generalised preferences, which is incompatible with WTO rules. Given the delay in the talks and the lack of readiness on the part of the ACP countries.
MEPs call in a report, adopted by 550 votes in favour to 59 against with 59 abstentions, for the Commission to make the conditions for the agreements less onerous for these countries.
The three objectives of these agreements - to facilitate access for ACP products to the European market via a free-trade area, to develop South-South trade and to support the process of regional integration - are causing concern in ACP countries, so the own-initiative report, drawn up by Robert Sturdy (EPP-ED, UK) calls for the "pacing, timing and scope of liberalisation to be gradual and flexible in order to improve ACP regional integration and competitiveness."
MEPs ask for "duty-free, quota-free market access for the ACP as well as simplified, liberalised and more flexible rules of origin in EPAs that is the case under EBA [the 'Everything but Arms' initiative]".
Safeguard mechanism
If agreements are not reached by 1 January 2008, when the derogation granted by the WTO comes to an end, the House asks the Commission "not to exert undue pressure and […] to make efforts at WTO level to seek to ensure that disruption of existing ACP exports to the EU is avoided pending a final settlement."
The EP also urges the negotiators not to work under excessive pressure or in a hurry on such complex and extremely important negotiations". The state of advancement of the negotiations differs substantially between the various regions concerned. Talks with Central Africa, West Africa, East Africa, the Caribbean and Pacific countries are making slow progress, while the group of southern African countries has moved ahead more quickly. MEPs c all for the special case of the EU countries’ overseas regions and territories to be taken fully into account in the EPA negotiations, especially the outermost regions referred to in Article 299(2) of the EC Treaty .
To counter the effects of ending the system of non-reciprocal preferential tariffs, MEPs are calling for safeguard mechanisms to permit ACP regions to react to surges in imports from the EU, particularly of agricultural products. On the liberalisation of key services such as water, transport and energy, the report asks that this should respect the right of each country freely to regulate its public services.
The House calls for "the ACP to bring forwards, with appropriate EU-assistance where required, detailed, costed proposals of how and for what additional EPA-related funds are needed, particularly with regard to: regulatory frameworks, safeguard measures, trade facilitation, support in meeting international SPS (Sanitary and Phytosanitary) and IP (Intellectual Property) standards, the composition of the EPA monitoring mechanism."
Rapporteur Robert Sturdy (EPP-ED, UK) said: "This report highlights the complexity of establishing a forward programme for trade relations between the EU and the ACP, two very different and largely unequal groups which share a common goal to strengthen trade as a means of real development. Idealistic as this may sound, I have received a great deal of support from both the Commission and the representatives of the ACP regions and, despite the many concerns expressed by NGOs and political groups, they and I, and I am sure the Commission, remain optimistic.
My report makes a number of recommendations: simplified, liberalised and more flexible rules of origin, full duty-free, quota-free market access for the ACP, workable safeguards, dispute settlement and monitoring mechanisms with transparent provisions and a real power to act in the event of changes caused by EPAs having a harmful effect on sectors of ACP economies. These are the positive aspects and need to be correctly framed in negotiations. We need to know how these mechanisms will work and to build trust and ensure that Europe will be as keen to help implement these mechanisms as the ACP countries."
Singapore issues - basic public services and parliamentary scrutiny
But the House is also worried about the impact of falling customs revenue on ACP budgets, which could entail public spending cuts in key sectors such as education or health; calls on the EU to set up the compensation mechanisms required to avert consequences of this sort. MEPs recall the fact that 77 poor countries opposed the inclusion of negotiations on Singapore issues in the DDA agenda. Bilateral negotiations on trade in services must abstain from pressuring ACP countries into offering any liberalisation of basic public services. Concerning Labour standards, MEPs want to ensure the implementation of Article 50 of the Cotonou Agreement, which includes a specific provision on trade and labour standards and which confirms the parties' commitments to core labour standards.
Finally, the report calls for the creation of a Parliamentary Oversight Committee on EPAs, to be made up of EU and ACP parliamentarians, which would meet alongside the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly, rather than as a separate institution. Additional parliamentary scrutiny is recommended with a regular follow-up by the relevant Committee of the JPA and by European and ACP parliamentarians in plenary sessions.
20070516IPR06764 The Economic Partnership Agreements Text, as adopted by the EP on 23 May, will shortly be available here
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5296412
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
