MEPs call for a common European foreign policy more in line with citizens' wishes
External relations
2007-05-23 - 13:55
The European Union must bring its foreign policy goals in line with its citizens' wishes, says a report adopted by a large majority in the European Parliament on Wednesday, 23 May. It emphasises the need for internal steps, such as implementing certain measures proposed in the Constitutional Treaty, and setting external priorities, for example the fight against poverty, in order to have a common European voice in international affairs.
The own-initiative report by Elmar BROK (EPP-ED, DE) on the annual report from the Council on the Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP) in 2005, was adopted by a large majority (526 votes in favour to 118 against with 14 abstentions). It suggests that the EU's foreign policy "should target a limited number of areas which better connect with the wishes and concerns of European citizens and their expectations of the role to be played by the Union in international affairs." Members particularly emphasised that "much more should be done from an external action perspective to halt the spread of poverty in the world." They also underline energy security and addressing the root causes of immigration as important priorities.
On non-proliferation, the report specifically expresses its concern "regarding the first test of an anti-satellite weapon carried out by China in January 2007." MEPs were also concerned by recent declarations of Russian President Vladimir Putin regarding the planned anti-missile shield installations in Poland and the Czech Republic, especially Russia's unwillingness to continue abiding by the CFE Treaty (Conventional Forces in Europe). On this matter, MEPs called on the United States to improve its efforts on consulting NATO members and Russia on its plans for a missile defence system. The Parliament also stressed the need to "implement the international non-proliferation system in all its aspects," in particular the CWC (Chemical Weapons Convention), the Ottawa Treaty (banning landmines) and the CTBT (Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty)
The House calls for maintaining "the enlargement of the Union as a key objective of the Union's political agenda in 2007, albeit one which must be consistent with the Union's capacity to integrate new Member States." (Par. 30) Members also noted some priorities for areas far outside of Europe, calling for more EU action in Afghanistan, the Middle East, Kosovo and in strengthening the transatlantic partnership.
The Constitutional Treaty and CFSP financing
"Without the Constitutional Treaty, [...] the European Union cannot shape a foreign policy that can at least partially meet the most important challenges," the report says. It argues in favour of establishing a mutual assistance clause, an office of Minister of Foreign Affairs, a European External Action Service, and an EU Diplomatic Academy. (Par. 4 and 8g) The House also took the view that "without the introduction of qualified majority voting in CFSP matters, the coherence, effectiveness and visibility of the external action of the Union will be deeply undermined."
On the issue of the CFSP budget, MEPs regret that "that the specific article within the CFSP budget chapter devoted to European Union Special Representatives does not avoid the proliferation of envoys of that kind," which the Parliament thinks undermines the role of the Commission's delegations on the ground. The House therefore pointed to the need to establish criteria for the appointment and evaluation of EU Special Representatives.
Furthermore, the EP is unsatisfied with the fact that "the new Inter-institutional Agreement does not change the existing rules on ESDP operations, such as the principle that 'costs lie where they fall'," which in effect places the financial cost of any military operation on the Member State who provides the troops to accomplish it. This is a disincentive for governments to pledge troops, and could be avoided if such operations were financed directly from the EU's budget, the report argues.
Improving European Parliament oversight
The House also stresses the need to involve the Parliament more closely in the elaboration and oversight of CFSP goals. "The Council's practice of merely informing Parliament and submitting a descriptive list of CFSP activities carried out in the previous year, instead of really consulting Parliament at the beginning of each year [...] constitutes a de facto infringement of the very substance of Article 21" of the EU treaties says the report. It therefore calls for more active consultation of the Parliament on the CFSP in general, while also calling for additional powers, for instance "by conferring on Parliament the authority to appoint, and dismiss, the Counter-Terrorism Coordinator and the Directors of SitCen, the EU Satellite Centre (EUSC) and Eurojust."
20070516IPR06767 Annual report 2005 on CFSP Text, ad adopted by the EP on 23 May, will shortly be available here
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5379882
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
