Brussels Plenary: 9-10 May
Institutions
2007-05-14 - 16:58
Safer mirrors on lorries was one measure backed by MEPs
Meeting in Brussels for a two day Plenary session MEPs discussed a wide variety on international and European topics. Relations with Russia came under discussion with a debate and the adoption of a resolution ahead of an EU-Russia Summit on 18 May. Road safety also was tackled with MEPs supporting safer mirrors for heavy goods vehicles. More investment in poor housing across the whole EU, and more private sector involvement in public transport were just two other issue discussed by Members.
For more information on these topics and other issues discussed please see the summary's of each day below. Members return to Strasbourg for a week of debates and votes starting on Monday 21 May.
20070514FCS06604
Wednesday: EU's relations with Russia centre stage
The role of the private sector in public transport was discussed The European Union's relations with Russia took centre stage in the Plenary yesterday with MEPs debating a resolution which was endorsed Thursday. The resolution says that Russia remains an important partner for Europe, especially in the energy sector, but that democratic values and human rights must remain core principles of the relationship. It comes ahead of an EU-Russia summit on 18 May - a meeting some MEPs wanted cancelled amid the furore of the moving of a Soviet war monument by Estonia.
The summit - due to be held in the Russian city of Samara - could mark an important step in the renewal of the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement between the two. The existing one has been in place since 1997 and both sides are negotiating its renewal. In the resolution MEPs welcomed greater dialogue over energy issues, the easing of visa restrictions and expressed support for Russia's membership of the WTO. However, the resolution, which was backed by the European People's Party and European Democrats (EPP-ED), the Socialist PSE, the Union of Europe for the Nations (UEN) and the European United Left (GUE/NGL) was critical of Russia over its human rights record. In particular the use of force by the Russian authorities to quell protests in Moscow and St. Petersburg and restrictions on the media. "Today, we are all Estonians" However, it was the furore over Estonia's decision to move a Soviet War memorial which saw the liveliest apart of the debate. Joseph Daul, leader of the EPP-DE, told MEPs that "today, we are all Estonians". He warned Moscow that the Russian leadership would be making a "grave mistake" if they thought Europe would be divided over the issue. For the Socialist PSE Group Marianne Mikko, - who is herself Estonian - called for an end to the "cyber war" between the two sides as Russian hackers are apparently targeting Estonian news websites. Graham Watson for the Liberal ALDE Group (who opposed the resolution along with the Greens), told MEPs that "when intimidation triumphs over negotiation, it can no longer be business as usual between the European Union and Russia. The Russians need a clear signal that enough is enough". Road safety: MEPs want "blind spot" on lorries removed As the largest vehicles on the road, lorries need to be able to see other road users. Every year about 400 people in Europe, many of them children, are killed in accidents involving lorries. One of the most important causes of accidents is the "blind spot" where a driver cannot see other people in his mirrors. Specially designed "blind spot" mirrors are compulsory for new Lorries from 2007, although in the debate on Wednesday and the vote Thursday MEPs supported extending this to older vehicles registered from 1 January 2000. As the Parliament's rapporteur Paolo Costa (Liberal ALDE) put it, "at current replacement rates, the EU population of some 5 million lorries would not be entirely replaced by 2023. Until then, the danger to vulnerable road users, particularly children, would continue". It is estimated that the whole replacement project would cost €100 - 150 per lorry but could save up to 1,200 lives in Europe by 2020. German MEP Dieter-Lebrecht Koch of the European People's Party praised the heavy goods industry and the role they play in the EU's internal market. However, he was critical of the length of the transition period - the deadline being March 2009 for implementation - as "around 800 people would die in accidents while we would wait" he told MEPs. Public transport: MEPs back public / private compromise To what extent private sector should be involved in public transport was the subject of the second reading of a Regulation considered by MEPs. It concerns the awarding contacts of service between the private and public sector. The Regulation is based on the "controlled competition" concept which is which is half-way between complete deregulation and a closed market. In the first reading the EP extended the length of contracts to respectively 8 years for bus services and 15 years for rail. Reflecting on the compromise reached, Christine De Veyrac of the European People's Party said that "even if not perfect, this is a good compromise that could give real legal security to all the actors in the transport business". For the PSE Group Brian Simpson "what people require is an efficient, reliable, affordable and safe public transport system that places on public bodies a responsibility to ensure that those criteria are met. It also places responsibility on transport operators to deliver, and frankly, that is where the challenges will lie". Other issues debated on Wednesday included:
reform in the Arab world - based on a report by Michel Rocard of the PSE Group.
deregulate package sizes for pre-packed product (report by Jacques Toubon of the European People's Party.
Vehicle Type Approval (new rules on the manufacturing standards of road vehicles).
report on the health consequences of 1968 crash in Greenland. Resolution on EU-Russia relations Public transport - more Parliament's Transport Committee backs mirrors A full round up for the Press of the May Plenary
Thursday: MEPs back better housing in Europe
A report called for greater investment in housing MEPs have given their backing to using the European Regional Development Fund to invest in affordable and decent housing across the whole EU. Whilst at present money is only allocated to the States that joined in or after 2004 the scope of the report wants to extend funding to all EU members. This could help deal with high prices and urban sprawl across Europe. Voting on another report, MEPs supported a boost to innovation in Europe's regions through education and cross border cooperation.
Poor maintenance, demolition and high prices are just three issues the report by Italian Liberal ALDE MEP Alfonso Andria identifies. Although the report calls for more housing it wants accommodation built in a way that will include social infrastructure such as libraries and meeting places. It also sees proper development as the way to ease urban sprawl and reduce traffic congestion caused by long distance commuting to work. The report is adamant that "the vitality of town centres and the fabric of listed buildings must be preserved". Definition of "adequate housing" needed In environmental terms it calls for regeneration of Brownfield sites and protection of the greenbelt as well as more energy-efficient housing. In a vote yesterday MEPs backed Mr Andria's proposals to extend funding for this kind of housing to the 27 EU members. Under the European Regional Development Fund, investment presently runs until 2013. At present the fund pays for the development of public areas, safety improvements, water and energy saving measures and support for social integration. Mr Andria would also like to see a proper definition of "adequate housing" that would prevent the building of sub-standard properties. He also favours easing access to housing benefit to allow people to settle in communities easier. Speaking in the debate he stressed the need for a wider approach: "the problem of a habitable lodging is not to be seen on its own. It must be put within a global approach, that concerns sustainable urban development in general, strongly linked to sect oral and horizontal policies". Alain Hutchinson for the PSE Group said that "it was the first time that the House was voting on this ....I recall that it is important for us to listen to the citizen. If some citizens, rightly or wrongly believe that the EU is far from them, then thanks to Andria's report the EU so to speak has invited itself in the homes of its citizens". More Innovation needed in regional policy A report adopted yesterday calls for regional policy makers to adopt measures that can boost innovation across the continent. In particular it calls for improving access to education and providing access to citizens at every level. The report also wants greater cross border cooperation amongst the academic and business community. The latter is particular important according to the report as it stresses the important role that Small and Medium Size Enterprises can play in innovation. The report was drafted by Mieczyslaw Janowski of the Union of Europe for the Nations Group (UEN) who told MEPs "only 21 regions of the EU, which is less then 10 % of all regions, spend more then 3% GDP for research and development". James Nicholson of the European People's Party and European Democrats (EPP-ED), stressed the role of smaller businesses "often we associate innovation with large multinational companies with enormous research facilities. However, the backbone of the European economy has always been our small, often family‑orientated, businesses" he said. Resolution on Housing Innovation in regional policy EU-Russia relations
EN
1
PHOTO
20070514PHT06654.jpg
EN
2
PHOTO
20070510PHT06568.jpg
EN
7
PHOTO
20070511PHT06576.jpg
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0178 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070424BRI05802 ITEM-006-EN NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326IPR04582 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070507BRI06396 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A6-2007-0090 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070507IPR06419 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070507IPR06398 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
