Tuesday in Plenary: Poettering promotes values, reform and dialogue
Institutions
2007-02-14 - 10:48
Hans-Gert Poettering (centre) with Parliament's former Presidents
Defending European values, promoting reforms and engaging in a dialogue of cultures - these were the priorities Hans Gert Poettering set out yesterday for his term as Parliament's President. He called for tolerance among citizens and for clearer law-making at a European level. He also called for the EU to pursue a common energy and immigration policy. Also on Tuesday MEPs passed reports on cutting waste and women's rights in Turkey.
Europeans should be "proud" of their heritage.
There to hear his speech to MEPs were ten former holders of the office as well as German Chancellor Angela Merkel and Commission President José Manuel Barroso. Mr Poettering said overcoming the division of Europe from the Cold War was "the miracle of his generation" and that Europeans should be "proud" of their heritage.
On the rights of individuals Mr Poettering pledged that in "practical political activities we should always serve the dignity of the individual". He pointed to the Parliament's Sakharov Prize for freedom of thought and its opposition to the death penalty.
On how to promote jobs and protect social benefits he said Europe "must construct a cushion by strengthening our competitiveness and retaining the European social model".
President calls for dialogue between cultures and religions
Mr Poettering urged fellow European law makers to pass simpler and more effective laws. Key questions such as "does it serve people and the environment?" should be addressed in the drafting phase he said. He reaffirmed his commitment to the European Constitution and looked forward to the "Declaration on Europe" to mark 50 years since the Treaty of Rome was signed.
Calling for tolerance he told MEPs that "dialogue between cultures and religions are the hallmark of Europe".
Merkel: EU must not "lose sight of big picture"
Following this Chancellor Angela Merkel - President-in-Office of the Council told MEPs that the it represented half a billion citizens and should therefore not "lose sight of the big picture". This was important as Europe faces big issues such as peace, security, social protection and competition she said.
Later in the debate Mr Barroso told MEPs that "our European values underline the essence of the Europe we want and treasure: a Europe of peace, freedom, democracy, prosperity and justice".
For the political groups, Joseph Daul of the European People's Party said his group fully endorsed an EU that was "strong and open" to the world. He called for a recognition of the peace and prosperity that Europe had brought although he stressed citizens wanted more freedom, security and job prospects.
For the Socialist PES Group Martin Schulz highlighted the cultural and economic cooperation that had made Europe a success. He called for greater institutional reform and for more progress on a "social Europe". For the Liberal ALDE Group Graham Watson said the EU had to face new challenges of "rapid world population growth and migration, energy resources and climate change" to name just some. He said that the response of the EU institutions had often been "uncertain" said the "European Parliament must become the dynamo of European integration".
Cut waste say MEPs
The Parliament voted on two waste-related issues on Tuesday. British rapporteur Caroline Jackson for the European People's Party presented a report about the new waste directive proposed by the Commission. While supporting the emphasis on waste reduction and recycling, the adopted report calls for binding targets, in order to stabilise waste production by 2012. It also supports existing "five principles" of waste treatment such as prevention, re-use, recycling, recovery and safe disposal of waste. The report pointed to the lack of clear definitions of waste and for more recycling as only a third of waste is recycled in the EU.
The second report adopted was written by Dutch rapporteur Johannes Blokland (IND/DEM). It makes a distinction between measures aimed at industrial waste and household waste, especially in relation with landfill sites. The adopted report calls also for a review of existing legislation concerning incineration of waste and criticises waste disposal instead of recycling and re-use.
MEPs call for greater women's rights in Turkey
Also yesterday Parliament passed a report calling for greater implementation of women's rights in Turkey. Although the report states that the new 2005 Penal Code improved the rights of women it still identifies several areas of concern.
These include the lack of accurate data on women in Turkey and the fact that in areas of South east Turkey girls are not registered at birth. This can serious affect the legal status in later life.
The report also notes the lack of political participation by women in Turkey and low levels female employment (25% compared to the EU25 level of 55%).
Wednesday in Plenary
The House will hear the final report from Parliament's Temporary Committee on transportation and illegal detention of prisoners by the CIA. MEPs will be addressed by the President off Italy and former MEP Giorgio Napolitano whilst resolutions on climate change and the "passenger name recognition-Swift" controversy over personal data.
20070209STO02965 Poettering speech in full Waste Women's rights Watch it live
EN
1
PHOTO
20070213PHT03126.jpg
EN
5
LINK
/eplive/public/freetext_page_direct/20061020FTX11890-2101/default_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208IPR02888 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208IPR02886 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208IPR02887 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
