Thursday in Plenary: visas with Russia, energy, wine reform
Institutions
2007-02-16 - 11:51
Report wants the EU to become more energy efficient
Thursday saw MEPs adopt two reports on visa and immigration issues with Russia. The day also saw them endorse a report on how Europe can lower energy prices and decrease its dependency on energy imports. The report advocates the phasing out of use of fossils fuels in public transport and increasing overall energy efficiency.
On visa arrangements with Russia the report focused on short stay visas that would increase travel by EU and Russian citizens in both directions. Amongst other things, it covers close relatives, business travellers, official delegations and scientific, sporting and cultural events. With a view to increasing trade, international lorry drivers and those involved in transporting passengers are also covered.
The report also covers EU citizens who enter Russia and then require subsequent documentation if they want to travel to Chechnya or Siberia.
The second report concerned the readmission into Russia of illegal immigrants who have entered the EU. Both reports will serve as consultation documents to the Council on the visa / immigration accords initialled in Moscow in April last year. They were drafted by Maria da Assunção Esteves of the European People's Party.
Energy: call for action on rising energy prices
A report into the state of Europe's energy needs has called for greater energy efficiency and for the EU to reduce its dependence on imported energy. MEPs yesterday passed a report by Socialist MEP Manuel Antonio dos Santos which compares present oil prices with those of the early 1970's. It also points out that if present trends continue Europe's dependency on energy imports will rise from 50% of capacity today to 71% by 2030.
The report calls for a massive investment in energy infrastructure across the EU and the phasing out of fossil fuels in the transport sector. Its also calls for the completion of the EU's internal market in the energy field - pointing out that at present the sector is dominated by large firms. The reports says that embracing energy efficient measures would be an easy and cheap way for the EU to reduce CO2 emissions.
Finally, its calls for the EU to have an energy stock of oil and gas that in an emergency could keep the economy running for 120 and 90 days respectively.
"it is time for action, not words"
Speaking during the debate Mr Manuel Antonio dos Santos called on MEPs to "look at the nature of four energy shocks of the last 50 years" telling that "we will only be successful if we take a supranational approach with the whole EU working together. It needs common European policy for energy...this is diplomacy of new century..."
Later, Joaquín Almunia, the European Commissioner for Economic and Monetary Affairs said he welcomed the report and told the House that "we need a genuine single market in energy, to reduce risk to consumers and have acceptable supply of energy". He went on to say that "it is time for action, not words" and pledged that these matters will be a main point at the Council meeting of 18 March.
Also yesterday MEPs from all sides backed a report that aims to protect the historical and cultural position of European wine production. See article below for a full report.
20070209STO02967 Energy Wine reform
EN
1
PHOTO
20070216PHT03272.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070209IPR02933 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208IPR02894 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
