"We, the citizens of the European Union …"
Institutions
2007-03-26 - 12:21
Celebrations in Berlin to mark 50 years since the Treaty of Rome
Meeting in Berlin over the weekend, EU leaders adopted a Declaration to mark 50 years of the Rome Treaty. It spells out what the Union has achieved, what it is for and the challenges ahead. The Declaration reaffirms that "the European Union is founded on equal rights and mutually supportive cooperation" and that "the unnatural division of Europe is now consigned to the past". On the Constitution it calls for it to be put on a "renewed common basis before EP elections in 2009".
Berlin was an apt place for the Declaration. In addition to being the capital of Germany, the current holder of the EU Presidency, the dismantled Berlin Wall symbolises the divisions that Europe has overcome. The Declaration was signed by the "3 Presidents": - for the Parliament Hans-Gert Pöttering, for the Commission José Manuel Barroso and the President of the Council, German Chancellor Angela Merkel.
"Major challenges which do not stop at national borders"
The Declaration says that Europe is "facing major challenges which do not stop at national borders". It mentions terrorism, organised crime, illegal immigration, climate change, energy policy and the fight against poverty.
In terms of international relations it says that "the European Union will continue to promote democracy, stability and prosperity beyond its borders".
Pöttering: "we are Europeans... of equal value"
In a speech at the signing ceremony, Parliament's President Hans Gert Pöttering said, "we are Europeans, Europeans of equal value, wherever in the European Union we may live". He went on to say that "we are linked through our shared values - human dignity, human rights, democracy, the rule of law and the social market economy".
Constitution needed for a "more democratic" EU
President Pöttering also said the draft European Constitution is needed "to make the European Union more democratic, more open and closer to the citizens...we wish the substance of the Constitutional Treaty, including the expression of our common values, to become legally binding before the European elections of June 2009".
Finally he quoted former Chancellor of Germany, Konrad Adenauer, saying, "there was a time when a few people dreamed of European unity. It has since become the hope of many, and today it is a necessity for all".
Chancellor Merkel - from Berlin to Brussels
On Wednesday 28 March Chancellor Angela Merkel will address MEPs in Brussels and give her account of the summit and the Declaration. Also speaking to the House will be Commission President Barroso. Their speeches will be followed by a debate with MEPs. You can watch the debate live on this website from 1500 CET.
20070323STO04577 Berlin Declaration in 23 languages President Pöttering's speech Parliament's Agenda in Brussels this week
EN
1
PHOTO
20070326PHT04631.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.eu2007.de/en/About_the_EU/Constitutional_Treaty/BerlinerErklaerung.html
EN
3
LINK
/president/defaulten.htm
EN
4
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?reference=2007-03&language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
