Anchors aweigh for maritime safety
Transport
2007-03-07 - 11:40
EP seeks tougher measures on maritime safety
Memories of European maritime tragedies have been stirred in recent days: Tuesday marked 20 years since a ferry capsized off Zeebrugge with the loss of 193 lives. In Paris the Total oil company is on trial over France’s worst environmental disaster – the sinking of the rusting “Erika” oil tanker 8 years ago, which coated 400 km of coastline with oil. Safety inspections of ships are vital and Parliament’s transport committee has just adopted 7 reports on improving maritime safety.
Almost all were approved unanimously and will be debated by the full Parliament in April.
350 million Europeans travel by sea a year
This is a vital area for the European Union, with 90% of external trade and 35% of trade between EU countries going by sea, a significant proportion of which is oil and other hazardous substances.
According to the European Maritime Safety Agency (EMSA) 350 million Europeans travel by ship every year, between 600 ports and along thousands of miles of coast.
An interesting aspect of maritime travel in the EU is the sheer diversity of the maritime climate. As well as thousands of kilometres of coast, the EU has many significant islands, some of the world's busiest shipping lanes (the straits of Dover for example and some of the world's busiest ports (Rotterdam and Vigo to name just two).
Parliament supports maritime safety
The reports approved by Parliament's Transport committee deal with aspects of Maritime safety related to the European Commission's "Third Maritime package to improve safety.
The report drafted by French European Peoples' Party MEP Dominique Vlasto deals with the safety and inspection of ships in EU ports, or "port state control" to give it an official name. In essence it means that a foreign ship can be inspected in a European port to ensure safety.
The report advocates a series of measures that would improve safety:
Strengthen the inspection regime, the criteria for selecting ships for inspection, and the parameters to calculate a ship's risk profile. It wants an expanded inspection regime for high "risk profile" vessels, passenger ships and oil and chemical tankers over 12 years old.
It calls on the EMSA in Lisbon and the European Commission to develop a data base showing the risk profiles of ships and indicating all ships due for inspection.
Under certain conditions ships that have been detained in port more than twice in the preceding 36 months could be banned from EU ports.
A single inspection database for the EU and the Paris memorandum of understanding.
High risk ships...from landlocked Slovakia
What exactly is the Paris "Memorandum of Understanding"? It relates to an agreement on maritime safety reached in 1982 and incorporated into EU law in 1995 and it allows for the inspection of 25% of ships in port.
Under the Paris agreement an annual blacklist of unsafe fleets is drawn up. They are divided into 4 categories: medium risk, medium to high risk, high risk and very high risk. In "very high risk" are North Korea, Albania and Slovakia. Slovakia doesn't have a coastline but it does have vessels flying under its flag.
The enlargement of the EU in 2004 and 2007 significantly increased the coastline and maritime fleet of the Union. The Commission's third maritime package is an attempt to cope with the new realities.
20070307STO03826 Parliament's press service: 7 reports Parliament's Transport Committee European Maritime Safety Agency Paris Memorandum of Understanding
EN
1
PHOTO
20070307PHT03830.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/activities/expert/committees/presentation.do?committee=2356&language=EN
EN
4
LINK
http://www.emsa.europa.eu/
EN
5
LINK
http://www.parismou.org/
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070226IPR03587 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
