Wednesday in Plenary: Zimbabwe, Berlin Declaration, Kosovo
Institutions
2007-03-29 - 11:53
Angela Merkel makes her point to MEPs
President Pöttering warmly welcomed the two other signatories of the Berlin Declaration, Council president Angela Merkel and Commission president José Manuel Barroso at the beginning of the plenary session. The declaration was widely welcomed by the major groups, although some MEPs criticised the way it was negotiated. Later on, Commissioner Olli Rehn joined a lively debate about the status of the Kosovo province. MEPs unanimously condemned the increasing violence of Zimbabwe's government.
Opening the sitting Mr Pöttering read a statement on behalf of all the political groups on the situation in Zimbabwe where the government is mounting violent attacks on the democratic opposition. He said: "we condemn all forms of violence and repression by the government of President Mugabe. The Council and the Commission should co-operate with all international, regional and national forces in order to find a transitional solution to turn it from the current regime to a real democracy".
The Berlin Declaration
German Chancellor Angela Merkel was warmly welcomed by MEPs following the Summit and Declaration at the weekend under her Presidency of the Union. She told MEPs that "we have to do our outmost to work together to achieve the objectives. We need the Parliament to help". She mentioned EU-Russia and EU-USA summits as important events to come. Energy and climate change were also key areas according to Mrs Merkel - "it is important to strengthen the role of EU in this area" she told MEPs.
The President if the European Commission José Manuel Barroso stressed the "rapid and ambitions need for institutional settlement" regarding the Constitution. "Failure to agree on institutional settlement will cause divisions which could threaten our common values" he said. "It is obvious that even the biggest Member States cannot tackle climate change, energy security or mass migration alone."
Political Group reaction
For the European People's Party Joseph Daul praised Chancellor Merkel's stewardship of the Summit: "you have proven that Europe is not only about speeches and laws, it is also about emotions, joy and conviviality". He went on to say that "the Berlin declaration is a strong and readable text which puts Europe back on track and which gives new perspective with the proposal to find solution to the institutional questions before the European elections in 2009".
The leader of the Socialist PES group Martin Schultz noted that "we have to deal with the question where we take this continent. European integration is not finished, it needs to continue. Without reformed union, there won't be any enlargement."
The House as a whole warmly welcomed and endorsed the content of the Declaration as a statement of the basic principles of the Union.
Some group leaders – Graham Watson for the Liberal ALDE Group and Monica Frassoni for the Greens – expressed reservations as to the process by which the Declaration had been formulated, stating the view that more open public and parliamentary debate should have occurred. Other Groups, notably the Europe United Left (GUE), felt the Declaration could have said more about the problems Europe faces.
Debate about the Future of Kosovo
The future of Kosovo has been high on the Parliament agenda on Wednesday. This week has seen intensive diplomatic activity after UN special envoy to Kosovo, former Finnish president (1994-2000) Martti Ahtisaari, handed over his recommendations on the final status of the Kosovo to the secretary general of the UN. The UN Security council is expected to vote on the issue before the end of May, thus ending a long transitional period after the international military intervention of 1999.
In reaction to this, Dutch green MEP Joost Lagendijk presented a Parliament report backing the Ahtisaari recommendations to give Kosovo "supervised independence". Europe's Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn was present during the debate, in which most MEPs agreed that the current status quo in Kosovo is not an option and spoke out in favour of opening the way for a peaceful and prosperous development of the region.
German conservative MEP Doris Pack said very clearly, that "the Ahtisaari plan is the only available basis for a peaceful co-existence of ethnic Serbs and Albanians". In order to create a functioning multi-ethnic society, Europe will have to take upon itself a leading role in Kosovo´s future. This will include an extensive military and civilian presence of the EU, estimated at 1500-2000 international staff.
Parliament will vote on the report on Thursday. Commissioner Rehn has expressed his conviction, that an adoption of the report will further reinforce European unity.
Organic products
MEPs discussed a report by Marie-Hélène Aubert on the proposal for a Council regulation on organic production of agricultural products and respective labelling. Parliament is only being consulted on this issue.
Other reports discussed in the plenary:
The future of the European Union's own resources
2008 budget guidelines,
Joint debate on two reports on football,
Maritime transport
Integration of new Member States in the CAP
20070323STO04517 President Pöttering condemns situation in Zimbabwe Berlin Declaration: EU own resources - report: Report on Kosovo: Organic products Agenda of the Plenary session on 28.3.2007
EN
1
PHOTO
20070329PHT04841.jpg
EN
3
LINK
http://www.eu2007.de/en/About_the_EU/Constitutional_Treaty/BerlinerErklaerung.html
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070328IPR04763 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A6-2007-0066 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A6-2007-0067 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A6-2007-0061 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT AGENDA 20070328 SIT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
