Euro-Mediterranean assembly: a call for cultural dialogue
External relations
2007-03-20 - 15:42
Euro-Mediterranean assembly: a call for cultural dialogue
A call for dialogue between the people of the countries that border the Mediterranean was at the centre of a speech by Parliament's President Pöttering to European, Arab and Israeli MPs. He used the occasion to back a special session of the Euro-Med Parliamentary Assembly (EMPA) on the Middle East conflict in autumn 2007. He also proposed that as 2008 will be the year of intercultural dialogue, young people from Europe, the Arab world, Israel and Palestine should meet at the EP for a conference.
Speaking in Tunis on 17 March he returned to his theme of "intercultural dialogue" and the need to "build an intellectual bridge over the Mediterranean" between Europe and its neighbours. He also called for the reconstruction of Lebanon after last year's war and supported a proposed Mediterranean University.
A call for peace in the Middle East
His opening remarks were in Arabic and Hebrew - a symbolic recognition of the fact that the EMPA brings together representatives from Israel and the Arab world - including the Palestinian Authority. In fact outside the UN it is the only Parliamentary forum where European, North African and Middle East countries meet. The EMPA brings together MPs from 37 states in the EU and Mediterranean basin.
Mr Pöttering told delegates: " our objectives are a State of Israel in secure borders and a Palestinian State in secure borders." The aim is "peace and partnership between the human beings, the people and the States in the Middle East."
In his speech he evoked the peace efforts of former Egyptian President Anwar Al Sadat who "stretched out his hand to Israel for peace". He reminded delegates that as a young MEP he had heard Egypt's President Sadat speak at the European Parliament "a few months before he was murdered". On the role that individuals can play he said that "mankind and human dignity, the personality of the individual, have to be taken as the starting point of any dialogue".
EU-Mediterranean relations: "mutual understanding has diminished"
Coming to relations between the EU and countries in the region, he said relations were hampered by a "lack of mutual knowledge and familiarity leading to misunderstandings". "We have all watched with concern how mutual understanding has diminished on both sides of the Mediterranean in recent times. For that reason, we should seize the opportunity offered to us by the Euromed process." The European Parliament played a key role in getting the EMPA off the ground. During its Presidency of the assembly in 2005 it used all its political and logistical resources to regenerate the Euromed parliamentary process.
In Plenary last week MEPs adopted a resolution on Euro-Mediterranean relations calling for a dialogue of cultures, respect for common values, the rule of law, democracy and human rights.
Last week over 500 students from around Europe gathered in the Parliament's March Strasbourg Plenary to mark the European Day for victims of terrorism. During the debate several speakers stressed the importance of mutual understanding with different cultures.
University and Youth Parliament planned
If advances are to be made, in the President's opinion, a number of steps need to taken. These include international efforts to stabilise and reconstruct Lebanon after last summer's war against Israel.
Mr Pöttering also supported a proposed University Institute of the Mediterranean as a way of building education and cultural links in the region. These would be complemented by more educational and research exchanges. As a way of catching people's imagination and energising the Euromed process Mr Pöttering expressed his support for a proposed "Euro-Mediterranean week". This would involve cultural events and meetings aimed at increasing public interest and participation in the Euromed process.
Euromed: Tell me more
First convened in 2005 the Euro-Mediterranean assembly brings together MPs from 27 EU countries and 10 from the Mediterranean rim. The purpose is to add a parliamentary dimension to the "'Barcelona process" which was launched in 1995 to build economic links between the EU and its Mediterranean neighbours. For a full report on the EMPA meeting in Tunis click on the first link below.
20070314STO04222 EP press report on EMPA Euro-Mediterranean resolution Euromed - a user's guide Euromed Watch young people in the last Plenary
EN
1
PHOTO
20070320PHT04399.jpg
EN
5
LINK
/intcoop/empa/default.htm
EN
6
LINK
mms://wm.streampower.be/ep/archive/ep-video1_en_20070312_002.wmv
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070318IPR04276 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070309IPR04014 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060323BKG06654 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
