50 years of equal rights in the EU
Women's rights/Equal opportunities
2007-03-08 - 16:07
International Women's Day - 50 years building Europe
It is 50 years since equal rights for women was put firmly on the European agenda with the Rome Treaty, setting up the European Economic Community, laying down the right of women to get "equal pay for equal work". Women's rights have come a long way since the 1950s as companies and institutions have incorporated them into daily life. And the Parliament has long been a guardian of equality, inaugurating the Women's Rights Committee in 1984.
The principle of equal treatment for men and women was first adopted in the Rome Treaty. The scope of the original provision was limited but evolved over a number of years to become a basic tenet of EU law, with the EP and the European Court of Justice playing an important role in the elaboration and implementation of legislation to make it a reality.
Since 2007 is the year of equal opportunities and today is Women's Day, it's a good opportunity to look at some of the work that the European Parliament has done in the field of women's rights.
The EP set up a Committee on Women's Rights in July 1984. (It is now known as the Committee on Women's Rights and Gender Equality.) The Committee checks whether upcoming legislation affects the rights of women and it gives an opinion on most proposals for legislation on healthy, industry and the internal market.
Levelling the playing field
The Parliament contributes to policy development on equality through involvement in EU strategy making and programmes on gender equality, but is also involved in more specific areas with, for example, a May 2000 Resolution on the fight against trafficking in women and a January 2001 Resolution on the participation of women in the decision-making process.
It has also come up with a number of own-initiative reports which have led to concrete action. The EP pushed for 1999 to be the "European Year of action to combat violence against women", following which the EU came up with the Daphne programme to fight violence against women and children. It also contributed to the inclusion of the principles of equal opportunities and treatment in the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights.
The Parliament has participated in the Network of Parliamentary Committees for Equal Opportunities for Women and Men in the EU, since it was set up in 1997
Promoting EU values worldwide
The situation of women in the EU has radically improved in the last 50 years, but there are still places in the world where women suffer discrimination, pain and where their lives are threatened.
In granting the Sakharov Prize for freedom of thought, the EP has honoured those fighting for women's rights. In 1994 it was awarded to Taslima Nasreen, a Bangladeshi feminist doctor fighting for woman's equality in Islamic countries and in 2005, Nigerian lawyer Hauwa Ibrahim was one of the laureates for her work defending women condemned to death by stoning for adultery.
The work goes on
The Parliament continues to focus on this issue. Last week the Women's Rights Committee organised a hearing on reconciling family life and study. Highly educated women tend to have fewer children later in life because of the cost of studying, the difficulty of caring for a child and attending school and because fertility drops over the age of 30. Given the EU's demographic problems this is an issue that needs to be addressed.
A number of solutions were proposed, including financial support, affordable childcare, more involvement by fathers and more flexibility over time and distance learning. .
A report on the subject is expected to go to the plenary in June.
20070308STO03872 EP Women's Committee Working time and the work-life balance: how can we solve the dilemma?
EN
1
PHOTO
20070308PHT03900.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/committees/presentation.do?committee=2365&language=EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061020STO11817 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
