Juvenile delinquency: "entertainment violence" a problem
Youth
2007-03-21 - 18:26
Juvenile delinquency is on the rise in Europe
Are you a juvenile delinquent? Hopefully not, although in some EU countries the percentage of people who may be called this is as high as 22%. It can lead to exclusion from school and a drift into petty criminality - and a recent hearing in Parliament was told that juvenile violence is on the rise across Europe. Broken homes, poor housing conditions and despair about ever finding a job are three important contributors to the problem. Social exclusion based on race is another cause.
Hi-tech delinquents?
The hearing was told that the widespread availability of "entertainment violence" on TV, video and the internet was a cause for concern. Exposing young people to this can lead to them being de-sensitised to the effects of violence. MEPs and experts were told that in an experiment conducted in the US there was 40-50% less violence if these types of electronic media were switched off.
Some of the current measures that are being employed to tackle the growing were also explained. In Spain they have an observatory programme, in Germany "good conduct classes" and recognition for good work. In all countries the debate oscillates between punishment and protection of this vulnerable group inn society. This is particularly so as the main victims of juvenile crime are juveniles themselves.
Greek Socialist MEP Katerina Batzeli from the Women's Rights committee is preparing a report on possible ways to tackle the problem. She intends to use testimony from the hearing as well as from NGOs and national experts in the field before reaching her conclusions.
Need for positive role models
However, from the hearing there were some approaches advocated: These include:
tackling the social origins of this problem
preparing parents and teachers
giving the child an active role in the society, engaging in lawful socially useful activities
the need for positive role models
a role of NGOs and local authorities in combating the phenomenon
Speaking at the hearing Mrs Batzeli summed up some of the problems they face: "people's attitudes to children and children rights have evolved over the last years and society is trying to establish a standard approach to dealing with offenders". She will be hoping that her forthcoming report can offer some solutions to the problem.
20070314STO04228 Press release Programme of the hearing
EN
1
PHOTO
20070320PHT04407.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/hearings/20070320/femm/programme_en.pdf
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070319IPR04285 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
