Debates on culture, poverty dominate Citizens' Forum in Wales
Future of Europe/European integration
2007-03-14 - 12:01
Citizens' Forum in Cardiff
Some 150 Welsh school students, youth groups, teachers and others gathered in Cardiff on Friday 9 March for a Citizens Forum in the National Assembly for Wales. The forum, organised by the European Parliament's UK Office in association with the National Assembly, was the second such event in the UK, following a most successful start in the Scottish Parliament last May.
After a welcome from the Chief Executive of the National Assembly, and initial presentations from the groups, the young people broke into 9 working parties. The subjects they had chosen were Immigration in the EU, and the EU's roles in Climate Change and in Development and the Fight against Poverty.
Open up to cultures and languages
In the presentation following their group discussion on poverty Ffion Rowe and Alex Griffiths from Treorchy Comprehensive School suggested that e-twinning and exchanges helped to open people up to other cultures and languages. They also felt that language classes should be provided for immigrants as those who spoke English or Welsh were more accepted and integrated more easily with the local population.
Those discussing climate change felt that the reasons for taking measures to combat climate change needed to be better explained. Individual suggestions for dealing with it included making recycling a legal requirement, investment in public transport and making energy efficient light bulbs the only ones available.
In the morning session Richard Davies of Ysgol Tre-Gib had quoted Mahatma Gandhi: "Earth provides enough to satisfy every man's need but not every man's greed".
Action on poverty debated
On the issue of poverty, concerns were expressed by those in the poverty working groups that aid to developing countries did not always reach its target. Many participants also believed that subsidies for products produced in the EU could create unfair competition for developing countries. In addition, they felt that developing countries were not as prepared as developed countries to face the challenges of globalisation.
The young people were joined in the afternoon by a panel of politicians, including three MEPs Glenys Kinnock, Jill Evans and Graham Watson, and Members of the National Assembly, who listened to reports from the working groups and contributed to the discussion. The entire event was directed with aplomb by Jamie Owen of BBC Wales.
The working groups were extremely lively and thought-provoking; the general consensus was that if this group was at all representative of young Wales, there should be no fears for the future of politics in the principality.
20070313STO04105 UK Office of the Parliament National Assembly for Wales
EN
1
PHOTO
20070314PHT04125.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.europarl.org.uk/index.htm
EN
3
LINK
http://www.wales.gov.uk/index.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
