European Council: Pöttering calls for action on climate, simpler laws
European Council
2007-03-09 - 12:29
EU leaders gather yesterday for the European Council
Parliament's President Hans-Gert Pöttering told EU leaders at the opening of the European Summit last night that they have a "moral obligation" to take difficult political decisions to ensure the "well being of future generations". The first day of the Summit was dominated by discussions of climate change and energy. Mr Pöttering cited a recent opinion poll saying that 90% of citizens were concerned about climate change: He also urged EU action to safeguard energy supplies.
The President urged EU leaders to retain the substance of the Constitutional Treaty in the "D eclaration on the Future of Europe" on 25 March in Berlin.
"Our biggest asset is our people"
He said "our biggest asset is our people" but voiced concern over demographic trends noting that "o f the 30 States in the world with declining populations, 15 are in Europe". As well as demographic change he spoke of the need to improve the workings of the internal market as certain barriers remain - notably in transport, energy, financial services and telecommunications.
Equity between generations: President Pöttering underlined our "moral obligation" to future generations and called for courage and will to take difficult political decisions "which will lay the foundations for the economy, the environment and the well-being of future generations".
He used the opportunity of being in the Council building to praise the joint legislative work it and the Parliament had done recently - notably over reducing roaming charges.
Simplify and clarify EU law, says Pöttering
The need to make European law more "transparent and comprehensible" was another theme Mr Pöttering picked out. In particular he wants to see simplified and reduced legislation that would "benefit people and the environment". This could be done by reducing bureaucracy and using the principle of subsidiarity more frequently (the idea that law be made as close to the public as possible).
He also spoke of an "implementation deficit" and called for better transposition, proper implementation and enforcement of EU law. A cost-effective EU wide patent could be one step in this direction said Mr Pöttering. He said the failure to put reforms into place is hindering the attainment of Lisbon strategy aims and called their acceleration "a matter of urgency".
Climate: "years between 1995 and 2006 among the 12 hottest since 1850"
In addition to the poll showing 9 out of 10 people are concerned about climate change, Mr Pöttering quoted a recent UN report which said that "the years between 1995 and 2006 were among the 12 hottest since 1850".
He spelled out stark consequences of climate warming "a further temperature rise of more than 5° s is a real possibility. An increase of that kind in the temperature of the Earth would certainly be a massive leap, bearing in mind that 5° represents the difference between today's climate and the climate during the last ice age". He reminded EU leaders that experts say a reduction of 2°C is technically feasible and economically affordable, if concrete and binding targets will be agreed.
World leaders must accept that there is no space for excuses any more, action is needed now, he said. On behalf of the European Parliament he presented proposals for closer cooperation with the national parliaments of the 27 EU member states on climate change and for Europe to take a leading role in becoming what he called a "low-CO2 economy".
Foreign policy: "build bridges and foster peace"
On the EU's relations with the wider world, the President reiterated the need for measures to stop Iran acquiring a nuclear weapon. He also said the "safeguarding of energy supplies for the EU as a whole" is an important aspect of the partnership and cooperation agreement between the EU and Russia.
President Pöttering called for energy policy to be integrated into the European Neighbourhood Policy (which governs relations with the EU's neighbours). He told EU leaders that "the best way to safeguard our energy supplies is to establish a link between measures to foster economic development and democracy".
On relations with countries in North Africa and the Middle East he promised to implement active parliamentary diplomacy and intercultural dialogue, stressing the role played by the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly.
Pledging a stronger transatlantic partnership, he reiterated, nevertheless that the existence of the US prison in Guantanamo Bay is against European values.
20070309STO03960 Parliament's President Conclusions of the meeting EU energy policy Parliamentary debate on the climate
EN
1
PHOTO
20070309PHT03985.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/president/defaulten.htm
EN
3
LINK
http://www.consilium.europa.eu/uedocs/cms_Data/docs/pressdata/en/ec/93135.pdf
EN
4
LINK
/news/public/documents_par_theme/909/default_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070206STO02777 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
