Thursday in Plenary: Russia, Zimbabwe, BBC journalist and Geremek case
Institutions
2007-04-27 - 07:59
MEPs discussed the case of BBC journalist Alan Johnston
The last day of April's Plenary in Strasbourg was dedicated mainly to human rights. MEPs spoke out on the situation in Zimbabwe and on breaches of human rights, democracy and the rule of law in Russia. The kidnapping in Gaza of BBC journalist Alan Johnston also continued to preoccupy the house. Parliament also called once more for a universal moratorium of death penalty and adopted its 2006 annual report on Human Rights in the World.
Fundamental freedoms under threat in Russia
MEPs held a lively debate about the violent repression of demonstrations in Russia with most of the speakers cited continuing breaches of human rights and fundamental freedoms in Russia. They condemned them and warned of the growing seriousness of the situation.
Gabriele Stauner for the European People's Party (EPP) said Russia "is not acting as a responsible member of the Council of Europe". Others focused on the freedom of the press, evoking the case of murdered Russian journalist Anna Politovskaya. "Journalists are afraid" said Milan Horacek for the Greens while Panagiotis Beglitis for the Socialist PSE warned of a "new intolerance to the dissidents" and said that "even if Russia is a strategic partner of EU, in future negotiations on a new agreement we will have to take into account what is happening".
Marcin Libicki for the Union of Europe for the Nations noted "Russia's lack of democratic tradition". Former Russian President Boris Yeltsin, who died this week, was also remembered by PSE member Józef Pinior. After the debate, MEPs approved a joint resolution on the subject.
MEPs call for release of kidnapped BBC journalist
A resolution calling for the immediate release of BBC correspondent Alan Johnston was unanimously passed by MEPs on Thursday. Mr Johnston has been missing since 12 March. In the debate Richard Howitt for the PSE group called the BBC a "symbol of integrity" in the media and expressed solidarity with the journalist's family.
Many speakers in the debate shared the view of Swedish Green MEP Carl Schlyter who said the kidnap "goes against the interests of the Palestinian people. Mr Johnston was living in Gaza and he was telling the story of the Palestinian people to the world" he said. Liz Lynne for the Liberal ALDE called on the Palestinian authority to "work to put an end to the attacks the journalists are suffering".
Resolution condemns situation in Zimbabwe
Robert Mugabe's ambitions to run for election against as President of Zimbabwe were condemned in a resolution backed by five of the Parliament's five largest groups. It also deplores efforts to intimidate the political opposition.
On developments in Zimbabwe Geoffrey Van Orden for the EPP told the house that "something positive has happened. The latest violence from Mugabe regime has awakened reactions in the neighbouring countries. Now they see Mugabe as a dictator and don't accept the explanation that the problems come from outside". Max van den Berg for the PSE said the "EU has rightly imposed sanctions to Zimbabwe. But we want these sanctions to be extended".
The situation in Zimbabwe continues to deteriorate: life expectancy is now among the lowest in the world at 37 for men and 34 for women. Twenty per cent of adults are HIV positive and the World Food Programme estimates that over 4.5 million suffer from malnutrition.
Announcement on Polish MEP Geremek
Polish MEP and veteran of the Solidarity movement Bronislaw Geremek of the ALDE group could be facing a legal challenge to his mandate as an MEP after his refusal to sign a new Polish declaration stating that he has never collaborated with the Communist-era security services. A spokesman for the Polish government had indicated that Mr Geremek's mandate as one of Poland's 54 MEPs could as a result become null and void.
Parliament's Hans-Gert Pöttering made a statement to MEPs on the issue in which he said that "The Polish Constitutional Court is currently examining the law on which the withdrawal of the mandate of Mr Geremek is based. A decision of the Court is expected during the next weeks". Mr Pöttering also said that the Conference of Presidents (where the leaders of the political groups meet) had "stated its sympathy and solidarity with our colleague Bronislaw Geremek".
Also on Thursday
MEPs urged Polish authorities to refrain from proposing a law banning 'homosexual propaganda' in schools (resolution)
Parliament supported a regulation providing for special Rapid Border Intervention Teams to provide technical and operational assistance over the external borders of any EU member.
approved a proposal to allow "Regional Advisory Councils" for fisheries to be funded in a more straightforward manner.
20070420STO05501 Zimbabwe : MEPs condemn Mugabe dictatorship Statement by President Pöttering on the situation of Bronislaw Geremek MEPs take stock of EU record on human rights protection in 2006 EP reiterates call for universal moratorium on the death penalty Poland urged to drop new law banning 'homosexual propaganda' in schools Rapid response teams to tackle illegal immigration
EN
1
PHOTO
20070426PHT06112.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420IPR05699 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070426IPR05986 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070426IPR05964 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070423IPR05701 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420IPR05691 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420IPR05693 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
