EP and Human Rights: Beyond activism
Human rights
2007-04-03 - 14:51
EP does have a positive impact on human rights
Reports, resolutions, debates, questions, the Sakharov prize for Freedom of Thought, human rights clauses, guidelines, dialogues - there are a multitude of policy instruments to promote human rights. But does it add up to more than just words? Is the European Parliament, long-time champion of human rights, really making a difference? Yes, a seminar last week concluded, but it could do more.
Two former Sakharov Prize winners - Robert Ménard, Secretary General of Reporters sans Frontières (2005), and Ales Antsipenka of the Belarus Association of Journalists (2004) - joined experts from the EU institutions, the German Bundestag and NGOs in a seminar on 27 March in the EP Human Rights subcommittee to consider the issue. The winners said the prize had made them safer and better able to pursue their work, but Parliament could still follow up more effectively on its Human Rights initiatives.
EP must coordinate, prepare and focus better - Pöttering
Opening the seminar, EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering, said: "We shouldn't necessarily do more, but better with the tools we have", He underlined the need to co-ordinate, prepare and focus better. "We cannot give an example if we don't ourselves live up to expectations."
Sakharov Prize Laureate Robert Ménard said the Parliament is doing a great job in general, but he questioned the consistency of action. "If you agree to sign an association agreement, why don't you make its human rights clauses respected?"
Positive impact, but lacks visibility
The seminar considered a study on the impact of EP activities in the field of human rights by the European Inter-University Centre for Human Rights and Democratisation (EIUC), which found some of the positive effects were raising visibility, protecting individuals, putting pressure on third countries and being a source of reference for other institutions and organisations. For example, after the draft 2004 Annual Report on human rights identified the stoning of women, execution of minors and amputation as punishment of particular concern, the rapporteur got written assurances from Iran that a moratorium would be placed on the practices. When the Damas de Blanco won the Sakharov prize, they said: “Although the authorities say they do not recognize the prize, in fact they are more cautious in their repression against us.”
However, the study says better visibility and media coverage is needed as well as better coordination within EP and with other institutions. "The effect is lost when there's no follow-up and the EP falls back to its everyday business," EIUC President Professor Horst Fischer said, suggesting better interweaving and coordination of human rights activities inside the Parliament and with other institutions and EU countries.
A number of participants came up with suggestions to overcome the lack of visibility of EP efforts in the human rights field. "Why not use common positions, declarations, joint missions between Sakharov Prize winners and MEPs?" Ménard said. Other suggestions included: the use of delegation visits, more use of specialised EU media, broadcasting EP debates and even YouTubing. The chair of the committee, Hélène Flautre, said the responsibility belongs jointly to the EP and the media.
Coveney Report
Fine Gael's Simon Coveney, who drafted the 2006 EP annual report on Human Rights in the World, noted that a lot of the recommendations are already included in the report. The report was adopted 27 March by the Foreign Affairs Committee and will be put to the plenary in April. Coveney also said the Parliament should continue to report independently in part because it can play a stronger advocacy role and push EU policy further than the Commission and Council of Ministers. In addition, it isn't bound by the same diplomatic constraints as the other two bodies. External Affairs Commissioner Benita Ferrero Waldner has supported a concerted EU human rights report.
20070323STO04522 Press Info on the 2006 EP human rights report The Parliament and Human Rights Human Rights Committee
EN
1
PHOTO
20070330PHT04977.jpg
EN
4
LINK
/activities/expert/committees/presentation.do?committee=2367&language=EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326IPR04589 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060912STO10568 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
