Thursday in Plenary: EU foreign policy, own resources
Institutions
2007-03-30 - 09:42
Javier Solana: told MEPs of a "major desire" for a strong EU foreign policy
Day 2 of Plenary opened with an overview of the Union's foreign policy in 2007 by Javier Solana - the EU's High Representative for foreign policy. He identified the Arab-Israeli dispute, the nuclear stand off with Iran, the status of Kosovo and Darfur as major issues. Mr Solana also condemned the seizure of 15 UK personnel by Iran and called for a debate on missile defence in Europe. In a later vote on Thursday MEPs adopted reports on the EU's "own-resources".
Solana before MEPs to report on EU foreign policy
Mr Solana told MEPs that there was "major desire" around the world for a strong EU foreign policy and reminded them that the EU has 10 international military missions and plans more in Afghanistan and Kosovo. Later in the debate Joseph Daul of the European People's Party took up this theme when he said that EU foreign policy should encourage freedom around the world.
Middle East: On the Middle East Mr Solana welcomed and supported the recent Arab League initiative to revive a 2002 plan which would give Israel peace treaties and recognition from Arab states if it withdrew to its 1967 borders, - and pledged support for the new Palestinian national reconciliation government. Socialist leader Martin Schulz noted that the EU is built on dialogue and it was important to talk to the new Palestinian government.
Iran: On the nuclear stand-off with Iran, Mr Solana said "Iran must comply with its (UN) obligations". He also said that Europe must support non-proliferation of nuclear material and disarmament. The heads of all the political groups supported a political solution to the crisis although some, notably Graham Watson for the Liberal ALDE Group and Daniel Cohn-Bendit for the Greens/EFA, strongly advocated moves towards general nuclear disarmament.
Mr Solana said that he had raised the issue of the captured British sailors when he met the Iranian Foreign Minister recently. The political groups condemned the detention and called on Tehran to release them - while Mr Watson noted that "most of them are my constituents".
Kosovo: On the disputed province Mr Solana repeated the conclusions of UN envoy Martti Ahtisaari that it would be "extremely difficult to find a negotiated solution favourable to Kosovo and Serbia".
He said Darfur must remain the EU's "number one concern" in Africa. For the European people's party Joseph Daul called the situation in Darfur "genocide" and developments in Zimbabwe "an affront ".
Missile defence: (the Czech Republic and Poland have agreed to let the US station missile systems on their territory). Mr Solana said that the EU was not a "defensive alliance" and the Treaties give sovereignty to its members in this area. However countries are obliged to support the general aims of the Union and "it would be a mistake not to talk about this issue".
Martin Schulz for the Socialist PES Group warned of a "new arms race" of missile defence systems are developed in Europe. He said it would solve none of the existing problems like poverty and disease but "only create new ones". Konrad Szymanski for the Europe of the Nations Group warned against taking the "Russian view" - one that "could divide the EU".
Own resources: a fairer distribution of EU money?
MEPs adopted a report proposing a reform of the "own-resources" system which would above all emphasise "equality between EU states". Own resources were created in 1970 and consist of agricultural duties and sugar production levies (approximately 1.5% of the EU budget) and customs duties collected at the EU's external borders (roughly 11% of the Union's budget). The opinion of MEPs is that they believe the current system is complex, incomprehensible to the public and not transparent - hence the need for reform.
The own-initiative report by European People's Party MEP by Alain Lamassoure advocates two stages of reform:
In the first stage the system would be based on the "Gross National Income resource". This resource is less visible to the general public but is more equitable in relating contributions to the general level of prosperity. Under this scheme the British rebate would be abolished by 2013.
In the second stage, the EU would benefit directly from a certain share of tax, as happens with regional or local authorities in most countries. The new system will, under no circumstances, grant the European Union the right to levy taxes. Fiscal sovereignty will remain with the Member States.
MEPs want the new system to be introduced from 2014, with a "transition period" to guarantee a smooth phasing-out of the old financing system.
The next Plenary session opens on 23 April in Strasbourg.
20070323STO04519 Solana debate in full Own resources - more Wednesday in Plenary
EN
1
PHOTO
20070329PHT04917.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326IPR04625 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070329IPR04856 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070323STO04517 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
