Monday Plenary: counterfeiting, advanced therapies, financial payments
Institutions
2007-04-24 - 12:58
CDs are a prime target for counterfeiters
Fighting counterfeit goods, advanced medicinal therapies and ways of making cheaper and faster financial payments were all on the agenda on Monday in plenary. The session opened with EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering passing his condolences to Russia following the death of Boris Yeltsin. He also urged the Turkish government to protect religious minorities in the wake of three recent murders.
Action against counterfeiting
Introducing a report on a proposed directive to introduce criminal sanctions against counterfeiters, the rapporteur Nicola Zingaretti for the PES said that the volume of counterfeit goods had risen 1600% in a decade with the loss of 125,000 jobs.
Counterfeiting affects everything from CDs and cosmetics to medicines (which can be fakes or of an inferior quality). Although people may think they are getting a "bargain" counterfeiting undermines legitimate business. It also reduces tax revenue threatening services and in the case of medicines undermines funding for research into new remedies.
It also breeds organised crime - a situation not helped by the EU's current fragmented system of laws. According to the rapporteur "this directive is to fight organised crime". That is why patents and personal use are out of the scope. He stressed the risk linked to counterfeited medical products and the effects of piracy on EU economy.
For the Greens/EFA in the debate David Hammerstein Mintz warned against the start of a "'witch hunt" whilst for the European People's Party Hans-Peter Mayer said "criminalisation is not aimed at citizens but at professional counterfeiters". A vote on the Enforcement of intellectual property rights will be held on Wednesday.
Advanced therapy medicinal products
This report by Slovak European People's Party member Miroslav Mikolášik aims to set a legal framework for genetic and cell therapy and tissue engineering. The stated purpose is to ensure common stands so that people are treated safely whilst also providing a legal framework that will boost innovation and research.
This type of treatment could offer the hope of treatment for many diseases, although it raises many ethical issues - issues that a majority of MEPs believe should be settled at the national level. This will take into account the cultural differences between EU members. This is particularly reflected in excluding products derived from embryonic stem cells from the scope of regulation. Mr Mikolášik commented "as a rapporteur I had to respect diversity of 27 legislations".
For the Greens/EFA Hiltrud Breyer hoped that the vote on this proposal "will prove to be a touchstone" in that in might constitute the "incorporation of European values in legislation." Ensuring the "non-commercial of the human body" is essential, and it is also important to "avoid genetic interventions" she told the house. The vote is on Wednesday with the rapporteur warning it would be "close".
Cheaper and faster bank transfers?
Cheaper and faster bank transfers could be on the way with a proposed directive on payment services in the EU's internal market. The purpose is to make international payments in euro as simple as domestic payments and improve consumer protection and encourage more open competition. MEPs welcomed the role of the Parliament in pushing for a balance between the market and the consumer. The report - by Jean-Paul Gauzès of the European People's Party - was adopted in a vote on Tuesday.
20070420STO05492 Watch the debates live Info on Mikolášik report Advanced therapy: MEPs debate report Monday
EN
1
PHOTO
20070424PHT05781.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/eplive/public/freetext_page_direct/20061120FTX00012-2101/default_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420IPR05538 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070201STO02644 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
