Citizens' Forums: what people are saying in 2007
Future of Europe/European integration
2007-04-18 - 12:07
In the famous "period of reflection" after voters in France and the Netherlands rejected the EU Constitution in 2005, the Parliament launched "Citizens' Forums" across Europe to listen to what the people had to say. This year alone they have brought together members of the public, MEPs, MPs, local representatives and NGOs in 15 countries. Below is a flavour of what people have been discussing this year.
The Netherlands: Haarlem and Maastricht
Held in January and February in Haarlem and the emblematic town of Maastricht, many participants felt that the EU does not do enough to protect the environment, particularly concerning airline pollution.
On the Constitution, 80% of the people in Haarlem (50% in Maastricht) would like to see a new referendum with some preferring the existing document while others called for the Constitution to be completely rewritten.
Italy: Florence 10 February
A student who attended called for the EU to take greater risks in passing the Constitution. They paraphrased Max Weber saying that the possible cannot be achieved without first trying the impossible.
Others wanted the Constitution to push the more "social" aspect of Europe - i.e. job security, living standards, health care, and social security - rather than concentrate on institutional issues.
Concerning ratification - in a final document agreed by participants ("The Call of Firenze") they called for a referendum in 2009 to coincide with the next European elections.
United Kingdom: Cardiff, Wales 9 March
These debates were dominated by immigration, climate change and the fight against poverty. Some of the suggestions from participants included: e-twinning and exchanges help to open people up to other cultures and languages. They also said that language classes should be provided for immigrants.
Also many participants felt that the reasons for taking measures to combat climate change needed to be better explained.
There were also concerns that aid to developing countries did not always reach its target. Many participants also believed that subsidies for products produced in the EU could create unfair competition for developing countries.
Across Sweden: March, April
Debates in Sweden dealt with the position of women in the EU and human rights. One of the MEPs who attended, Socialist member Inger Segelström said "the average women in Europe earns 15% less than men - this means they work without a salary in January and February".
On human rights Jens Holm of the European United Left said that "whether human rights issue is a success story or not depends on who you ask. If we had been seeking asylum from a country in Africa, I don’t believe we would have seen the EU as well functioning regarding to human rights".
Latvia and Estonia: Valka, Valga 9 March
These events were symbolically held in Latvian town of Valka and the Estonian town of Valga in the morning and afternoon to represent the common European experience. Fittingly, the event was dominated by discussions over regional development and cross border cooperation. Studying and working abroad also featured prominently as did the possibility of one day joining the Euro zone.
On the issue of studying, Latvian MEP Inese Vaidere for the Union of Europe for the Nations Group remarked that "young people should first study the profession, then become the professionals and only then go into the politics so that they have a necessary background for their work".
A separate event in the Latvian capital Riga on 23 March looked at the economic impact of EU accession on Latvia and how to access EU funds. The participants also discussed education - stressing its importance - and the tax system.
Cyprus: 23 March Nicosia
Participants felt that the EU had not achieved a high level of political integration - especially with regard to foreign policy and that the EU's foreign and security policy should be strengthened.
Where's next?
Citizens' Forums continue to be held throughout the year by the Parliament, below are some upcoming forums.
Stockholm, Sweden: EU and transparency policy (3.5), EU constitution (11.5)
Germany: Growth and employment (Mainz, 10.5), The Environment (Essen, 14.5)
Italy: Erasmus scheme (Vibo Valentia, 18.5)
Portugal: Portuguese Presidency (Porto, 18.5)
20070412STO05235 Parliament's Information Offices UK
EN
1
PHOTO
20070418PHT05395.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/parliament/public/nearYou.do?language=EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070313STO04105 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
