Plenary session: 23-26 April - what's on the agenda
Institutions
2007-04-20 - 13:09
The April plenary session in Strasbourg will see MEPs debating transatlantic relations ahead of a key EU/US summit on 30 April in the US. India's President, Dr A.P.J. Abdul Kalam will address MEPs. The House will vote on legislation to make cashless payments – such as card transactions, bank transfers and direct debits – simpler and cheaper. Parliament will also be asked to vote on a draft regulation designed to foster gene therapy, somatic cell therapy and tissue engineering.
The House will debate and vote on the draft annual report on human rights in the world and the discharge of the EU budget for 2005. Among other key legislation on the agenda is the third maritime package.
Monday 23 April The session starts with a debate on payment services in the internal market. MEPs are to debate and vote on the legal framework designed to make cashless payments simpler and cheaper with the creation of a single European payments area.
Following this, MEPs will debate and vote on a draft regulation on advanced therapy and medicinal products designed to foster gene therapy, somatic cell therapy and tissue engineering. MEPs in the Environment and Health Committee support the draft text but are calling for guarantees regarding the products and techniques used, plus extra support for smaller companies working in this field. The vote is on Wednesday. The House will turn its attention to the enforcement of intellectual property rights. Parliament will be asked to approve the first EU directive aiming at harmonising national criminal law when a first-reading report on legislation imposing criminal sanctions for the infringement of intellectual property rights comes up for a plenary vote. The vote takes place on Wednesday. Tuesday 24 April Tuesday starts with a debate on the EU budget discharge for 2005. MEPs on the Budgetary Control committee have relaunched the idea of "national declarations." They are demanding that EU members take responsibility for co-managing Community funds, alongside the European Commission.
Tuesday also sees MEPs debating the progress that Croatia has made towards accession to the EU. Croatia, a candidate country for accession to the EU since October 2005, has made major progress in its preparations, according to MEPs. However, the EP Foreign Affairs Committee believes it must make further efforts at a local level in areas such as cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), reform of the judiciary and the transition to a market economy. MEPs then turn their attention to combating HIV/AIDS within the EU and in the neighbouring countries. Tuesday evening is dedicated to the third maritime safety package, which seeks to promote healthy competition between shipping operators who comply with international rules on safety and compensation. The Commission will make a statement on Galileo - the European Satellite Navigation System on Tuesday evening. MEPs will vote on a resolution on Wednesday
Wednesday 25 April The key debate of the week is on transatlantic relations. MEPs will debate the topic after hearing statements from both Council and Commission. The next EU-US Summit will take place on 30 April in Washington DC where the key topics for debate will include energy and climate change. MEPs will also vote on a resolution.
At midday on Wednesday, the President of India, Dr A.P.J. Abdul Kalam will address MEPs in a formal sitting. On Wednesday, the House will vote on a proposal from the Conference of Presidents to set up a new Temporary Committee on Climate Change. A debate on human rights in the world and the EU's policy towards it will take place on Wednesday. Focusing on the situation in 2006, the report looks at EU policies on breaches of human rights, criticises EU action in this area and makes a number of recommendations. China, Iran, Russia and Sudan are among countries singled out for criticism. MEPs will also debate the issue of homophobia in Europe. The House will vote on a resolution on Thursday. Parliament will also turn its attention to a moratorium on the death penalty with a vote on resolutions on Thursday. Thursday 26 April MEPs will debate EU relations with Switzerland. The House also turns its attention to the situation of disabled women in the EU. At 3pm on Thursday, MEPs will debate the deteriorating situation in Zimbabwe. The House will also vote on a resolution. The session ends as usual with three debates and votes on human rights around the world. On this occasion, the topics are: the recent suppression of demonstrations in Russia, the kidnapping of BBC journalist Alan Johnston in Gaza and the human rights situation in the Philippines.
20070420STO05488 Strasbourg Briefing: Plenary in detail Live debates all week from 1700 CET on Monday
EN
1
PHOTO
20070420PHT05547.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/eplive/public/freetext_page_direct/20061120FTX00012-2101/default_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070413BRI05265 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
