Croatia's EU hopes: MEPs to vote in Strasbourg on state of play
External relations
2007-04-17 - 11:29
Dubrovnik, shelled in the war, now symbolic of Croatian optimism
Will Croatia become the EU's next member? A recent poll found that 53% of Croatia's 4.5 million people would like it to be. Next Wednesday in Plenary MEPs will have their own "poll" when they vote on a report on Croatia's progress towards EU membership. It congratulates Croatia on "good progress" and "commends" them on cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal over war criminals. The report wants more judicial reform and for Zagreb to settle its border dispute with EU member Slovenia.
For supporters of Zagreb's EU's hopes there is good news; if the accession criteria are met then the report says "this should lead...to a timely accession of Croatia to the European Union". However, no date or timetable is given. The author of the report - Austrian Socialist MEP Hannes Swoboda, secured it approval by the Foreign Affairs committee in late March.
Suspected war criminals
The most critical part of report voices concerned that "hostility at a local level" in Croatia may undermine prosecution of suspected war criminals. It also says that the negative perception by Croats of the International Criminal Tribunal for former Yugoslavia (ICTY) must be overcome.
On relations with the Court, the report is also critical of Zagreb's willingness to pay the legal fees for army generals and its offer to act as "amicus curiae" (when a third party offers assistance to a court) for these and others before ICTY.
The Croatian government has defended its policy of paying for legal fees saying that the men are on very low incomes (as army officers) and cannot possibly afford their own legal costs.
The most notably beneficiary of these legal costs could be Croatian Army General Ante Gotovina. He is charged with "Crimes against humanity" for his part in the 1995 military offensive in the "Krajina" area of Croatia. The opening of membership talks was complicated by the controversy over Gotovina's status. The issue was highly sensitive as many Croats considered Gotovina hero rather than someone who should be on trial in the Hague. He was eventually arrested in late 2005.
With the country chasing EU membership and likely to join NATO in 2009 the treatment of war criminals is an important test. On Monday 16 April a Croatian Court indicted a Parliamentarian and six other people on charges related to the killing of Serb civilians during the 1991-1995 war. The man charged - Branimir Glavas - is the most senior state official ever charged with such crimes.
Slovenia-Croatia border dispute lingers
Another complicating factor in Zagreb's EU hopes is its ongoing border dispute with neighbouring Slovenia. The two former Yugoslav Republic's have been arguing over maritime areas and fishing rights since the break-up of Tito's state. In 2004 Slovenia and its 2 million people became the first Yugoslav successor join to join the European Union. It is considered one of the "stars" of the new arrivals in terms of "Euro-enthusiasm" and economic performance. At the start of this year it adopted the Euro as its currency.
The report by Hannes Swoboda calls on Ljubljana and Zagreb to "exploit all opportunities available" to settle the dispute. Next Spring Slovenia becomes the first of the "class of 2004" to hold the rotating EU Presidency - and no-one wants the issue to overshadow the agenda.
Another former part of Yugoslavia - the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia is also an EU "candidate country" hoping to join the EU when it completes negotiations. In theory all of the countries in the Western Balkans have been offered a "European perspective" of possible membership should they fulfil the criteria and should existing members agree.
The report on Croatia also calls for the rapid ratification of the Kyoto protocol to reduce greenhouse gases, the introduction of a Civil Service Act to improve transparency and further steps to improve the country's judicial system. It also calls on Croatia to liberalise its economy and reduce subsidies in the shipbuilding and steel industries.
Croatia: EU members by 2009?
Many in Zagreb fear that "enlargement fatigue" could affect Croatia's EU hopes after 10 new countries joined in 2004 and two more followed in 2007. They are also worried that continued wrangles over the EU's draft Constitution could delay their entry. Some states have said that no more enlargements can take place before the situation regarding the Constitution can be clarified.
The recent "Berlin declaration" to mark 50 years since the Rome Treaty called for the Constitutional issue to be settled before the 2009 elections - and some see this as the deadline for Croatia's membership.
Across the EU and the European Parliament Croatia has many supporters. Prime Minister Ivo Sanader's party is a member of the Parliament's European People's Party - the largest bloc in the Parliament. This could be useful as before any new country can join the European Union there is a legal requirement that MEPs must vote to give their "Assent" to new members.
You can see the result of the vote live here next Wednesday on the Parliament's website.
20070412STO05232 EP press report after Foreign Affairs Committee adopt report Croatia - profile and state of negotiations with EU Parliament's Foreign Affairs Committee Hannes Swoboda report Strasbourg Plenary 23-26 April - Agenda
EN
1
PHOTO
20070417PHT05373.jpg
EN
3
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/enlargement/croatia/index_en.htm
EN
4
LINK
/activities/expert/committees/presentation.do?committee=2346&language=EN
EN
6
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?reference=2007-04&language=EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326IPR04585 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A6-2007-0092 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
