President Pöttering urges Bulgarians to vote in EP elections
Institutions
2007-04-20 - 16:56
Hans-Gert Pöttering addressed the Bulgarian Parliament in Sofia
With the opening of the European election campaign in Bulgaria, European Parliament's President Hans-Gert Pöttering has urged people to vote in large numbers to increase the legitimacy and credibility of the poll. In a two-day visit to Bulgaria he stressed that voting matters as the Parliament is not a consultative assembly but a self-confident legislative body. Among the people he held talks with were Bulgaria's President Georgi Parvanov and Prime Minister Sergey Stanishev.
Addressing the Bulgarian Parliament on Friday 20 April Mr Pöttering said "I call on all citizens to use their right to vote...your future is our common future and our common future is Europe".
His talks with the Prime Minister focused mainly on the future of Europe. Mr Pöttering welcomed Bulgaria's support for the draft Constitutional Treaty in its existing form. He also reiterated the Parliament's position that it would like to see the substance of the text retained - especially in relation to reform of the EU and the commitment to individual values. The President also held talks with Georgi Pirinski, the Speaker of the national Parliament.
Another message he took to the country was that Bulgaria should continue with the reforms it began in its aim to join the EU. Just because it is now a member, reforms must not stop, he insisted. The European Commission is currently studying a "progress report" on Bulgaria to look at some outstanding issues from the accession negotiations. When the Commission do report Parliament is likely to debate the issue later in the year.
New Information Office in Sofia
Also on the agenda was a meeting with the Mayor of Sofia and regional Councillors. The Parliament has just opened a new Information Office in the capital Sofia.
Bulgarians go to the polls on 20 May to elect 18 MEPs who will hold office until the 2009 European elections. At present the country of 7.4 million people is represented by "temporary" Members in place since it joined the EU in January. The latest polls see 27% of the population absolutely determined to vote. Prior to leaving Mr Pöttering said, "we are looking forward to welcoming the 18 new Members that your country will elect in May". His visit was timed to coincide with the opening of the election campaign.
Parliament supports medics in Libya
Bulgaria has already featured in the European Parliament with a resolution in January on the five nurses sentenced to death in Libya. The resolution expressed strong support for the nurses (and 1 Palestinian doctor) and cast doubt on the legal process. Just prior to leaving for Sofia President Pöttering met relatives of the nurses. Whilst in Bulgaria he reaffirmed the Parliament's commitment to use its influence to secure their release.
In January this year President Parvanov visited Strasbourg where he addressed MEPs and thanked Parliament for its "constructive criticism and for its encouragement for Bulgaria to carry forward its pro-European change".
20070412STO05244 Bulgarian European elections in detail EP President in Bulgaria Bulgaria's President Parvanov asks for open borders
EN
1
PHOTO
20070420PHT05553.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/president/press_releases/en/files/cp0043.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070418BKG05394 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070201STO02646 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
