Report urges more social security for artists: interview with Claire Gibault MEP
Social policy
2007-05-08 - 15:06
Claire Gibault, MEP and orchestra conductor
Musicians, singers and dancers are just three types of performing artists for whom working outside their home country can be a regular experience. However, as a recent report by Parliament shows, they often have difficulties in transferring their social rights between countries. The very nature of the business - travelling, short term contracts and performances - adds to the problem. The report by Liberal MEP and orchestral conductor Claire Gibault calls for more legal protection for artists.
MEPs on the Culture Committee backed a report on 7 May that calls on EU states to set up a proper legal and institutional framework to protect artists' rights. The report calls for artists to have easier access to information on their rights and a practical handbook that includes information on relevant legislation. The Gibault report also calls for a European Professional Register to help artists in the EU as well as specific temporary visas for artists. MEPs will vote on the report in the June Plenary session. In an exclusive interview we talk to the French MEP about her report.
How do you see the development of artistic creativity and the working conditions of artists in Europe?
CG: There is a great deal of variety of performances on offer, but they are quite poorly attended which is a problem in Europe. Also, with the economic crisis, people are less willing to be creative.
There are fewer and fewer theatrical troupes, opera groups and troupes of singers. There are also less artists at the head of great cultural institutions - they now tend to be managers. Their goal is to fill the auditorium and that does not favour artistic boldness. If Europe favours commercial exchanges, we cannot say that this will sufficiently encourage boldness and creativity.
Have you been inspired by your experience as an artist to initiate this report?
CG: Yes, because when I became an MEP, it was to represent artists and try to find solutions for their problems. Also, in managing orchestras all over Europe and in particular youth orchestras - like those which came to work with our orchestra in Bologna (she works with Claudio Abbado at the head of the new Bologna Mozart Orchestra), I realised the problems of visas for those who tried to come.
With my artistic friends who are a bit older I also realised that we have all worked all over Europe, paying for social security, retirement and sometimes for unemployment benefit - and that these rights cannot be transferred to the country we come from! Therefore a lot of artists do not get pensions or unemployment benefit. I am aware that various European directives exist - although they are not well known by the artists and that states can be ultra-protectionist and not do not transfer the rights earned by artists.
What concrete steps can the European Union take to improve social protection for artists - or should this remain an issue for the member states?
CG: Europe can take action to improve the state of affairs and improve coordination between members to improve the dispersal of social rights. In my report, I call for example, for the creation of an electronic European Social Security card that will retrace the entire professional life of artists, their rights to health insurance, pension and unemployment benefit .
I also propose the creation of a European artistic register where employers can record the name of the artists, the nature of their work and the length of the contract. Finally, an information guide for European artists that combines all the rules that apply in the EU member states as well as those foreseen by the EU.
Your report is in favour of the mobility of artists. However, certain MEPs have underlined how artists from the "new" EU members still have difficulty working in the "old" EU members. What are your thoughts on this?
CG: I travel a lot in Italy and I have seen the great difficulties that young people have in getting there. There must be no more obstacles to the mobility of artists within the EU. But the work inspectors and the social security are ultra protectionist. There is really fear of clandestine work...
We should also apply the mobility of artists to non-EU citizens people who would, like to come and play here. For example if the St. Petersburg Philharmonic orchestra is visiting and has to replace a player at the last moment, we are obliged to find a Russian replacement (for example) who already knows the orchestra. There are always problems obtaining visas rapidly. I therefore propose short and medium terms visas specifically for artists.
Culture is often the last resort in terms of budget for many countries. Can Europe put a value on its artists?
CG: Europe subsidises projects that encourage intercultural dialogue. It needs the cooperation of 8 members to obtain funding. However, the budget is limited. Culture represents 0.04% of the EU budget - that's 7 cents for every inhabitant!
The central question is the place of culture in society. We are surprised by the lack of EU knowledge by its citizens, but it's not the advertising, or the media that makes people feel European, its also being together in a concert hall or in a museum. Even if we don't all speak the same language, we feel more fraternal.
Has being the conductor of an orchestra helped in your life as an MEP?
CG: Being a conductor is like being a teacher and a mediator. You have to face the sensitivities of the musicians differently, but they must be always be in harmony in the orchestra and you can't please all the people - you must play with that. Therefore it's useful because it allows room for negotiations. Also being a conductor obliges you to be a good listener.
20070507STO06308 Press Info Documents of the Culture Committee meeting Parliament's Culture Committee Overview of EU activities regarding Culture MEP Claire Gibault
EN
1
PHOTO
20070508PHT06434.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/meetdocs/2004_2009/organes/cult/cult_20070507_1500.htm
EN
4
LINK
/activities/expert/committees/presentation.do?committee=2360&rewritten&language=EN
EN
5
LINK
http://europa.eu/pol/cult/overview_en.htm
EN
6
LINK
/members/public/yourMep/view.do?name=gibault&partNumber=1&id=28207&language=EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070507IPR06319 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
