Wednesday in Plenary: EU's relations with Russia centre stage
Institutions
2007-05-10 - 17:23
The role of the private sector in public transport was discussed
The European Union's relations with Russia took centre stage in the Plenary yesterday with MEPs debating a resolution which was endorsed Thursday. The resolution says that Russia remains an important partner for Europe, especially in the energy sector, but that democratic values and human rights must remain core principles of the relationship. It comes ahead of an EU-Russia summit on 18 May - a meeting some MEPs wanted cancelled amid the furore of the moving of a Soviet war monument by Estonia.
The summit - due to be held in the Russian city of Samara - could mark an important step in the renewal of the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement between the two. The existing one has been in place since 1997 and both sides are negotiating its renewal. In the resolution MEPs welcomed greater dialogue over energy issues, the easing of visa restrictions and expressed support for Russia's membership of the WTO.
However, the resolution, which was backed by the European People's Party and European Democrats (EPP-ED), the Socialist PSE, the Union of Europe for the Nations (UEN) and the European United Left (GUE/NGL) was critical of Russia over its human rights record. In particular the use of force by the Russian authorities to quell protests in Moscow and St. Petersburg and restrictions on the media.
"Today, we are all Estonians"
However, it was the furore over Estonia's decision to move a Soviet War memorial which saw the liveliest apart of the debate. Joseph Daul, leader of the EPP-DE, told MEPs that "today, we are all Estonians". He warned Moscow that the Russian leadership would be making a "grave mistake" if they thought Europe would be divided over the issue.
For the Socialist PSE Group Marianne Mikko, - who is herself Estonian - called for an end to the "cyber war" between the two sides as Russian hackers are apparently targeting Estonian news websites.
Graham Watson for the Liberal ALDE Group (who opposed the resolution along with the Greens), told MEPs that "when intimidation triumphs over negotiation, it can no longer be business as usual between the European Union and Russia. The Russians need a clear signal that enough is enough".
Road safety: MEPs want "blind spot" on lorries removed
As the largest vehicles on the road, lorries need to be able to see other road users. Every year about 400 people in Europe, many of them children, are killed in accidents involving lorries. One of the most important causes of accidents is the "blind spot" where a driver cannot see other people in his mirrors.
Specially designed "blind spot" mirrors are compulsory for new Lorries from 2007, although in the debate on Wednesday and the vote Thursday MEPs supported extending this to older vehicles registered from 1 January 2000.
As the Parliament's rapporteur Paolo Costa (Liberal ALDE) put it, "at current replacement rates, the EU population of some 5 million lorries would not be entirely replaced by 2023. Until then, the danger to vulnerable road users, particularly children, would continue". It is estimated that the whole replacement project would cost €100 - 150 per lorry but could save up to 1,200 lives in Europe by 2020.
German MEP Dieter-Lebrecht Koch of the European People's Party praised the heavy goods industry and the role they play in the EU's internal market. However, he was critical of the length of the transition period - the deadline being March 2009 for implementation - as "around 800 people would die in accidents while we would wait" he told MEPs.
Public transport: MEPs back public / private compromise
To what extent private sector should be involved in public transport was the subject of the second reading of a Regulation considered by MEPs. It concerns the awarding contacts of service between the private and public sector. The Regulation is based on the "controlled competition" concept which is which is half-way between complete deregulation and a closed market.
In the first reading the EP extended the length of contracts to respectively 8 years for bus services and 15 years for rail.
Reflecting on the compromise reached, Christine De Veyrac of the European People's Party said that "even if not perfect, this is a good compromise that could give real legal security to all the actors in the transport business".
For the PSE Group Brian Simpson "what people require is an efficient, reliable, affordable and safe public transport system that places on public bodies a responsibility to ensure that those criteria are met. It also places responsibility on transport operators to deliver, and frankly, that is where the challenges will lie".
Other issues debated on Wednesday included:
reform in the Arab world - based on a report by Michel Rocard of the PSE Group.
deregulate package sizes for pre-packed product (report by Jacques Toubon of the European People's Party.
Vehicle Type Approval (new rules on the manufacturing standards of road vehicles).
report on the health consequences of 1968 crash in Greenland.
20070507STO06336 Resolution on EU-Russia summit Resolution on repression of demonstrations in Russia: 26 April Public transport - more Parliament's Transport Committee backs mirrors
EN
1
PHOTO
20070510PHT06568.jpg
-//EP//TEXT MOTION P6-RC-2007-0190 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0169 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070424BRI05802 ITEM-006-EN NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326IPR04582 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
