Transposition into EU law of control and technical measures adopted by North West Atlantic Fisheries Organisation
Fisheries
2007-06-07 - 12:51
The House adopted a report by 576 votes in favour to 17 against with 7 abstentions on a proposal which incorporates into Community law, by updating and bringing together in a single regulation, the technical conservation and enforcement measures adopted by the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organisation (NAFO). Those measures are binding on the EU as a contracting party to the NAFO Convention and should therefore be implemented.
Founded in 1978, NAFO is an intergovernmental organisation which provides a framework for regional cooperation intended to promote rational management and the conservation of fisheries resources in the waters of the North-West Atlantic. The Community has been a NAFO contracting party since 1 January 1979.
Member States which operate fishing vessels in the area are Spain (36 vessels), Portugal (12), Estonia (9), Germany (1-5), Latvia and Lithuania (3), Denmark (1-2) and Poland (1).
The rapporteur, Luís CAPOULAS SANTOS (PES, PT), incorporates in the form of amendments any developments subsequent to the drawing up of the Commission text which for reasons of timing do not appear in the proposal, in particular the provisions contained in the most recent regulation on total allowable catches (TACs) and quotas (Regulation 41/2007 of 21 December 2006 fixing for 2007 the fishing opportunities and associated conditions applicable in Community waters and, for Community vessels, in waters where catch limitations are required).
The technical measures include provisions relating to minimum fish and mesh sizes, requirements relating to the collection of data and special provisions applicable to shrimp fishing.
The control measures include the establishment of a vessel-tracking satellite system and the requirement for vessels to carry impartial observers.
The supervision and inspection measures include the requirement for the contracting parties to accept a joint scheme for inspection at sea, including infringement procedures which they are required to implement.
The proposal also includes measures intended to ensure that vessels belonging to non-contracting parties which operate in NAFO waters and whose activities are regarded as illegal, unreported and unregulated (IUU) fishing activities shall abide by the NAFO rules.
NAFO has 12 members, including the EU, France (representing St Pierre et Miquelon), the Russian Federation, Japan, the Republic of Korea, Canada, Cuba, Denmark (for the Faroe Islands and Greenland), Norway, Iceland, Ukraine and the USA
20070606IPR07555 Fishery resources: transposal into Community law of control and technical measures adopted by the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organisation NAFO Text adopted, 7 June, will shortly be available here
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5402442
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
