MEPs support bilateral talks, urge action on democracy and human rights in Kashmir
External relations
2007-05-24 - 14:29
MEPs welcome and encourage bilateral talks between India and Pakistan to find a solution to the Kashmir conflict, while criticising Pakistan for lack of progress on democracy and human rights. The own-initiative report by Baroness Emma Nicholson of Winterbourne (ALDE, UK), passed by an overwhelming majority in the plenary in Strasbourg. (522 votes in favour 9 against with 19 abstentions)
MEPs emphasised that the recent "earthquake has had an immense impact on the lives of the Kashmiris on both sides of the Line of Control (LoC)," although "the size and impact of the earthquake had a much greater effect on the Pakistani side." They recommended that the EU consider favourably any further requests for assistance for reconstruction in the area, while also emphasising that the EU "take a firm stance in upholding the democracy and human rights clause in its agreements with both India and Pakistan."
The report welcomes the increase in the number of visas issued for travel between India and Pakistan, as well as the re-opening of truck and bus services, but adds that it is vital to remove "all obstructions and hindrances for all Kashmiris to travel freely to the entire state." It also argues for setting up exchange programmes, including a common University.
Political settlement
The House believes that the "resolution of the continuing conflict along the LoC can best be achieved jointly by a constant engagement between the governments of India and Pakistan, involving the peoples of all parts of the former princely state." It also commended both countries on the peace moves underway, and welcomed the restoration of bilateral talks. The report reaffirms that "all peoples have the inalienable right of self-determination," while pointing to the fact that "the pre-conditions for invoking the plebiscite have not been met at present."
Human rights and democracy
Although stressing that India and Pakistan (along with China) are both important EU partners, MEPs also note that "India is the world's largest secular democracy and has devolved democratic structures at all levels," while "Pakistan still lacks full implementation of democracy in AJK, [...] has yet to take steps towards democracy in Gilgit and Baltistan," and "President Musharraf has not been able to implement his undertaking made in 1999 that 'the armed forces have no intention of staying in charge any longer than is absolutely necessary to pave the way for true democracy to flourish in Pakistan.'"
MEPs also regret the "negative chain of events set in motion by the suspension of Chief Justice Iftikhar Muhammed Chaudhry" and deplored the recent outbreaks of violence in Pakistan They also regretted the "continuing ambivalence of the current Government of Pakistan with regard to the ethnic identity of Gilgit and Baltistan." The report calls on Pakistan to ensure free and fair elections in the AJK, Gilgit and Baltistan.
The House also expresses concern at "documented human rights violations by Pakistan" in Gilgit and Baltistan and at reports of torture and mistreatment, discrimination, and corruption in AJK. It also calls on the Indian government to "put an end to all practices of extrajudicial killings, 'disappearances', torture and arbitrary detention in Jammu and Kashmir," and to establish an independent commission of inquiry into serious violations of human rights by Indian security forces. MEPs call on both governments to allow international human rights groups access to the region for investigations, and stressed "the risk of maintaining the death penalty in a complex political situation" such as the one in the region, arguing for a moratorium to be established.
British speakers in the debate preceding the vote - 24 May 2007
An "enlightened and balanced report" on the situation in Kashmir, which "highlights the common heritage shared by India and Pakistan" and "makes clear its support for the current peace process", was presented by the rapporteur Baroness NICHOLSON OF WINTERBOURNE (ALDE, UK), at the opening of the debate.
Baroness Nicholson said that the report, "correctly contrasts the situation" between India, a democracy which has "evolved structures at all levels", and Pakistan, which "still lacks full implementation of democracy [.]" The report expresses concerns that Pakistan "has encouraged militants to commit atrocities on the Indian-administered side" and stresses that "the report "takes a firm line on human rights abuses."
Shared values
The report focuses on promoting an appreciation of the "pluralism, multiculturalism and multi-faith nature and secular traditions" of Kashmir, in addition to promoting the "economic integration of commerce between peoples on both sides of the border" with a system "along the lines of the European Union model."
The report is also "strong on human rights" and "denounces terrorism and those who support terrorism." It therefore "reflects many principles of the European Union" and is of great importance to the European Parliament, which is "keenly interested in all aspects of the situation."
Charles TANNOCK (EPP-ED, UK) began with a reference to the "tragic and bloody dispute" between India and Pakistan, which "is one of the oldest in the world." He congratulated Baroness Nicholson on the "content and quality" of the report, in particular the "accurate tone" in which it was written. The report, Mr Tannock continued, "highlights the lack of genuine democracy" in the region. The EU should help the process towards "a just and enduring peace", he said, "but only if both sovereign governments ask for our help."
James ELLES (EPP-ED, UK) "warmly welcomed" the debate on Kashmir and yet said that the report contained "still some areas where I remain unhappy." Mr Elles expressed concern over "the question of machine-readable Pakistan passports" and warned that "we have to be careful to keep the report factual." Despite these concerns, Mr Elles welcomed the report as "a positive message of shining a light on the problems which are faced on a daily basis by the people of Jammu and Kashmir."
Richard HOWITT (PES UK) began by stating that "our role in relation to Kashmir should be to support peace processes and to uphold international law." The approach taken, he said, should be "balanced, constructive, diplomatic [.]" Mr Howitt was disappointed with the report, claiming of the rapporteur that "she has done only harm."
Sajjad KARIM (ALDE, UK), said that "my group's passion must be self-determination, self-determination, self-determination." The EU must "support the positive ideas now coming forward", Mr Karim said, and stressed that "it is not for us to take any options off the table." The EU's role should be to "protect the most vulnerable in the short-term and secure their livelihoods in the long-term", with the "core goals" of "peace, justice and self-determination for the generation of Kashmiris to come."
Jean LAMBERT (Greens/EFA, UK) said that conditions for a plebiscite "should not be set aside." The conflict over Kashmir has, she continued, "brought the world nearer to nuclear conflict than anything else since the 1960s", and therefore the issue is "hugely important." What is needed is the "normalisation of relations at every level, grass roots to political" and the "softening of the border as an interim measure."
Neena GILL (PES, UK) said that in time the report "will become an authoritative report on the issue." It has "brought out into the open for the first time the conditions prevailing not only in Kashmir but also in northern areas." She added that "one of the outcomes I hope will be more democracy and greater democratic structures" and hoped that the report "will lead to improvements on all fronts for the people of Kashmir."
Elizabeth LYNNE (ALDE, UK) supported the amendment calling for "the Kashmiri people to exercise their right to self-determination to a plebiscite in the future", adding that "all people should have a right to determine their own destiny." The report, she said, "seemed to be concentrating a great deal on the shortcomings of the Pakistan Government within Pakistan, rather than taking a balanced approach relating to both India and Pakistan's failures in Jammu and Kashmir generally." She concluded by saying that "no solution can be achieved without the Kashmir people having the final say themselves."
20070516IPR06777 Kashmir: present situation and future prospects Text, as adopted by the EP on 24 May, will be available here in due course The verbatim debate on Kashmir will appear here in due course (24 May 2007)
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5295922
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
3
LINK
/activities/expert/cre/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
