No conciliation agreement on third railway package
Transport
2007-06-06 - 12:00
European Parliament and Council delegations were unable to reach a conciliation agreement, early Wednesday morning, on the three third rail package proposals, on passengers' rights, train crew certification, and rail market access respectively. They are still at odds over passenger rights, facilities for people with reduced mobility, crew certification and other issues including accident liability, compensation, insurance, information, ticketing and train quality.
On passenger rights, it became clear that Parliament was defending the rights of all passengers, whereas the Council would only protect passengers on cross-border connections. Passenger compensation in the event of delays remains a key issue in the negotiations.
On the certification of train crews, the parties could not agree whether crew members other than drivers should be included in the scope of the regulation.
On rail market access, the parties still disagree about a proposed levy on new international passenger services, to fund compensation for national service operators affected by the introduction of such services. Parliament believes that compensation should go only to national operators who are directly affected by the introduction of international services, whereas Council takes the view that the levy might be used to compensate any service operator providing a rail service in the Member State in which a new international passenger service is established.
The two delegations have now six to eight weeks to reach an agreement. Negotiations may resume during the June plenary session in Strasbourg.
2007-06-04 Committee on Transport and Tourism In the chair: Alejo Vidal-Quadras EPP-ED ES
Procedure: Conciliation, third reading
Rapporteurs: Dirk Sterckx (ALDE, BE) on passengers rights, Gilles Savary (PES, FR) on the certification of train crews and Georg Jarzembowski (EPP-ED, DE) on rail market access.
20070604IPR07389
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
