Fruit and vegetables: MEPs call for aid tailored to farmers' needs
Agriculture
2007-06-07 - 13:58
Parliament voted on Thursday, 7 June for flexible forms of farm aid tailored to the needs of different types of fruit and vegetables, as well as the creation of a special crisis fund to boost competitiveness in this sector. These were the main points of a consultation report, adopted in plenary this Thursday, on reforms proposed by the Commission.
Falling consumption in the EU, rising imports and declining prices as a result of pressure from big distributors are the problems weighing on the European market in fruit and vegetables. The European Commission proposed in January to improve the competitiveness of this sector by giving producer bodies more influence, incorporating the various existing forms of aid into the single payment per hectare system (not linked to production volumes) introduced for other sectors in 2003, safeguarding the environment better and boosting consumption, especially among young people, while still remaining "budget neutral".
In adopting today the report drafted by María Isabel Salinas García (PES, ES), Parliament has given its go-ahead to the general thrust of the reform. However, it believes it is possible to provide more flexible aid, better tailored to producers' needs, especially in crisis periods.
Security fund to manage major crises
To enable producer organisations to manage major crises better (e.g. when prices fall), Parliament puts forward once again the idea of a security fund, which was supported by the EP in an own-initiative report in May 2005. It argues that Member States should set up funds of this kind, to be financed two-thirds by the EU (with a possibility of using up to 0.5% of national reserves) and one-third by producer organisations (POs), which would finance measures for withdrawal from the market, green harvesting, etc. These funds would also be open to producers who were not members of POs. MEPs also proposed that a body to monitor prices be set up, so as to anticipate crises better.
Strengthening producer organisations
To strengthen POs against the power of major distributors and to encourage more producers to join these bodies, Parliament is asking for Community co-financing of operational funds to be increased from 50% to 60% in more cases (merging POs, integrated production, etc). It also recommends putting a ceiling on Community aid to these POs of 6% of the value of the production placed on the market.
According to MEPs, the POs should also be able, on a voluntary basis, to finance operations to promote the consumption of fruit and vegetables, e.g. through campaigns in schools.
Flexible support tailored to different producers
MEPs want more flexibility in the way aid is decoupled from production, with transitional periods to allow the sector time to adapt, especially the processed foods sector (tomatoes, citrus fruits, etc.).
Parliament also voted for more effective controls on imports from non-EU countries by boosting the EU's ability to react to crises caused by floods of imports. A safeguard clause should be introduced, allowing extra duty to be slapped on such imports. MEPs also called for better quality and labelling standards.
The report was adopted by 526 votes to 95 with 32 abstentions. Its amendments are not binding on the Agriculture Council, which is hoping to reach a "political agreement" at its next meeting on 11 and 12 June in Luxembourg.
20070606IPR07556 Specific rules for the fruit and vegetable sector : Council regulation Text, as adopted by the EP on 7 June, will shortly be available here
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5436042
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
