The Week Ahead 4 - 10 June 2007
Institutions
2007-06-01 - 10:12
Plenary Session and Committee Meetings - Brussels
Plenary Session
Constitution. The ongoing constitutional process will be the focus of this session: the plenary opens with a debate on the Brok-Barón Crespo report and returns to the subject the next day in a debate on the preparations for the June European Council (Wednesday and Thursday) .
Middle East. With President Pöttering having just completed a visit to the region, the situation in the Middle East will be the subject of a plenary debate following a statement by Javier Solana, High Representative for the CFSP (Wednesday) .
Among other topics in plenary, MEPs will hold debates on the social status of artists and the VIS (visa information system). A final feature of this Brussels session is that the Bulgarian MEPs elected on 20 May will take office.
Outside the plenary
Darfur. MEPs will discuss the Darfur crisis at an open meeting of the Conference of Presidents. Archbishop Desmond Tutu, who has repeatedly spoken out on the situation in Darfur, and Jody Williams, who recently led a United Nations mission to the country, will take part (Tuesday) .
President Pöttering in Poland. EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering makes a two-day official visit to Poland, where his programme includes meetings with President Lech Kaczynski and Prime Minister Jaroslaw Kaczynski (Monday and Tuesday) .
Third rail package. Cautious optimism will prevail among members of the EP delegation to the conciliation meeting on the third rail package. (Justus Lipsius building, Council, Tuesday evening; press conference Wednesday morning).
Climate change. Following its constituent session of 24 May in Strasbourg, the temporary committee on climate change holds its first working meeting (Thursday) .
Galileo. Parliament's rapporteurs on the European satellite navigation system will have a discussion with the director of the European Space Agency at a meeting of the Subcommittee on Security and Defence (Tuesday) .
20070531IPR07246 The Agenda
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20072300AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
