MEPs scrutinise Galileo's future
Research and innovation
2007-06-05 - 20:03
The struggles of the Galileo satellite navigation system and the recent adoption by the Council of a European Space Policy were debated by MEPs in the Security and Defence Subcommittee on Tuesday. A solely public funding scheme looks to be Parliament's preferred option, days before transport ministers hold their decisive meeting on Galileo.
While on 22 May this year, the European Space Council (a joint ministerial meeting of the EU Council and the Council of the European Space Agency - ESA) adopted the 'European Space Policy, the EU has recently encountered grave problems in the public-private partnership financing scheme for the Galileo programme, a project aimed at developing a European satellite navigation system. An upcoming transport Council meeting on 8 June will decide the future of this project and its proposed funding. Who's to pay for Galileo? Etelka Barsy-Pataki (EPP-ED, HU), former rapporteur on Galileo for the Parliament gave an overview of the current setbacks facing the project. She emphasised that Galileo was a project of strategic importance - and that the EP still does not question that. "What we do question is whether the right type of financing has been chosen to undertake it," she added. "We shouldn't question the programme, just overcome the difficulties it faces," she said, and noted that all three EU institutions agree that Galileo must continue with public financing. A draft resolution should be adopted by the Budgets committee on Monday 11 June in that direction. However, due to the massive sums needed to re-ignite Galileo, there are concerns within Parliament that the money used in this respect could harm the funding of other policies. Norbert Glante (PES, DE), the current rapporteur, added that the reasons for continuing Galileo remained unchanged. "We could buy GPS (Global Positioning System - the existing US version of satellite navigation) off the shelf, or weapons systems off the shelf," he said, "but our research and development capabilities would suffer." He noted that so-called 'downstream industries' which plan to use Galileo technology for offering services to consumers, are anxiously waiting for the outcome of the 8 June summit, and need to be given reliable dates for the completion of the project. Many European stakeholders see the development of Galileo as a must as the GPS system is ultimately controlled by the US military, and could be turned off by the Pentagon in times of crisis. A European Commission representative answered that Galileo constituted the "first time that the EU is investing in a truly common infrastructure," that belonged to the Union as a whole, not just one, or a few, of its Member States. "This is a big step, and comes with many problems attached." Military versus civilian uses of space technology The Chair of the Subcommittee, Karl von Wogau (EPP-ED, DE) asked whether space policy will also have a role to play in military operations of European armed forces. Geoffrey van Orden (EPP-ED, UK) worried whether the European Space Policy was truly a technical project, or more of a political one, with a view to increase the role of the EU in the world. Michael Praet, Head of the ESA's Brussels office, answered that "space technology is neither military nor civil by definition - it is politics, not technology that decides the way in which it is used." He insisted that the global space effort in Europe, including national expenditures, is about one-sixth of that of the US, and said "I don't know how long we can remain competitive under such pressure." He warned that "if you don't have space in your tool basket, you will be relegated to the second tier in global competition: in military, economic and research terms."
2007-06-05 Subcommittee on Security and Defence Chair Karl von Wogau EPP-ED DE
20070604IPR07400 European Commission - Space Policy European Commission - GALILEO
EN
1
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/enterprise/space/index_en.html
EN
2
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/dgs/energy_transport/galileo/index_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
