Parliament calls for clear roadmap on reforms in the constitutional process
Constitution
2007-06-07 - 13:58
Treaty must improve democracy, transparency and citizens' rights
Parliament will reject any agreement on a new treaty which does not improve democracy, transparency and citizens' rights. This is the message of the resolution on the EU's constitutional process which was approved by the plenary on Thursday, 7 June, by 469 votes in favour to 141 against and 32 abstentions on the June European Council to define a roadmap to reach a new agreement on institutional reforms.
By backing by large majority the report by Enrique BARÓN CRESPO (PES, ES) and Elmar BROK (EPP-ED, DE), MEPs call on the June European Council to shortly convene an Intergovernmental Conference (IGC) to reach a settlement on institutional reforms - and they ask for Parliament to be fully involved in its work. According to the adopted text, the EP "will reject any outcome of the negotiations which, if compared to the Constitutional Treaty, would lead to a diminution of the protection of the rights of citizens (...) as well as to less democracy, transparency and efficiency in the functioning of the Union". In order to help reach a positive outcome, Parliament will maintain close contacts with national parliaments, as well as with the Committee of Regions and the Economic and Social Committee, throughout the whole IGC.
The House calls for the preservation of the basic principles of Part I of the Constitutional Treaty in the future agreement on the institutional reforms. The Charter of Fundamental Rights, whose inclusion in the new treaty is still being debated by governments, is one of the reforms the EP deems indispensable. In addition, the report lists the recognition of the Union's values, the clarification of respective competences at national and EU level, the respect of subsidiarity and an increased involvement of citizens in the EU's political life among the crucial achievements of the draft Constitution to be upheld.
MEPs say that the outcome of the IGC must take into account all questions raised during the period of reflection on the future of Europe. Particularly, they ask Member States to agree a common approach in the fields of climate change, energy security, migration policy, the fight against terrorism, enlargement, the European social model and the economic governance of the Euro-zone.
To facilitate the approval of the new agreement on the institutional reforms, MEPs also propose to Member States to coordinate their ratification procedures to approve the new text simultaneously by the end of 2008.
The approved resolution is Parliament's contribution to the June European Council, to be held on 21 and 22 June, dedicated to the institutional reforms.
20070606IPR07541 Text, as adopted by the EP on 7 June, will be available here shortly: Baron Crespo/Brok report. Road map for the Union's constitutional process
EN
1
PHOTO
20070607PHT07629.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
3
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5478952
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
