Darfur crisis: MEPs and Nobel Prize laureates condemn lack of international action
Human rights
2007-06-05 - 20:38
Protecting people against ethnic cleansing, crimes against humanity and genocide is an international responsibility, that calls for co-ordinated international action, enforced with sanctions, said Nobel Peace Prize winners Jody Williams and Archbishop Desmond Tutu on Tuesday, at a special meeting of MEPs on the Darfur crisis.
Darfur, Archbishop Tutu said, has become "shorthand for the most ghastly example of our inhumanity towards one another. [...] Though there is much that we, African leaders, should be proud of, we should hang our heads in shame” when it comes to Darfur. Praising those who refused to let the crisis in Darfur go unnoticed over the last four years, the Archbishop also thanked MEPs for not giving up on Africa - and for not succumbing to what he referred to as “Afro-pessimism”.
International responsibility to protect
International land-mine ban campaigner Jody Williams, who headed a UN Human Rights Council (UNHRC) mission to Darfur in March, had little faith in the Sudanese authorities. The government, she said, is “very sophisticated in the art of promising things that never happen.” It is “very difficult", therefore, "to believe Khartoum when they speak”. Her mission had concluded, she said, that a state is responsible for protecting its population against ethnic cleansing, crimes against humanity and genocide. If it fails to do so, "the responsibility to protect" becomes “the responsibility of the international community, via the UN.” That said, she added, “all [of us] have failed to protect the people of Darfur”. I have no "Afro-pessimism but I have Darfurian pessimism".
Call for sanctions
“I support wholeheartedly the imposition, in the face of its intransigence, of specific, targeted sanctions against Khartoum”, said the Archbishop. The EU should make three key demands to Sudan: allow "unimpeded access” into Darfur both for a UN force and for humanitarian aid; and disarm the Janjaweed militia. Omar al-Bashir's government should be given a non-negotiable deadline for these conditions to be met; if it complies, sanctions would be suspended, he suggested. “Let us not give up that change can happen in Khartoum”, he said.
Call for co-ordinated peace initiative
Ms Williams argued that international actors should draw up "a single, co-ordinated peace initiative" accompanied by "mediation, funding and consistent diplomatic intervention". The EU should not hesitate to “isolate Sudan economically and politically" without waiting "for an elusive consensus in the Security Council”, she added.
MEPs react and call for action
Jürgen Schröder (EPP-ED, DE) said that the name of Archbishop Tutu was synonymous with hope, which was so sorely needed in the days of apartheid South Africa and his own former East Germany. He deplored that the people of Darfur continued to be deprived of the peaceful transition which these two countries had experienced.
The Sudanese government has been in “Orwellian denial” of what amounts to genocide against its own people, and will "never admit the truth" argued Glenys Kinnock (PES, UK). The EU should demand “an immediate ceasefire”, she proposed, later adding that “the international community [is] sleepwalking into another Rwanda”.
Simon Coveney (EPP-ED, IE) expressed his outrage with the “lack of EU action” in Darfur. Four years into the crisis, he said, "we still hear that it’s time to do something". By doing nothing, however, we “share some of the blame.” We have heard the Council express “grave concern” about the situation in Darfur “fifty-four” times, he complained – and still have no targeted sanctions in place. Giving EU money to help the AU force in place is not enough, he argued. Instead, “we need to set deadlines and have consequences if they are not met”. Darfur is not only a humanitarian disaster, but “a political disaster”, too, said Graham Watson (ALDE, UK), citing the international community's “impotence and incompetence” in protecting the world against genocide. What is needed is “a full African Union-United Nations force” – anything short of this will be insufficient, he argued, adding that Europe, meanwhile, "should be leading a Marshall Plan for Africa, starting with Darfur.” “We must – and we want – to do more”, said Commission Vice-President Margot Wallström, announcing that the EU would provide a further €40 million to support the African Union’s Mission to Darfur (AMIS). Underlining the need for an international consensus, the Commissioner saw it as essential that China and other actors apply their “diplomatic weight” in Khartoum. Daniel Cohn-Bendit (Greens/EFA, DE) advocated using the 2008 Olympic Games in Beijing to provide leverage against China, Sudan's most important diplomatic ally, trade partner and arms supplier. We must "genuinely threaten" the Olympic Games if the Chinese government does not revise its relations with Khartoum, argued the Greens' leader. “You cannot hold the Olympics of peace, while supporting the regime in Khartoum”, he concluded.
Gernot Erler, speaking on behalf of the German Presidency of the Council, agreed on the need for a ceasefire, as well as for a “robust peace mission” to supervise any forthcoming peace process. The EU would continue contributing financially to AMIS, in preparation of a hybrid AU-UN mission, he said. Jody Williams agreed with those who believe that rhetoric is meaningless without action: “If you’re not prepared to protect the people of Darfur," she said, "more words on paper are not relevant”.
Extraordinary open meeting of the Conference of Presidents
2007-06-05 Conference of Presidents In the chair: Alejo Vidal-Quadras EPP-ED ES
20070604IPR07390
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
