Verbal fencing with Pál Schmitt MEP
Sport
2007-06-01 - 08:59
Hungarian Pál Schmitt today and as a fencing champion
In the late '60s and early 70's Pál Schmitt was arguably the world's greatest fencer. Olympic champion in '68 and '72 he was also twice world champion. These days he has turned his talents towards political combat as a Hungarian MEP for the European People's Party and European Democrats (EPP-ED). He is one of several sports stars who have turned the skills they learnt in the sporting arena to the political one. We caught up with him for some verbal fencing - armed with just a pen and paper.
How did you make your way from fencing to the European Parliament?
During my sporting career I always paid attention to pursue studies at the same time as my sporting activities. I graduated from the University of Economic Sciences and I learned languages. I would not have thought to become an MEP at the time, especially because when I was a sportsman it was back in Communist times with a one-party, totalitarian system. At the time we could not even dream of a system where democracy would prevail and Hungary would become member of the EU and NATO.
What are the values you acquired as a fencing champion that can be applied in your work as an MEP?
First of all, let me say in my capacity as Vice-Chair of Parliament's Culture and Education Committee Committee that I find it important to raise the level of education within the EU, given that education is the basis for a knowledge-based society. My sporting career served me to acquire skills which you can hardly acquire anywhere else. Sports teach you how to concentrate, deal with monotony, build up a team spirit, respect rules, and endure pain and exhaustion.
What I owe to sports in the first place is that even at the age of 65 I can work a lot. It is also due to certain sporting traits of character that you can excel within the 785 MEPs. Above average diligence and pro-activeness will help you prepare for a performance to the best of your knowledge - at a debate or when presenting a written motion for instance.
You are also Chairman of the Delegation to the EU-Croatia Joint Parliamentary Committee. The EP has recently adopted a report on Croatia and it seems that you will have a couple of busy years ahead of you. How do you see Croatia's EU prospects?
Croatia has been performing well since the moment the accession negotiations have been pursued on the basis of the country's own merits, i.e. independently of Turkey's accession. Croatia is practically through the entire screening process. The country would absolutely not be a big burden for the EU's absorption capacity, since this country of 4,5 million people have already at this point in time better economic indicators than many of the newly joined countries, unfortunately including my country, Hungary as well, but also Bulgaria and Romania.
If the legislative environment changes at the pace as it do now, i.e. we can adopt the draft constitution by 2008, and then in my view there would be a chance for Croatia to join in 2009 and participate in the European parliamentary elections. If not, I think a more realistic scenario would be 2010.
It is now three years since Hungary joined the EU. What do you feel you have accomplished as an MEP and what are the challenges lie ahead?
When we joined the EU we thought we would enrich it with our language, science, history and culture - a part of our objectives that we have accomplished. I can only regret that on the economic front we have been less successful.
It is not easy to be a successful MEP if one's own country is not successful. Hungary's economic indicators are lagging behind the countries with which it joined the EU in 2004. Back then we were the frontrunners of these 10 countries, now unfortunately we have become file-closers. In particular I think of the Hungary's huge state debt, its exceptionally high inflation (9%), high unemployment rate within the youth. I also regret that Hungary's Euro zone accession is getting more and more delayed in time.
What we can do now is to try and absorb efficiently the funds allocated to Hungary within the EU's 2007-2013 budget for convergence and national development programs.
Involvement in Olympic movement
After departing the fencing world he has remained involved in the Olympic movement as President of the Hungarian Olympic Committee for 18 years and as a member of the International Olympic Committee for 23 years. He has also been Hungary's Ambassador to Spain and Switzerland.
As Vice-Chairman of Parliament's Culture and Education Committee he is currently working on a report on "the role of sport in education".
Others sports champions turned MEPs include 1981 World Rally Champion Ari Vatanen who is now an MEP representing France, and Slovak MEP Peter Šťastný, who was a professional ice hockey player in the North American National Hockey League.
20070531STO07250 Pál Schmitt MEP Click on country to find your MEP
EN
1
PHOTO
20070531PHT07318.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/members/public/yourMep/view.do?name=schmitt&partNumber=1&id=28133&language=EN
EN
3
LINK
/members/public.do?language=en
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
