“Creating a British society at ease with its diversity” - Arlene McCarthy MEP launches key event on non-discrimination
Employment policy
United Kingdom
2007-05-29 - 13:31
Arlene McCarthy MEP at the Commission for Equality and Human Rights
2007 has been designated 'European Year of Equal Opportunities for All'. The aim of the Year is to launch a major debate on the benefits of diversity for European societies. The Commission for Equality and Human Rights (CEHR) is the national implementing body for the UK for the European Year and it wanted to mark 2007 - the European Year of Equal Opportunities for All and the opening of the new Commission in a memorable way.
On 14 May in Manchester the launch event for the year was held. One of the keynote speakers was Arlene McCarthy MEP for the North West.
The focus of the European Year of Equal Opportunities for all is on:
Rights – raising awareness of the right to equality and non-discrimination, and the problem of multiple discrimination.
Representation – stimulating the debate on ways to increase the participation of under-represented groups in society, in particular groups that are victims of discrimination. Recognition – celebrating and accommodating diversity and equality.
Respect – promoting a more cohesive society.
Prejudice and discrimination have no place in a fair, free and just Britain. While we have made substantial progress to fight these injustices over the past decades, inequality still scars our society and holds back too many individuals from realising their full potential.
In the UK, March 2007 marked the 200 anniversary of the abolition of the slave trade. This bi-centenary provided a major focus for schools, libraries, museums and galleries and the media to look at and reflect on the struggles of the past, the progress we have made so far and the challenges that remain.
In October 2007, the UK sees the opening of the new Commission for Equality and Human Rights (CEHR). This will be the largest Equalities body in the world and will bring together existing organisations: the Equal Opportunities Commission, Disability Rights Commission and Commission for Racial Equality and will also for the first time have responsibility for issues of Age Discrimination and discrimination on the grounds of religion.
The CEHR is the national implementing body for the UK for the European Year and it wants to mark 2007 - the European Year of Equal Opportunities for All and the opening of the new Commission in a memorable way.
Following the launch a series of events across England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland will focus on what we can all do to help create a fairer and more equal society. In England in June and July one day seminars will look at lessons from the European experience and how Europe can help us in the UK achieve a nation at ease with diversity . Each event will also include a human rights roundtable to help increase knowledge and understanding of the new human rights culture.
The conclusions of these conversations will help the new CEHR build a solid foundation for equalities policies and services. In addition, the conclusions will be taken to European leaders in Brussels in December 2007 as a testament of what Britons are doing to create a fairer, more equal society.
20070521IPR06893 2007 European Year of Equal Opportunities for All Commission for Equality and Human Rights European Parliament Information Office in the UK All 78 UK MEPs
EN
1
PHOTO
20070613PHT07793.jpg
EN
2
A
http://www.cehr.org.uk/content/european.rhtm#launch
EN
3
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/employment_social/eyeq/index.cfm
EN
4
LINK
http://www.cehr.org.uk/
EN
5
LINK
http://www.europarl.org.uk/index.htm
EN
6
LINK
/members/expert/groupAndCountry/search.do?country=GB&language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
