Thursday in Plenary: MEPs back better housing in Europe
Institutions
2007-05-11 - 13:16
A report called for greater investment in housing
MEPs have given their backing to using the European Regional Development Fund to invest in affordable and decent housing across the whole EU. Whilst at present money is only allocated to the States that joined in or after 2004 the scope of the report wants to extend funding to all EU members. This could help deal with high prices and urban sprawl across Europe. Voting on another report, MEPs supported a boost to innovation in Europe's regions through education and cross border cooperation.
Poor maintenance, demolition and high prices are just three issues the report by Italian Liberal ALDE MEP Alfonso Andria identifies. Although the report calls for more housing it wants accommodation built in a way that will include social infrastructure such as libraries and meeting places. It also sees proper development as the way to ease urban sprawl and reduce traffic congestion caused by long distance commuting to work. The report is adamant that "the vitality of town centres and the fabric of listed buildings must be preserved".
Definition of "adequate housing" needed
In environmental terms it calls for regeneration of Brownfield sites and protection of the greenbelt as well as more energy-efficient housing. In a vote yesterday MEPs backed Mr Andria's proposals to extend funding for this kind of housing to the 27 EU members. Under the European Regional Development Fund, investment presently runs until 2013.
At present the fund pays for the development of public areas, safety improvements, water and energy saving measures and support for social integration.
Mr Andria would also like to see a proper definition of "adequate housing" that would prevent the building of sub-standard properties. He also favours easing access to housing benefit to allow people to settle in communities easier. Speaking in the debate he stressed the need for a wider approach: "the problem of a habitable lodging is not to be seen on its own. It must be put within a global approach, that concerns sustainable urban development in general, strongly linked to sect oral and horizontal policies".
Alain Hutchinson for the PSE Group said that "it was the first time that the House was voting on this ....I recall that it is important for us to listen to the citizen. If some citizens, rightly or wrongly believe that the EU is far from them, then thanks to Andria's report the EU so to speak has invited itself in the homes of its citizens".
More Innovation needed in regional policy
A report adopted yesterday calls for regional policy makers to adopt measures that can boost innovation across the continent. In particular it calls for improving access to education and providing access to citizens at every level.
The report also wants greater cross border cooperation amongst the academic and business community. The latter is particular important according to the report as it stresses the important role that Small and Medium Size Enterprises can play in innovation.
The report was drafted by Mieczyslaw Janowski of the Union of Europe for the Nations Group (UEN) who told MEPs "only 21 regions of the EU, which is less then 10 % of all regions, spend more then 3% GDP for research and development". James Nicholson of the European People's Party and European Democrats (EPP-ED), stressed the role of smaller businesses "often we associate innovation with large multinational companies with enormous research facilities. However, the backbone of the European economy has always been our small, often family‑orientated, businesses" he said.
Yesterday also saw MEPs adopt a resolution on EU-Russia relations - see link below for more details.
20070507STO06338 Report on housing Innovation in Regional Policy EU-Russia relations
EN
1
PHOTO
20070511PHT06576.jpg
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A6-2007-0090 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070507IPR06419 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070507IPR06398 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
