Opening of the session: welcome to Bulgarian MEPs, condemnation of ETA
Institutions
2007-06-06 - 15:55
Parliament's President Hans-Gert Pöttering opened the session by welcoming the 18 newly elected Bulgarian MEPs freshly elected on 20 May. "After coming through the period of communism, Bulgaria with this election seals its integration into the European family", said the president. "Let us work together on the further building of our common European home".
Mr Pöttering then referred to the announcement by ETA that it was abandoning its ceasefire. He stressed that the European Parliament "stands shoulder-to-shoulder with the Spanish people" and that it "condemns the use of violence as a means of achieving political goals". He added that the fight against terrorism must always take place within the rule of law and concluded by expressing the EP's "solidarity and sympathy with the victims of terrorism".
Under changes to the agenda, it was announced that pursuant to Rule 81 of the Rules of Procedure, the House will vote tomorrow (Thursday), at the request of the Development Committee, on a regional strategy paper on Mercosur and Latin America.
Sophia IN 'T VELD (ALDE, NL) asked the President to demand explanations from the mayor of Moscow and Russian President Putin for the violent treatment suffered by herself, fellow MEP Marco Cappato (ALDE, IT) and others at the peaceful Gay Pride demonstration in Moscow last weekend. Mr Pöttering replied that he would take the appropriate steps.
Highlights of the agenda include
The first item on the agenda is a key debate on the road-map for the European Union's Constitutional process. Parliament will reject any agreement on a new treaty which does not improve democracy, transparency and citizens' rights, according to the Constitutional Affairs Committee, which is putting forward a report on the EU's constitutional process. It calls on the June European Council to define a roadmap to reach a new agreement on institutional reforms. On Thursday, the House will debate the forthcoming European Council which will focus on the Constitutional Process.
Javier SOLANA , the EU's High Representative for Foreign Policy, will make a statement to the House on the situation in the Middle East. Parliament and the Commission will debate the latest developments in the region including the heightened tensions in Lebanon, Israel, Palestinian Territories, Iraq and Iran. The vote on a resolution on the Middle East will take place during the next plenary session in Strasbourg in late June (18-21 June).
This is followed by a joint debate on cross-border co-operation with a focus on the Visa Information System (VIS) which includes two reports by Baroness Sarah LUDFORD (ALDE, UK). The Civil Liberties Committee is backing a regulation setting up a database for exchange of data between Member States on short-stay visas and visa applications from third country citizens who wish to enter the EU's Schengen area. The text is the result of an agreement with Council so the legislative process should be completed at the first reading stage after the full Parliament votes on the regulation on Thursday.
Parliament then turns its attention to the status of the artist. The employment conditions for performing artists who move around Europe as part of their work should be improved, and they should be better informed on how to transfer their social rights. So says the Culture Committee in an own-initiative report, calling for better protection for artists and the introduction of a special electronic social security card.
The House will also debate reform of the EU fruit and vegetable sector. Parliament's Agriculture Committee believes it is possible to boost the competitiveness of the fruit and vegetables sector by providing flexible forms of aid tailored to the various products and situations in the Member States - and without a significant increase in the EU budget.
In a late addition to the agenda, MEPs will debate (without resolution) European solidarity and the protection of rights of migrants after hearing statements from the Council and Commission.
Thursday 7 June 2007
The session starts at 9.30am with a debate on the preparation of the European Council (21-22 June) and the situation with regard to the Treaties. MEPs will discuss the preparations for the Brussels summit with Germany's Foreign Minister, Frank-Walter STEINMEIER , and Minister of State for Europe, Günter GLOSER . The summit is the culmination of Germany's six-month presidency of the EU Council and the main item on the agenda for the heads of state or government of the 27 Member States will be the future of the Constitutional Treaty.
20070606IPR07538 Briefing - 6-7 June - Brussels Plenary Draft Agenda - 6-7 June 2007
EN
2
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?language=EN&reference=2007-05
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070510BRI06564 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
