Better transparency in public procurement
Free movement of services
2007-06-21 - 12:38
Today, 21 June, the European Parliament adopted a co-decision report on EU public procurement which -- by modifying a pair of existing directives -- is set to ensure better transparency and more effective review in procedures for awarding contracts.
At the centre of the co-decision report on "Review procedures concerning the award of public contracts", drafted by Jean-Claude Fruteau (recently elected to the French National Assembly) (PES, FR), lies the idea of a so-called "standstill period".: a period allowing effective review between the decision to award a contract and its conclusion. Such a provision is, among other things, expected to encourage economic operators to pursue public award contracts in other EU Member States.
The Commission had proposed that, under the "standstill" clause, authorities must suspend the conclusion of an awarded public contract for at least 10 days from the date when the contract award decision is sent to relevant tenderers. MEPs voted to retain this minimum period in cases where such notification is made by fax or electronic means. In instances where notification is made by other means, however, it extended it to 15 days.
In line with a Council-EP compromise agreement, Member States, in turn, must ensure that review procedures allow for measures - such as suspending the procedure for the award of a public contract or awarding damages - to correct alleged infringements or to prevent further damage to the interests at stake.
The infringement of the standstill period or the suspensive effect, MEPs decided, will lead to the contract being rendered ineffective. Member States may derogate from this by applying alternative sanctions: by levying fines, or shortening the duration of the contract. Illegal direct awards, on the other hand, will have to be rendered ineffective in every case.
Having entered into negotiations with the Council Presidency prior to the vote in plenary, MEPs secured a first-reading agreement on the dossier. The Council, therefore, is expected to back the Parliament's amendments and to adopt the legislation without further changes. EU countries will then have 24 months (after the publication of the directive in the Official Journal) to bring its provisions into force.
20070615IPR07920 Public contracts: review procedures concerning the award (amend. Dir. 89/665/EEC and 92/13/EEC) (Remedies Directives) Text, as adopted by the EP on 21 June, will shortly be available here
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5339542
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
