Green Week - MEPs spell out how we can make a difference
Environment
2007-06-11 - 13:14
11-15 June -Green Week
This week is "Green week" in the EU institutions - an annual event that promotes a more environmentally friendly way of life. It aims to suggest practical ways in which we can all help avert the worst effects of climate change. In January last year MEPs passed a resolution calling for reductions in Greenhouse gas emissions of 30% by 2020. Here, we ask MEPs what steps they think we should take in our daily lives to help the environment. Below are a few ideas you may want to try yourself.
Speaking on behalf of the Parliament's efforts to reduce its environmental impact, President Hans-Gert Pöttering said that "with the help of a study which is intended to make our ‘ecological footprint’ visible, we will soon know in detail where the European Parliament actually produces CO2 and how much and how we can reduce our emissions. It is a long way to a Parliament free of CO2, but we are taking the first step."
On a more day-to-day level Portuguese Socialist (PSE) member Edite Estrela suggested "little actions like switching off the air-conditioning when you don’t need it".
From Slovenian Liberal ALDE MEP Mojca Drčar-Murko , "we have to change our anthropocentric attitudes towards nature, animals and plants likewise, into an enlightened behaviour, respectful of the diversity of Earth’s life".
Miroslav Ouzký - a Czech member of the European People's Party and European Democrats identified the "super consumption" of your society as being to blame. She said" each of us could do something for the environment simply by reducing our own consumption.
Dutch PSE Member Dorette Corbey : "Personal choices do make a difference. So become vegetarian, insulate your home and don't fly to your holiday destination this summer."
Parliament's Vice-President Gérard Onesta , suggests that one way to help the environment is to read documents on screen rather than printing them out" An alternative opinion from non-attached British MEP Roger Helmer suggested "we could roll back the industrial revolution, make heroic economic sacrifices, and destroy the competitiveness of our European economies, while our global competitors hoot with laughter at our folly. Come to think of it, that's exactly what we're planning to do."
German PSE Member Dagmar Roth-Behrendt advocated thinking about "environmentally sound transport, use of energy, use of office material, waste disposal. at all times."
Roberto Musacchio for the European United Left (GUE/NGL, IT): said we should "respect some simple rules: use water responsibly and make ecological choices for your transport means."
Karl-Heinz Florenz, a German Member of the EPP-ED: "we should focus on our homes, for example to improve the insulation or heating system."
Italian MEP Alessandro Foglietti of the Union of the Europe for the Nations said that "we should recycle more and use our brains as much as possible".
Italian Monica Frassoni for the Greens/EFA: First ask yourself, "Do I need to take a car to go to that place or can I rather take the bus, or walk, or ride my bike?"
Spanish MEP Cristina Gutiérrez-Cortines (EPP-ED): "In zones of high temperatures, the windows should remain open all night long, till dawn. Closed, during the sunny hours of the day, which are the hottest, and when possible using the shades or blinds, so light will be able to come through without letting the heat in".
Spanish PES MEP Teresa Riera Madurell told us that "an important contribution is to adopt energy saving gestures like room temperature control".
Bulgarian ALDE member Bilyana Ilieva Raeva had this to say "before printing, think about the environment!"
Tunne Kelam , an Estonian EPP-ED Member, said "we should stop using faxes and send documents only via electronic means."
Gyula Hegyi, a Hungarian PSE Member said " walk or bike to your working place and eat less meat and more vegetables!
Leader of the PSE Martin Schulz suggested: "switch off your computer and the lights when leaving your office after work."
Jana Hybášková, a Czech MEP for the EPP-ED said that "reducing consumption both as a legislator and as a private person".
Italian PSE Member Guido Sacconi said we should "go to work by public transport and leave the car home."
British Green MEP Caroline Lucas said "the greenest thing we can do at work is to demand, through effective unions, that our employers reduce their greenhouse gas emissions."
20070611STO07664 Green week - what's on Mobility week September 06
EN
1
PHOTO
20070611PHT07684.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/environment/greenweek/home.html
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060922STO10912 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
