Integrated strategy at national and European level needed to tackle juvenile delinquency
Justice and home affairs
2007-06-21 - 13:38
The European Parliament stresses in an own-initiative report adopted today that juvenile delinquency can be effectively combated only by adopting an integrated strategy at national and European level, which will use three guiding principles: prevention, judicial and extrajudicial measures (and the social inclusion of all young people. The MEPs want the Commission to set up an integrated Community framework programme. The report was adopted by 440 votes for, 64 against and 71 abstentions.
In the report drafted by Katerina BATZELI (PES, EL), the MEPs note that juvenile delinquency is becoming a matter for concern since it has assumed huge proportions and because delinquency is starting at a younger age, MEPs believe that it is only possible to combat this phenomenon with an integrated strategy at national and European level.
Policies at national level
The report stresses that it is crucially important for all stakeholders in society to be directly involved in the planning and implementation of an integrated national strategy. MEPs believe that effective combating of juvenile delinquency calls for an integrated and effective school, social, family and educational policy which will help to ensure that social and civic values are passed on and that young people adjust to society at an early age. It is also necessary to adopt a policy geared to greater economic and social cohesion and to reducing social inequalities, and countering social exclusion and poverty, especially child poverty.
The report stresses that the guiding principles for any policy need to be: prevention, judicial and extrajudicial measures and the social inclusion of all young people. MEPs also emphasise the specific role the family plays in all stages of this fight against juvenile delinquency and ask the Member States to develop adequate support for parents. They note that in certain cases there is a need for parents to be involved to a greater extent and to be made more aware of their responsibilities.
MEPs also propose various measures, e.g. one-year parental leave, special training for teachers in the management of heterogeneous classes, conflict management guidelines and a (European) "road map" for the media involving a ban on the broadcasting of extremely violent images at certain times of the day.
Actions at European level
The Member States should, MEPs believe, in cooperation with the Commission, draw up and adopt immediately a number of minimum standards and guiding principles common to all Member States. The objective of a European approach should be to define models for intervention to deal with and manage juvenile delinquency, while recourse to custodial measures and punishment should constitute the last resort and be implemented only when judged to be absolutely necessary.
The Commission should provide funding for preventive measures under existing Community programmes and should create a new budget heading for integrated actions and networks to combat juvenile delinquency and to contribute to the social integration of all young people. A helpline for missing children and a free Europe-wide telephone hotline for children and young people with problems are also called for.
Once the necessary studies have been completed, the Commission is asked to propose an integrated Community framework programme with Community preventive measures, support for NGO initiatives and transnational cooperation and the funding of pilot programmes at regional and local level, which will be based on best national practices, will attempt to disseminate these practices throughout Europe and will also cover social and educational infrastructure requirements.
20070615IPR07915 Juvenile delinquency - role of women, the family and society Text, as adopted by the EP on 21 June, will shortly be available here
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5430632
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
