This week on Parliament's website: EU summit, Del Ponte, European Youth Media Days
Institutions
2007-06-25 - 14:43
Chancellor Merkel will sum up her Presidency of the EU on Wednesday afternoon
This week an exceptional plenary session will take place in the EP to discuss the results of the EU summit of last week. Also this week, Carla Del Ponte, chief prosecutor for war crimes in the former Yugoslavia will meet MEPs on the Foreign Affairs Committee. We will carry an interview with her on Wednesday. To wrap up the week we will hand over our website to 23 young journalists. Find out why, and read more about the EP's schedule in our look at the week ahead.
EU summit
On Wednesday afternoon (15:00-17:00 CET), German Chancellor Mrs Angela Merkel will close the EU presidency of her country by presenting the results of the European Council meeting of 21-22 June in the hemicycle. MEPs will have the chance to react to the deal she brokered last weekend. After that, attention shifts immediately to the next EU Presidency when EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering and the leaders of the Parliament’s political groups visit Lisbon on Thursday and Friday for discussions with the Portuguese government, which takes over on 1 July 2007 for six months.
ACP-EU Assembly
On Monday , Mr Pöttering will open the 13th session of EU-ACP Joint Parliamentary Assembly in Wiesbaden, Germany, together with Mr Horst Köhler, President of the Federal Republic of Germany. The meeting that will last until Thursday is set to focus in particular on the proposed Economic Partnership Agreements as the Assembly will consider reports on the migration of skilled workers, poverty reduction for small farmers in ACP countries and good governance. The two urgent topics which will result in the adoption of a resolution are the situations in Darfur and Zimbabwe.
Del Ponte
On Tuesday the chief prosecutor for the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia Ms Carla Del Ponte will visit to the EP, where she will meet the Foreign Affairs committee. The committee will hear reports on Serbia's co-operation with the criminal tribunal for the former Yugoslavia not only from Ms Del Ponte but also from Serbian foreign affairs minister Vuk Jeremic.
Digital trust
On Tuesday, we will publish an article about 'digital trust.' Despite the potential of online shopping, only 6 % of European consumers seem to engage in cross-border e-commerce. Despite the large and growing market of the EU, apparently consumers are not taking full advantage of the internal market.
European Youth Media Days 2007
Finally, 270 young journalists and students in journalism will attend conferences and participate in several workshops in the EP buildings from 27 to 30 June. The young journalists will participate in an opening ceremony with EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering and will have the opportunity to discuss with MEPs and representatives of the Commission and the Council issues of European interest. The workshops pursue the aim to produce actual material such as photos and videos, assisted by professional journalists and experts. Also we will hand over the "keys" to our website, allowing several young journalists to replace the existing editors of our site in order to produce a Focus about the event.
Other important issues
Other important issues this week include a proposed framework directive on the safer use of pesticides that will be put to a first-reading vote in the Environment Committee on Tuesday. The regulation on roaming charges will be signed into law by Mr Pöttering and Mrs Merkel on Wednesday. Also the anti-missile shield that the USA would like to establish with bases in some EU member states will be the subject of a hearing in the Security and Defence committee on Thursday. Furthermore five MEPs of the committee Development will be in Darfur and eastern Chad to see conditions there for themselves, from Saturday until the 6 July . Another group of MEPs will go to East Timor to observe the Parliamentary elections from Wednesday to Monday.
20070622STO08190 EU Presidency European Council conclusions ACP-EU Assembly European Youth Media Days 2007
EN
1
PHOTO
20070625PHT08266.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.eu2007.de/en/
EN
3
LINK
http://www.consilium.europa.eu/cms3_fo/showPage.asp?id=432&lang=lt&mode=g
EN
4
LINK
/intcoop/acp/10_01/default_en.htm
EN
5
LINK
http://www.youthmediadays.eu/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
