Opening of the June Strasbourg session: changes to this week's agenda - new debate on the situation in Palestine
Institutions
2007-06-18 - 18:28
Following the opening on Monday of the Strasbourg session by EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering, the House approved a number of changes to this week's plenary agenda. On Tuesday at 9am the President of Parliament and one speaker from each political group will make statements on the situation in Palestine. Mr Pöttering will ask the Council and Commission to take part. Regarding the debate on the conclusions of the G8 summit, later on Tuesday, the Council has announced it will now not participate.
The vote on the resolution on the Middle East, scheduled for Thursday, is postponed to the July plenary, in view of the speed with which events are evolving in that part of the world. Also on Thursday, under debates on breaches of human rights, the topic "Situation of Iraqi refugees" is replaced by a debate on Cuba.
Highlights of the week include
Monday 18 June 2007
MEPs will debate a first-reading legislative report on the definition, presentation and labelling of spirit drinks. Parliament will vote on controversial new rules on the production and labelling of spirits such as whisky and vodka when a first-reading report from the Environment Committee comes before the plenary. A compromise text has just been agreed with Council covering all the main issues including the most hotly-contested one: the ingredients and labelling of vodka.
Later on Monday, the House will debate banning the import of or export from the Community of cat and dog fur. The first-reading report being tabled by the Internal Market and Consumer Protection Committee would scrap an exemption allowing trade in fur from cats and dogs if they were "not bred or killed for fur production". MEPs fear this would leave a "gaping loophole" in the legislation, which traders would quickly exploit.
The last item on Monday evening will see MEPs debate the topic of multiple sclerosis. Marcin Libicki (UEN, PL) on behalf of the Committee on Petitions will be asking the Commission to indicate the specific measures which it has taken to implement this resolution and, in particular, the Code of Best Practice.
Tuesday 19 June 2007
Parliament will debate and vote on the final report by the Committee of Inquiry into the Crisis at the Equitable Life Assurance Society. The House is expected to endorse the inquiry's findings, which include recommendations aimed at preventing such cases in future and at fostering a healthy European pensions and insurance market. The report also calls on the UK government to set up a compensation scheme for Equitable's victims.
Later on Tuesday, Arlene McCarthy (PES, UK) will present her report on public procurement legislation. The committee recommends that the Commission propose an action plan to encourage Member States to fulfil their obligation to tackle persistent and emerging transposition and implementation problems in public procurement, focusing on illegal direct awards and late or incorrect transposition.
The House will also debate and vote on the banning of exports and the safe storage of metallic mercury. The Environment Committee is tabling a report calling for a proposed ban on exports of mercury to be brought forward to 1 December 2010. It also wants stricter rules on storage of this substance, which is regarded as dangerous to health and the environment. In addition, it is proposing that an import ban be introduced from 1 July 2010, something which was not included in the Commission's draft legislation.
MEPs will debate and vote on a resolution on the recent developments on the financing of Galileo - the EU's satellite navigation system. MEPs in the Budgets Committee urge the Commission to come up with a revised proposal for a regulation for the financing of the EU satellite navigation system. The funding proposal should be made under the co-decision procedure, the resolution says.
On Tuesday afternoon, Glenys Kinnock (PES, UK) will present her report on the Millennium Development Goals at the Midway Point. The report commends the Member States that have reached or exceeded the 0.7% Overseas Development Aid (ODA) / GNI target and those that are increasing their actual aid levels, but regrets that some EU-15 countries have missed the interim 0.33% target by a large margin in 2006.
Later, the House will debate the outcome of the recent G8 meeting held in Heiligendamm, Germany after hearing statements from the Commission.
The House will also debate and vote on the recent Petitions Committee fact-finding mission to Andalucía, Valencia and Madrid concerning the extensive urbanisation projects in these autonomous regions of Spain about which many petitions have been received.
Wednesday 20 June 2007
The key debate of the week is the debate at first-reading on the improvement of the portability of supplementary pension rights. Parliament's Employment and Social Affairs Committee, in a first-reading report by Ria Oomen-Ruijten (EPP-ED, NL), broadly endorses the Commission proposal but spells out the point that the directive should apply to all supplementary pension schemes for workers, e.g. group insurance contracts, pay-as-you-go schemes, funded schemes or pensions backed by book reserves.
The House will then debate the enlargement of the eurozone to Malta and Cyprus from 1 January 2008.
On Wednesday afternoon, the House will debate a report on MEDA and financial support to Palestine - evaluation, implementation and control.
The rest of the afternoon is dedicated to a series of reports from the Civil Liberties Committee. Among them is a report from Martine Roure (PES, FR) on the framework decision on combating racism and xenophobia. On 20 April 2007, the Council of EU Justice Ministers in Luxembourg achieved political agreement, the Parliament will give its views on this.
Thursday 21 June 2007
On Thursday, the Internal Market Committee will be putting forward a legislative report on review procedures concerning the award of contracts. The directive amends the “Remedies Directives”, the European Commission is seeking to improve economic operators’ recourse to effective and harmonised procedures in cases of illegally awarded public procurement award contracts.
As is usual, the session ends with debates and votes on three resolutions on human rights issues. On this occasion, the topics are: Cuba, Ethiopia and Burma (Aung San Suu Ki).
20070615IPR07880 Briefing - 18-21 June 2007 Final draft agenda
EN
2
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?language=EN&reference=2007-06
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070606BRI07533 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
