The Week Ahead 25 June - 1 July 2007
Institutions
2007-06-22 - 11:33
Plenary Session and Committee meetings - Brussels
EP/German and Portuguese Presidencies. Chancellor Angela Merkel will report on Germany's EU Presidency and on the EU summit at an extraordinary plenary session in Brussels (Wednesday). The EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering and the political group leaders then go to Lisbon for a meeting with the Portuguese government, which holds the Presidency in the second half of 2007 (Thursday-Friday).
EU Treaty. A discussion in the Constitutional Affairs Committee will give MEPs their first chance to react to the outcome of the summit. (Monday)
Roaming signature. The regulation on mobile phone roaming will be signed into law by Mr Pöttering and Mrs Merkel (Wednesday).
Serbia. The Foreign Affairs Committee will hear reports on Serbia's co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, first from its Prosecutor Carla Del Ponte, then from the Serbian foreign affairs minister Vuk Jeremic (Tuesday).
ACP-EU Assembly. Mr Pöttering will open the 13th session of EU-ACP Joint Parliamentary Assembly in Wiesbaden, Germany. The meeting is set to focus in particular on the proposed Economic Partnership Agreements (Monday-Thursday).
Pesticides. The proposed framework directive on the safer use of pesticides will be put to a first-reading vote in the Environment Committee (Tuesday).
Missile defence. The anti-missile shield that the USA would like to establish with bases in some EU member states will be the subject of a hearing in the Security and Defence Subcommittee (Thursday).
Darfur and Timor Leste. Five Development Committee MEPs will be in Darfur and eastern Chad to see conditions there for themselves (from Saturday until 6 July). Another group of MEPs will go to Timor Leste to observe elections (Wednesday-Monday).
European Youth Media Days. President Pöttering will welcome some 270 young journalists to Parliament to take part in a series of debates and workshops with key players from the media and the EU institutions (Wednesday to Friday).
20070622IPR08180 For full details of all the week's events see 'The Agenda'
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20072600AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
