EU Summit on Constitution: Pöttering sets out the Parliament's position
Institutions
2007-06-21 - 11:46
Family photo: EU leaders in Brussels, March, 2007
When EU leaders meet in Brussels over the next two days for a crucial summit on the Constitution, the President of the European Parliament will deliver a message calling for more democracy, transparency and a Europe that works for its people. Hans-Gert Pöttering will use his address at the start of the Summit to set out the position of the Parliament. His message will be stark - just last week at a meeting with national Parliaments he said failure to get agreement would lead to a "major crisis".
EU "needs to function in globalised world"
On 6 June Parliament debated a report which called for a "roadmap" to be clearly established to show people how and when progress will be made on the Constitution. The debates and votes on the Constitution are crucial in framing the statement that its President will make to EU heads of state and government on Thursday around 17:30 in Brussels.
Meeting with MPs from national Parliament's a few days ago, President Pöttering said, "the EU can not operate efficiently with the current instruments...it needs to function in a globalised world, to assert its role at an international level and to meet efficiently the concerns of the citizens."
The Constitution was originally intended to come into force in November 2006 but "no" votes in referendums in France and the Netherlands in mid-2005 and the doubts of other countries about ratification have put the ratification process on hold. With 18 countries having ratified the document, German Chancellor Angela Merkel has made progress on the issue one of the key aims of her country's six month EU Presidency which ends on 30 June.
Under the original Constitution, Parliament would see its competence as a budgetary authority extended and the co-decision legislative procedure (under which the EP and Council of ministers share power) covering more areas.
In 2003 it was agreed that the President of the Parliament would attend and participate in Summit meetings where the Constitution is being discussed. Normally the President of the European Parliament reads a statement to EU leaders at the start of the meeting and then leaves them to their deliberations.
An "intensive" day at the Summit
There are four EU Summits a year in Brussels and they usually start mid or late afternoon, leaving time for last minute meetings to seek common ground. This is Hans-Gert Pöttering's second EU Summit - the previous Summit in March was a "very intensive day" according to the President.
Prior to the March Summit he held talks with Polish President Lech Kaczyński on the Constitution followed by the traditional meetings of European political "families", when Presidents and Prime Ministers from the left and right meet to identify key policies. The President's address to EU leaders meeting in the "Justus Lipsius" building normally lasts 20 minutes.
On Friday night there is the traditional working dinner - in March Mr Pöttering sat next to French President Jacques Chirac at his last European Summit.
Past Presidents on their experiences at the European Council
Enrique Barón Crespo, President from 1989-1992, said "I recall we were sitting at a big round table and the political leaders - of what at that time was the EU-12 - were looking at me...I felt part of a body half way between a Senate and a Court. I had been told that political leaders did not listen, but I noticed gestures and signs confirming that my message was getting through."
Pat Cox - President from 2002-2004 and now president of the International European Movement said that "the Parliament’s role was real but limited because of the chosen working method of the Council Presidencies".
20070615STO07889 Parliament's President Resolution on Constitution roadmap German Presidency website European Council website
EN
1
PHOTO
20070620PHT08121.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/president/agenda/en/default.htm
EN
4
LINK
http://www.eu2007.de/en/About_the_EU/Constitutional_Treaty/BerlinerErklaerung.html
EN
5
LINK
http://www.consilium.europa.eu/showPage.asp?lang=en&id=668&mode=g&name=
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0234 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
