Budget overhaul takes shape as MEPs adopt EIT opinion
Budget
2007-06-12 - 10:27
The European Institute of Technology (EIT) must be funded adequately - but not at the expense of other research and innovation priorities, said the EP Budgets Committee on Monday. The Committee called for talks with the Council to renegotiate the EU financial framework accordingly. MEPs also underlined similar funding problems for the European satellite navigation system, Galileo, in a separate resolution also adopted on Monday.
Lead committees do not always take account of opinions contributed by other committees, but in this specific case the Industry Committee agreed to take on board the Budgets Committee's views in this co-decision dossier.
Still hope for a first-reading agreement
"The EIT is a "must" for Parliament and we are keen to find a first-reading agreement", said Budgets Committee Chair Reimer Böge (EPP-ED, DE) after the vote. "On Galileo, we insist that any agreement on the funding of the European satellite navigation system has to be agreed in a co-decision procedure, hence with Parliament's approval".
The Commission proposed that the EIT be funded from existing programmes under Heading 1a, "Competitiveness for growth and employment" (also known as the "Lisbon" heading), as it includes money for the 7th Research Framework programme. Up to €1.5bn would be taken from these Heading 1a programmes to fund the EIT for 2008-2013, so as to meet the EIT's €2.4 billion price tag, as estimated by the Commission. The remaining appropriations would come "from the available margin under heading 1a" (i.e. money available in this heading, in this case €308m) and a further €527m from the Member States and the private sector.
However, the Budgets Committee found it hard to accept that the Lisbon programmes should suffer a further cut, as they had already been substantially reduced by the crunch 2005 December European Council. The EIT was not included in the 2007-2013 financial framework, which makes its proposed funding arrangements more difficult than expected.
A key amendment to the Ms Nina Skottova's (EPP-ED, CS) opinion, uninamously adopted by the committee, calls on the Council "to enter negotiations with Parliament on both the financing of the governing board of the EIT and the financing of Knowledge and Innovation Communities (KICs), using all possibilities offered by the IIA of 17 May 2006" (i.e. the rules governing budgetary provisions outside the treaties).
The crucial amendment emphasises that the reference amount is subject to an agreement by the budgetary authority (Parliament and Council) as foreseen in the IIA, in particular in its part C on revision of the financial framework.
Articles 20 to 23 of the IIA deal with the possibility of a revision of the multiannual financial framework, either through additional money, or from a redeployment from other headings of the budget.
With no such agreement on the funding of the programme, no agreement can be made on the legislative act, at least in first reading.
Move ahead on Galileo - but the EP must have its say
On Galileo , MEPs in the Budgets Committee urge the Commission to come up with a revised proposal for a regulation for the financing of the EU satellite navigation system. The funding proposal should be made under the co-decision procedure, the resolution says.
A call for a revision of the financial framework is, in this case, explicitly made by MEPs in another paragraph.
A total of €1billion was foreseen by the financial framework for 2007-2013. Transport ministers meeting in Luxembourg on 8 June asked the Commission to provide further details of alternative scenarios to finance Europe's satellite navigation project Galileo, including the various options for public funding.
This decision effectively shelved the public-private-partnerships, or PPPs, initially-proposed to launch Galileo.
With the final price tag expected to be around €3.5 billion (with € 1 billion already accounted for in the EU budget), some MEPs in the Budgets Committee stressed the urgent need to move ahead with Galileo - or else face the embarassment of being overtaken by emerging countries: "China and even India could have their systems up and running earlier than the EU", warned Catherine Guy-Quint (PES, FR).
This resolution will be put to the vote in the forthcoming June II plenary session in Strasbourg, whereas the opinion on the EIT will be forwarded to the lead (Industry) Committee.
2007-06-11 Commission des budgets In the chair: Reimer BÖGE EPP-ED DE
20070611IPR07692 Interinstitutional agreement on budgetary discipline and sound financial management Budgets Committee documents can be found here
EN
1
LINK
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/site/en/oj/2006/c_139/c_13920060614en00010017.pdf
EN
2
LINK
/meetdocs/2004_2009/organes/budg/budg_meetinglist.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
