Carla Del Ponte interview: 'My greatest motivation is the victims'
External relations
2007-06-27 - 07:59
Carla Del Ponte at the EP on Tuesday
Carla Del Ponte, Chief Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, was in Parliament Wednesday to talk to the foreign affairs committee about her work in pursuing indicted war criminals. Only 4 remain at large - including Mladic and Karadzic - and she believes a new Serbian government will cooperate. Since being established by a UN Resolution in 1993, the tribunal has indicted 161 people. Ms Del Ponte has been Prosecutor since 1999. She told us about her work.
Born in Lugano in 1947, Ms Del Ponte made her name as an indefatigable opponent of organised crime as a prosecutor in her native Switzerland - often at significant personal risk - before being appointed to take on her present role. This has put her in the front line in dealing with some of the worst crimes in post war European history. Her work at the Tribunal has been important in identifying and prosecuting forms of warfare such as genocide and rape.
Q. What do you think has been the most important accomplishment of the ICTY? Has it helped in the reconciliation process in former Yugoslavia?
CDP: The most important achievement is that the ICTY has been able to issue 161 indictments against those militarily and politically responsible for the atrocious crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia – the war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide. It is now common knowledge that Srebrenica was genocide. This is a big achievement, the fight against the impunity of the powerful men or women. It was an important achievement for the implementation of justice, of the Genocide Convention and of the Geneva Convention. That is extremely important.
Reconciliation is a much more difficult issue. Justice must be done, but it's not enough to achieve a complete reconciliation; it's one of the contributions, a component to reconciliation. Reconciliation will only be when the population accepts the facts of the past and the new generation is informed and engages for a future of peace and in democracy. International justice is the first step, but we need the local, national authorities to provide a second step in admitting the truth, the facts of the conflict. A third step will be the educational step by a new generation, in schools and universities. This takes time.
Q. The EU recently resumed negotiations on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with Serbia. Does this mean that Belgrade is now cooperating fully with the Tribunal?
CDP: Yes, in two weeks they delivered two fugitives who were extremely important for us - and we were told that it was very difficult to get them. So I'm asking them now to deliver Mladic and I hope he will be located and transferred to the Hague as soon as possible. I think finally with the new government Serbia has the political will to cooperate with us, as not only were two fugitives transferred to the Hague, but we also received a lot of documents we had been asking for months as well as access to witnesses. So I think we are in a good direction for being able to certify full cooperation - but I need my four fugitives, without my four fugitives it will never be full cooperation - especially Mladic, they can deliver Mladic!
I need the European Union, particularly in the next two or three months to keep the conditionality (linking progress on an EU Association agreement with Serbia to cooperation with the ICTY). If they (Serbia) do not deliver the fugitives it will be the crucial moment and the last moment. If I cannot get my fugitives this year I think it will be extremely difficult if not impossible. I hope the EU will support me as they have done before - despite different political pressures.
Q. If in future, MEPs are asked to consider the EU applications of countries in former Yugoslavia, what standards should they hold them to?
CDP: I'm a prosecutor, I'm not involved in politics and I am trying to stay out, although sometimes I go to the border...but I need to get my fugitives, to have the co-operation to allow me to execute my mandate. In any case I would say, if they (States of former Yugoslavia) are hiding war criminals they should not be allowed to enter European Union. We're not talking about low or mid-level fugitives but those highly responsible for the most atrocious crimes. Let's see, it will be in the near future.
Q. On a personal note, what is it that motivates you and has kept you going through your career?
Well, firstly it is because it is my job. I have been a prosecutor for many years. My greatest motivation is the victims of the crimes. You can imagine that with war crimes, crimes against humanity...people suffer in an incredible manner. I and my collaborators are very motivated when we see that the victims see that justice is done, it's incredible and that gives us a great motivation.
20070622STO08192 Del Ponte meets MEPs in Foreign Affairs Committee International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia. (02:36)
EN
1
PHOTO
20070626PHT08377.jpg
EN
3
LINK
http://www.un.org/icty/
EN
4
MULTIMEDIA
20070628MLT08618.asf
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070625IPR08228 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
