Interview with US Ambassador to EU: "relations strong and getting better"
External relations
2007-07-04 - 10:24
State of the Unions - Ambassador Gray makes his point
On 4 July, American Independence Day, we thought it a good opportunity to look at the state of EU-US relations through American eyes. Who better to ask than C. Boyden Gray, US Ambassador to the European Union? Ambassador Gray has held the post since January 2006. His job description includes a brief to "strengthen the transatlantic relationship, work out how common US-EU interests can be furthered throughout the world, provide early warning of potential frictions, and resolve problems".
The political landscape has changed recently on both sides of the Atlantic. In this context, how do you see the current health of the transatlantic partnership?
I see these relations as pretty strong and getting better, and I think recent political changes in the US will help. I'm a Republican, but we're bipartisan over here, and the real point about these changes is that we both live in democracies which share values. The changes here are good for us, we think, there's a lot of new energy. President Sarkozy is less reflexively sceptical about the United States than some - he campaigned as a friend - not an indiscriminate friend - but a friend. The US looks forward to working with the EU with him as one of the key players.
You have doubtless reported back to the US administration on the constitutional deal sealed at last week's European summit. How did you assess the outcome from a US perspective?
We're still trying to figure out what it all means, especially on the removal of "free and undistorted" competition from the EU's objectives. I suppose that until it's all negotiated through in the intergovernmental process, we don't really know, nor can we really comment.
Basically though, we are in favour of a strong European Union, and this Treaty provides certain measures which will strengthen the Union and this is very much supported by the United States.
The long-standing EU-US partnership now faces a very different world, with rising and assertive global powers, such as China and India, a shifting relationship with Russia, new security threats, new environmental dangers. Does our partnership have what it takes to deal with them?
On all these issues, we share common goals and, at the moment, common tactics, even on issues which cause concern in the European Parliament, such as techniques in fighting terrorism. Are we solving all these issues, even with a common position? No, we're not done with all of them, but it's good we're singing off the same page.
On climate change, the differences loom larger rhetorically than programmatically. The key search for the technological advances that will allow China to reduce its emissions - and us too, but without China we will fail on this - is intense, collaborative, well under way and very productive. You don't read about that much in the papers.
The US Congress has 1 language, 2 parties whilst the EP has 23 languages and 8 political groups (and more than 160 political parties). How do you think two such different parliaments can work effectively together?
The fragmentation of your political organisation is an issue for us. On our side though, the fact that we have two parties doesn't mean it's as simple as that might sound: there are subgroups within both of them. However, it is easier to deal with parties, even divided ones, than with many different ones.
So we try to deal with all this on an issue-basis. We figure out what issues can we engage on and then let the process work itself out. We get the right people to meet - congressional committee chairs with MEPs and commissioners - and we've found a very positive result. Deals get done. We've done this on "open skies", we've done it on financial instruments, we've done it to some extent on anti-terrorism measures. I think that's the way we forge greater ties between Parliament and our Congress: start with issues rather than with structures.
What do you think the EU can learn from the US? And what can the US learn from the EU?
We need to learn from you on financial service issues. We got a little over-regulatory when we had our big dot com bust - we went too far. We got help from you, because you realise it is not a zero sum game. The better New York does (in terms of its stock exchange), the better for everybody. We can also deal better with liability issues. Europe seems not to burden shareholder’s rights with so much litigation in the courts.
What can you learn from us? I think we do a little better with innovation and entrepreneurial culture. You can learn from us how to draw better on the intellectual property in every university and then make it more easily transferable to commercial activity. It will actually benefit the public, rather than sit in a library somewhere.
On the environment too - this is not publicly known - EU officials acknowledge we have a lead on air quality, for example, and how we handle certain very dangerous pollutants. We are happy to share what we have done.
This is a very target-rich environment of what we can learn from each other. It's one reason I like this job so much; there's no end to the potential for reinforcing the relationship between the two continents.
It is eighteen months now since you were sworn in. What has it been like to be an American living in Brussels over that period? How do people react to you?
This is a most civilized place to live, though I wish it wouldn't rain so much!
Brussels is a little gem. It is like sleepy little Georgetown 30 years ago. Now, that's all gone. Thirty years from now you will be longing for the days when Brussels was like that: a sleepy little town with fabulous food and much rain. The "Beltway" is coming to Brussels. You can´t hide a gem like this for much longer.
20070703STO08736 US Mission to the EU Transatlantic Legislators Dialogue EP Delegation to the US
EN
1
PHOTO
20070703PHT08772.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://useu.usmission.gov/
EN
3
LINK
/intcoop/tld/default_en.htm
EN
4
LINK
/activities/expert/delegations/presentation.do?delegation=2457&language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
