Citizens' forum debate in Lisbon - young people centre stage
Institutions
2007-07-03 - 17:35
28-29 June - Citizens' forum in Lisbon
On the eve of Portugal's Presidency of the European Union 150 young people gathered in Lisbon for a debate in one of the "Citizens' forums". The role of young people was the main topic of debate but the situation in Iraq, the new EU treaty and the environment were just some other issues discussed. They were joined by the leaders of Parliament's political groups as well as Parliament's President Hans-Gert Pöttering and its vice-President Manuel dos Santos.
Opening the two day session on 28 June, Jaime Gama, President of the Portuguese Parliament called for a lively debate imploring people to "ask important questions, we don't want propaganda".
Iraq - how can the EU recover the "fractures" of the war?
One of the first questions was from Joana Filipe (from the "Young Parliament" project in Portugal) who asked "How can we give credibility to an EU discredited by the fractures over Iraq?"
Replying to this, the leader of the Greens / EFA in Parliament Monica Frassoni pointed out that "most of the times, the governments have difficulties in taking European decisions. The democratic question is not completely solved, especially in external policies".
Joseph Daul, President of the EPP-ED, remarked, "the Treaty will make possible to have (in some cases) a common policy."
Goodbye Constitution - hello Reform Treaty?
One of the priorities of the Portuguese Presidency will be in overseeing the drafting of a new "Reform Treaty". José Rodrigues of the Young European Federalists regretted that the EU Constitution had been dropped by EU leaders: "what can we do with the expectations of the citizens of the 18 countries that have approved it?" he asked the forum.
On this point President Pöttering said that "no-one wants Europe to be a 'superstate' but a democratic and competent one - a strong Europe that will speak in the world and where our regions will be allowed to defend their identity. Alone, Portugal would not be able to defend his values in the world".
Bruno Gollnisch of the Identity, Tradition and Sovereignty Group made the point that the new Treaty was similar to the old EU Constitution (which he is against) with "just words avoided".
Europe's young people: spectators or participants?
Some of the Group leaders were asked by Carla Mouro of the National Youth Council how they intended to involve young people in the EU's Lisbon strategy of growth and jobs.
Liberal ALDE leader Graham Watson asked for a show of hands on people's attitude towards globalisation. By a considerable margin people voted that they thought globalisation a good thing. Mr Watson said that "the Lisbon strategy is a way for Europe to have a more globalized economy and to be more competitive. The market is a precious instrument. So, we should try to get people ready for the new opportunities".
For the Socialist PSE Group Martin Schulz wanted "globalization with justice and not a globalization where just some take advantages".
For the UEN Group (Union of Europe for the Nations) Brian Crowley called on young people to take action themselves: "only the young people can guarantee that his voice is being listened to...you have a strong voice".
Environment - what is the EP doing to include it in EU policies?
One speaker - Vera Coelho who is studying the environment - wanted to know what MEPs are doing to ensure that environmental issues are included in EU policies.
For the European United Left (GUE/NGL) Francis Wurtz answered that "the EP is concerned about questions that overpass the political ones, like climate changes, clean energy, public transports and construction of isolated houses. Every time we discuss institutional questions we have to ask if the environmental ones are included".
The end of the debate concerned the question of whether a new "reform treaty" warranted a referendum. Mr Pöttering said that "each country should decide whether to hold a referendum. I defend the parliamentary systems but the decision is up to the Portuguese authorities".
20070703STO08735 Citizens Forum Lisbon
EN
1
PHOTO
20070627PHT08599.jpg
EN
2
LINK
mms://wm.streampower.be/ep/ondemand/citizen_forum/citizensforumlisbonEN.wmv
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
