Portuguese PM Sócrates tells MEPs new EU reform treaty in October
Institutions
2007-07-11 - 10:53
Portuguese Prime Minister José Sócrates outlined the new Presidency's priorities to MEPs in Strasbourg. The Presidency, he said, was working to obtain agreement on the new reform Treaty at the informal 18-19 October informal meeting of Heads of State and Government following a rapid Intergovernmental Conference. MEPs expressed divergent views and will vote later on the Parliament's opinion on the forthcoming IGC. The European Parliament will have 3 of its members fully involved in the IGC.
Council presidency
Opening the debate, the Council president-in-office and prime minister of Portugal, José Sócrates, said that in the present day, it was important for Europe to face up to global challenges and help build a more stable world, because "It is not only European people that need a strong Europe. It is the world that needs Europe." He then turned to the three priorities of his country's six-month presidency of the EU: treaty reform, economic and social modernisation and a stronger role for Europe in the world.
Treaty reform: Parliament's participation
The prime minister stressed that his presidency's job was to turn the mandate adopted at the last European Council into a new treaty. There would be an intergovernmental conference on 23 July, when Portugal would present "a draft Treaty drawn up on the basis of the detailed instructions set out in the mandate". Emphasising that the main issues had been settled by the summit, he said "One thing is clear to me. Our mandate is not to change the mandate, but to turn the mandate into a Treaty." Next, he said, "We intend to work actively to obtain an agreement on the Treaty during the informal European Council of 18th and 19th October in Lisbon".
He himself had argued for the European Parliament to have three representatives at the IGC (compared with two on previous, similar occasions). He would also propose that "the European Parliament is represented by its President whenever the Intergovernmental Conference meets at the Heads of State and Government level". He looked forward to the EP's approval later today of its opinion on the convening of an IGC, without which the process cannot start.
Modernisation of the European economy and society
Turning to his next priority, Mr Sócrates reminded the House that seven years ago the Lisbon Strategy was adopted, as a "roadmap for the modernisation of the European economy and society". A new phase of the strategy would be prepared in time for approval under the Slovenian presidency in early 2008.
Key areas would be the internal market, the role of culture industries in job creation, and energy and environment policy. "Here, Europe must have just one goal: to maintain its leadership in the environmental field and, in particular, in the fight against climate change", he said.
His presidency also intended to "give the social dimension of the “Lisbon Strategy” the relevance and visibility it deserves", by focusing on the creation of sustainable jobs in the context of global competition, sustainability of pension schemes and "flexicurity" (labour market reforms combined with protection for workers).
Another key area was strengthening of police and judicial cooperation in the fight against terrorism and organised crime. Striking the right balance was crucial, but he was confident that "democracy does not fear terrorism and know how to be firm in the face of this threat" He added "A good example of this firm position is that of the British government last week and I would like to express the solidarity of all the countries of the Union with them".
He also stressed that "The fight against terrorism should therefore remain a common aim among all member states. Because only European cooperation allows us to prevent, protect and pursue terrorism."
Strengthening Europe's role in the world
Mr Sócrates also told the House that "in the second half of 2007 unavoidable decisions must be taken about delicate questions on the global agenda", including Kosovo, the Iran nuclear issue and Darfur. Bilateral summits with India, China, Russia and Ukraine were also on the agenda and EU-US relations would remain crucial.
Three events merited special emphasis. Firstly, the recent summit with Brazil was important to Portugal because of close ties between the two countries but he also looked forward to a relationship "that is mutually beneficial to Europe and Brazil, and in this way also contributes to enhancing general relations with the whole of Latin America".
Secondly, the forthcoming Euromediterranean conferences in the areas of migration, energy, foreign affairs and ecofin/trade were part of "an in-depth political debate" which was needed given "the growing interdependence of the two margins of the Mediterranean".
Thirdly, Mr Sócrates spoke of the second EU-Africa summit set for December, stressing "the relations between two continents which are both historically close and very interdependent in our world today" and adding "we recognise the need to define a new strategic partnership between the EU and Africa, so as to develop sustainable growth, guarantee peace, combat endemic disease and achieve a balanced and mutually advantageous management of migratory flows".
Concluding, the prime minister said "in a world of change, the worst thing is to stand still". "Our intention is to ensure that Europe doesn't stop but moves forward in the service of a better world".
Commission President José Manuel Barroso
José Manuel Barroso said that: "The agenda of the Portuguese presidency is ambitious and demanding. The forthcoming IGC will play a major role, but the Portuguese presidency can't just be limited to the treaty. This IGC will also be of a very different nature to previous IGCs. We can now say that we have a never held an IGC with such a specific mandate. This time, we will be using a very developed language from a technical and legal viewpoint. The central issue of this IGC is not the political substance, but instead is level of faithfulness to the content of the mandate. The Commission fully defends the mandate and doesn't feel that the mandate should be reopened, and our overall goal is to transform the mandate into a Treaty. We do not want the renegotiation of a mandate that everyone gave their agreement to.
Furthermore, we shouldn't forget that this agreement was difficult, and was based on a difficult political balancing act. The Commission fully supports therefore the intention of the Portuguese presidency to carry out a concentrated, rapid IGC, and also the Commission will be particularly vigilant in ensuring that this mandate is complied with. The Commission fully supports a rapid IGC with a decision in October. "
Lisbon agenda
On the Lisbon strategy, President Barroso, said that positive results of this strategy are already coming through." Unemployment, he said had fallen by 10 million in the EU and female employment levels had increased by 50 per cent. We can not he said, be complacent. Innovation in particular is important, he said, as it is clearly linked to economic growth. This is why the priority given to the European Institute of Technology and the fight against climate change should be welcomed.
President Barroso said: "A reformed treaty will increase EU's capacity when it comes to external relations. Brazil, our most recent strategic partner, we share an ambitious agenda such as sustainable bio-fuels and tackling climate change."
Trade
On trade, President Barroso said: "International trade has to be based on rules and has to be run by multilateral agents. This also has to do with our multilateral vision of the world." "Trade is not just an end in itself; it is a motor for development bringing people out of poverty as has been in the case of Asian countries.
On Africa, the Commission President said "We need for a strategic partnership between the EU and Africa which tackles energy, immigration, climate change, democracy and human rights. . The EU cannot and should not be a set of countries that look inwards. The EU can and should be a force of stability in the world, [and] cannot close its eyes to the drama in Africa that is taking place so close to home," he said.
Concluding, President Barroso said: "We can have full confidence in Portugal and its pro-European credentials. We want a strong Europe for a better world. Together we will hopefully be able to work together to bring this about."
Political group speakers
The Portuguese Presidency's "will to build" was welcomed by EPP-ED group chairman Joseph DAUL (EPP-ED, FR) as following the "ambitious but realistic" path traced by its German predecessors.
Success in areas such as treaty reform, counter-terrorism measures and consolidating growth "will to some extent depend" on EU support, he noted, stressing that progress was needed in all these areas. Like a house of cards, "if any is missing, the whole edifice could collapse", he said.
Mr Daul hoped that the reform treaty could be completed by the autumn summit, and called on other Member States to co-operate with the UK to combat terrorism - the "I'm all right" attitude needs to be "done away with", he said, if we are to deal with sophisticated terrorist organisations that do not shrink from any kind of crime, including illegal immigration.
On the single market, Mr Daul noted that it takes courage to become a world-leading economic power, and stressed the need to bring home to EU citizens the tangible benefits of free movement of people, goods, capital, and services.
The Presidency's renewed focus on Africa and Brazil, and determination to pursue dialogue with Ukraine and Russia, were welcome, said Mr Daul, concluding with a call for "peace, security, courage and responsibility".
A year ago, Portugal's "nerves of steel" enabled it to turn the tide of football match in its favour by scoring penalties in extra time - a feat it now needs to repeat by turning the Intergovernmental Conference into a Treaty, began Socialist Group chairman Martin SCHULZ (PES, DE).
The PES group are "'realists' -what's being negotiated is not everything we would like, but at least we don't see less in this proposal" (the IGC mandate], he continued, stressing the need not "to step backwards into a crisis", and adding that it is hard to see how democracy can work in a "multi-speed" Europe.
The "Lisbon" strategy needs to deliver not just jobs and growth, but social security too, he said, insisting that this growth must be sustainable - otherwise, it is "worse than useless", he said.
The need to act on climate change is good example of a unifying theme for EU citizens - and one that MEPs can act upon, said Mr Schulz, stressing the need to harness the enthusiasm of young people, as displayed at a recent "Live earth" concert.
Yet unless Africa is involved, climate protection will be a "dead letter" he continued, noting that although Africa is among those that contribute least to climate change, it is among those that suffer most from it. The EU also needs to engage more intensively with Latin American countries to solve problems that affect them most, such as financial crises, he added.
The "common ground" between Portugal's Prime Minister and the Commission President, despite their differing political backgrounds, is "love of the European concept", noted Mr Schulz, wishing them every possible success.
The Presidency's programme has "clear goals" and "ample ambition" said ALDE chairman Graham Watson (UK), welcoming what he saw as "two Josés competing for the laurels of liberalism" - "It's the only way, José", he added, paraphrasing a UK newspaper.
On jobs and growth, Mr Watson stressed the need to put the "is on" back into "Lisbon", by ensuring that economic growth is sustainable. Here he welcomed the discussion on "flexicurity", which, he said, should "protect workers, not uncompetitive jobs, not businesses, but the people in them". Tackling climate change entails "merging the Lisbon and Gothenburg agendas", he concluded.
Africa and the EU need each other, said Mr Watson, hoping that the "first EU/Africa summit for seven years", will begin to forge a "new, generous, partnership".
In justice and home affairs, the ALDE will strive to protect civil liberties, ensuring inter alia that they are not eroded in the fight against terrorism.
Mr Watson urged that the IGC "package must not be unravelled", and concluded by wishing Portugal, this nation of navigators, "good luck and fair winds" in the Council.
Brian CROWLEY (IE) for the UEN group began by saying that "the main purpose of this Presidency will be to ensure that EU leaders sign a new EU treaty later this year", but reflecting that "a lot of work still remains to be done before this treaty is fully agreed." The EU-Africa summit set up by the Portuguese presidency offers "the opportunity to encourage other African countries to operate with each other" to achieve "what should be proper democratic control, and proper procedures for the rights and freedoms of individuals." It will also offer the chance to try and "find a clear way forward" for Darfur.
The reformed treaty, Mr Crowley added, should be "about giving us the freedom that we seek, not the freedom to do whatever we want, but the freedom to achieve all that we desire." The treaty should also give high priority to climate change, and Mr Crowley welcomed the Brazil summit which offered "the opportunity to bring forward the whole idea of renewable energies, looking at ways to bring about a new partnership with the developing world, and, most importantly of all, to guarantee that our citizens have the rights and freedoms they deserve."
On behalf of the Greens/EFA group, Monica FRASSONI (IT) stated that she liked the slogan of the Portuguese presidency, "A stronger Europe for a better world", but that specific action had to taken "to ensure that we do have a stronger Europe." As far as the IGC is concerned, Mrs Frassoni said, there should be "no tolerance whatsoever for those that want to revise downwards the agreements that have already been arrived at", but that there should be "space for a possible improvement, in climate change, for example."
The IGC should also be opened up to the involvement of Parliament and public debate. On the Lisbon strategy, Mrs Frassoni said that "absolutely nothing will happen if, over the next six months...you are not able to reinforce the climate change agenda." Favouring the idea of "a pact for the climate and climate change", Mrs Frassoni said that "it is now time to act" and that there should be measures in place to "limit temperature rising to two degrees over pre-industrial levels, and to ensure that there are sanctions as there are under the Stability Pact."
Mrs Frassoni also expressed caution about agro-fuels, and the "mystic vision and miraculous solution" given by President Lula of Brazil, stating that "deforestation, illegal imports of wood and food insecurity are actually going to work to the benefit of Europeans but not others."
Ilda FIGUEIREDO (GUE/NGL, PT) said that Europe is still faced with an "increase in precarious jobs and poverty", and a situation in which "women and children have their human rights negated." We should be looking at the "deep injustices" that have not been addressed by the reformed constitutional treaty and "must forget about sacrosanct competitiveness." There must be "a change of direction for the EU", Mrs Figueiredo continued, because "we see this insecurity prevailing amongst workers." It is time for "people to deepen democracy and concentrate on a fairer Europe and a greater division of power." Mrs Figueiredo added that "we need strength, co-operation and solidarity internationally" and that "the new draft treaty is just like the previous one, which ignored the real priorities before us."
Patrick LOUIS (FR), for the Independence and Democracy group, said that the German presidency tried to impose upon the French and Dutch people a text which they rejected in a referendum, now they have a new version of the same thing." Mr Louis spoke of the "manipulation we are being subject to" and expressed a "wish to the Portuguese presidency" that "if you don't want the peoples of Europe to be alienated from politics, the Portuguese presidency must go back to the methods of another age, and institute...less technocracy, more democracy."
Bruno GOLLNISCH (ITS, FR) said of the Portuguese presidency that "we cannot help but admire your objectives" such as making a contribution to help "resolve the problems in Africa, problems which have worsened since the European nations departed."
Mr Gollinsch added that "the wish to develop a European international policy can only be legitimate and transparent if it can distinguish itself from that hegemony and superpower which we know the USA to be." On the IGC, Mr Gollinsch said that "Europe shall have to apply a roadmap which has been imposed on you, which is defeating the voters. It is about a constitution which has already been rejected and you are just changing the wording." He added that people "would reject [the constitution] again if they were properly informed."
Gianni DE MICHELIS (IT), on behalf of the non-attached members, said to the Portuguese presidency that that they "appreciate the list of priorities that you gave" but added that "to ensure that your slogan becomes reality, in order to show that a stronger Europe can help for a better world, we do have to introduce some changes." Mr De Michelis referred to the priority given to the Middle East, and said that "Europe can and should do more", and that the increasing dangers in the region "gives us new opportunities." He added that "Europe has to know how to be stronger if it is to contribute to a better world."
British speakers
Alyn SMITH (Greens/EFA) stated that his party decided, on balance, that "we could not recommend the previous draft of the Constitution to our voters, but that is in the past, and we view your efforts with a fair heart and an open and constructive attitude. We wish you all the best. The EU is far from perfect but what is right with it is to be saved and is to be promoted. If you can build on the successes and sweep away what does not work – like this building, perhaps! – I hope to congratulate you in December also."
Nigel FARAGE (IND/DEM) stated that fortunately, there are some voices in the EU who are honest and say that we have the substance of the Constitution and all we have done is to change the terminology. Others say that we have 90%, we have 99%, of what was there in the first place.
Mr Farage stated that if the British had a referendum on the Constitution, 70% of perhaps more would say 'no'. Mr Barroso, he stated, talked on Tuesday about the EU being an empire and, "when it comes to Africa, my goodness me it is! I urge you to stop the fisheries deals with West Africa. Stop your own fleet. Stop the Spanish fleet plundering western African resources, killing African fishermen. If you do that in your six-month Presidency then you will have done something positive for Africa. Please act!"
Timothy KIRKHOPE (EPP-ED).wanted to ensure that the EU-Africa summit later this year takes place without the presence of Robert Mugabe. Mr Kirkhope and his colleagues, including Geoffrey Van Orden, have been underlining this matter for some time because, he said, it would be intolerable for our Union to welcome such a tyrant to Europe at a time when the suffering of his people is clear and should be uppermost in our minds.
"As to the draft mandate for the IGC, it may be very precise but it is not necessarily right. We do believe very strongly that, whatever form this constitution is shown to be in, there ought to be a referendum, certainly in the United Kingdom. And indeed we believe that the promise made by our outgoing - now gone - Prime Minister, Mr Blair, to give the British people a referendum on this issue should be followed and taken on board by his successor, Gordon Brown.
We do have other serious concerns. There are serious concerns about our continuing commitment to free competition, about the legal position of the so-called British opt-out of the Charter of Fundamental Rights and about the collapse of the third pillar, but I look forward to a positive debate during the IGC on these matters.
Finally, I want to refer to the resolution on the IGC today which calls for the issue of Parliament's two seats to be included in the mandate. I believe this is the perfect opportunity to demonstrate that Europe is listening to the people. The continuing vast expense of shuffling between Brussels and Strasbourg undermines the standing of our Parliament and the matter must be resolved soon."
Council response
For the Council, Mr Sócrates reiterated that the main priority of his country's presidency was to resolve the "constitutional crisis" by adopting a new treaty swiftly. He stressed that ratification of the treaty by national parliaments was perfectly legitimate and should not be seen as less democratic than referendums. The prime minister underlined the importance of the recent first EU summit with Brazil, saying that a good political dialogue with this country would help efforts to complete the Doha round of trade negotiations.
Responding to concerns about human rights in Africa in connection with the EU-Africa summit in December, he said a structured political dialogue with this part of the world would help tackle issues such as hunger, governance and indeed human rights. Mr Sócrates voiced concern about that morning's confirmation of the death sentences on the Bulgarian nurses and Palestinian doctor in Libya but said he believed a solution was still possible.
On climate change, he stressed the value of the decisions taken at the EU's spring summit and was firmly convinced that biofuels were part of the solution. Lastly, the prime minister underlined the importance to his presidency of dealing with immigration and the need to look at all sides of the question: border security, a humane approach and coordination of policies.
20070706IPR08899 Meetings of Heads of State and Government in Lisbon 18 and 19 October
EN
1
LINK
http://www.eu2007.pt/UE/vEN/Reunioes_Eventos/ChefesEstado/IMHSG.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
