Darfur crisis: UN/African Union hybrid force needed fast, say MEPs
Development and cooperation
2007-07-03 - 12:08
To stem the mayhem in Darfur (Sudan), a hybrid force of United Nations and African Union peacekeeping troops is needed fast, MEPs on a fact-finding mission there said on Tuesday. "We cannot wait another year for security", said delegation chief Josep Borrell, and "humanitarian operations cannot go on for ever", added EP humanitarian aid rapporteur Thierry Cornillet.
The Darfur crisis calls for the "rapid and effective deployment of the hybrid force, with an adequate mandate, as recently agreed by the Sudanese government" said Mr Borrell (PES, ES), who chairs the EP Development Committee.
The EP delegation has been visiting the refugee camps of Kindring II (West Darfur) and Koloma (Chad) over the past two days.
Reinforcements needed for security
African Union Mission in Sudan (AMIS) forces already in Darfur are "incapable of providing security", local people told MEPs. Yet creating a United Nations/African Union hybrid force is likely to take time - AMIS reinforcements are not expected to arrive before well into 2008, the delegation was told.
Attacks on aid workers
Nineteen aid workers were killed in Darfur last year, and attacks on them are growing. Aid workers fear they will soon be taken along with their vehicles and held hostage for money or prisoner release.
Aid and reconciliation
"Aid operations are becoming increasingly difficult, and food previously transported by road must now go by air. Most of the refugees are outside areas where food can be supplied", said Parliament's standing rapporteur on humanitarian aid, Thierry Cornillet (ALDE, FR).
In El Geneina (west Darfur) the delegation met Abdoul Mohammed, Chairman of the Darfur-Darfur Dialogue and Consultation (DDDC), which is trying to reconcile the parties to the conflict, and MEPs visited the World Food Programme's regional centre, which distributes 10,000 tonnes of food a month.
The delegation now goes to north Darfur and MEPs will meet the government authorities in Khartoum on 4 July.
The other members of the EP delegation are José Ribeiro e Castro (EPP-ED, PT), Frithjof Schmidt (Greens/EFA, DE) and Jürgen Schröder (EPP-ED, DE).
2007-06-30 Committee on Development Chair of the delegation Josep Borrell Fontelles (PES, ES)
20070702IPR08709
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
