MEPs advocate more transparent ticket prices
Transport
2007-07-11 - 13:51
In order to avoid misleading advertising and information of passengers the European Parliament adopted a legislative report saying that all air fares published in any form and addressed to the public must include all taxes, fees and charges added to the ticket price and known at the time of publication of the airfare. Air passengers must be treated like other consumers and thus have a right on clear and full information of the price they finally have to pay, the EP argues.
The report by Arūnas Degutis (ALDE, LT) deals with the Commission proposal on the revision the 1992 "third liberalisation package" of the internal aviation market that aims to increase market efficiency, to enhance the safety of air services and to improve passenger protection. The regulation lays down rules for, inter alia, operating licences, leasing of aircraft, public service obligations, traffic distribution rule and price transparency.
The price you really have to pay
Air passengers must be treated like other consumers and thus have a right on clear and full information of the price they finally pay. Especially internet booking has to be considered, as they are often the only possibility of booking with low-cost carriers. Air carriers therefore will have to provide the general public with comprehensive information "in any form, including on the Internet", on their air fares.
Those air fares which are "addressed directly or indirectly to the travelling public" have to include all applicable taxes, non-avoidable charges, surcharges and fees known at the time of publication (i.e. taxes, or duties, fees and other costs for the benefit of the airlines or of the airport operators.
By adopting this amendment, Parliament wants to put an end to misleading advertising and information of passengers.
Security taxes and charges
Security charges are on the rise. The Transport Committee argues that the consumer has a right to know how high they are, and where they are used for. Where airport or on-board security costs are included in the price of an air ticket, those costs shall therefore be shown separately on the ticket or otherwise indicated to the passenger.
Security taxes and charges, whether levied by Member States or by air carriers or entities, shall be transparent and shall be used exclusively to meet airport or onboard aircraft security costs.
Social legislation
In the past, the operation of bases other than country of origin has created problems as to the determination of the applicable laws to crews on the employment. Therefore, Member States shall ensure the proper application of Community and national social legislation with respect to employees of a Community air carrier operating air services from an operational base outside the territory of the Member State where that Community air carrier has its principal place of business.
Background
On 23 July 1992 the final stage in the liberalisation of air transport in the Community was reached with the adoption of the three Regulations, known as the "third package". This followed up the "first package", adopted in December 1987, and the "second package" of June 1990.
More than ten years after the entry into force the third package has largely played its role, allowing the unprecedented expansion of air transport in Europe. Old monopolies have been swept away, intra-Community cabotage has been introduced, and competition in all markets has intensified to the benefit of consumers.
Jim Higgins (EPP-ED, Fine Gael, IE) said during the debate in Strasbourg on Tuesday 10 July: "The opening-up of air travel to millions of citizens has been brought about by the low-fares airlines. I agree with the Commissioner that the single aviation market has been a singular success. Airlines such as Ireland’s Ryanair have revolutionised the aviation sector and have put pressure on the older, more established and more expensive airlines to follow suit. Such competition is good for the consumer and the traveller.
I raised this issue by way of a parliamentary question here last January, and the Commission replied, ‘the Commission, while maintaining the general rule of price freedom, proposes that “air carriers operating within the Community [...] provide the general public with comprehensive information on their air fares and rates and the conditions attached”. Consumers will thus be informed of the actual price (price of ticket plus the various charges and taxes).’
The Degutis report, which we are debating here tonight, will give practical effect to this, and that is extremely welcome. The obligation on airlines to introduce full transparency is extremely welcome and very important, because the consumer will now see from the very outset exactly what he or she will have to pay. That alone will not reduce the numbers of people travelling – as a lot of people think it might – but in my opinion it will further enhance competition and benefit the travelling public."
20070706IPR08903 Air transport: licensing, right to operate, pricing (repeal. Reg. 2407/92, 2408/92, and 2409/92/EEC). Recast Text, as adopted by the EP on 11 July, will shortly be available here
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5372632
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
