The Week Ahead 2 - 8 July 2007
Institutions
2007-06-29 - 10:00
Political groups week - Brussels
Lula. Parliament's Conference of Presidents has a meeting with the President of Brazil, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, who is in Brussels for a number of events relating to EU-Brazil relations and biofuels. The Brazilian leader will also have a bilateral meeting with EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering, followed by a ‘press point’ (Thursday).
Casualties of immigration. The Civil Liberties Committee is holding a public hearing on "Tragedies of migrants at sea". Representatives of Mediterranean states and the European agency for the management of external borders will take part (Tuesday).
Darfur. A delegation of five MEPs flies to Sudan to meet the authorities of that country and to visit the refugee camps in the Darfur region. A press conference on the visit will be held on 10 July in Strasbourg (Monday-Thursday).
Wine. Commissioner Fischer Boel will describe to the Agriculture Committee her proposals for overhauling the EC's market arrangements for wine (Wednesday).
Postal services. The EP press service is holding a seminar on the postal services directive, a week before the first reading plenary vote. The Transport Committee has called for the directive, which deals with letters weighing under 50g, to take effect at a later date. (Monday and Tuesday).
Preparations for plenary. Most of the week will be devoted to preparations for the July plenary session. Apart from postal services, the debates and votes of most interest are on the presentation of the Portuguese presidency's work programme, the convening of the IGC, the internal market in energy and EU rules on airline operations. There will also be a debate and vote on developments in the Palestinian territories.
Pre-session press conference. Any changes to the plenary agenda decided by the Conference of Presidents will be announced at the usual press briefing on Friday 5 July at 11am with the press spokespersons of the political groups.
20070628IPR08620 Read the agenda
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20072700AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
