Parliament's July Plenary session
Institutions
2007-07-10 - 12:05
In this special focus you can follow the Strasbourg Plenary session day by day with a full round up of the latest debates and votes from the European Parliament. July's session opened with MEPs observing a minutes silence for victims of terrorism. The day also saw debates on the safe level of food additives and a proposed EU health programme.
-
20070705FCS08855
Monday's opener: Terror condemned, food additives and health policy debated
Aftermath of terror attacks in Glasgow The opening moments of the July plenary session saw Parliament's President Hans-Gert Pöttering recall recent terror attacks on UK and Spanish citizens. He echoed UK Prime Minister Gordon Brown's words by saying "we shall not yield, we shall not be intimidated". MEPs then held a moments silence for victims of terror. The day also saw debates on food safety - particularly on what can be added safely to products. MEPs also debated funding for a proposed EU health programme.
Referring both to the June 30 attacks in Glasgow, an attack in the Yemen as well as the bombing on Madrid (2004) and London (2005) Mr Pöttering called terrorism "a direct attack on freedom, human rights and democracy".
He said the European Parliament "declares its solidarity and support for the victims of terrorism and their families". As to the means to fight terror he said that "this fight has to be within the rule of law".
Food additives, enzymes and flavourings
What exactly it is safe to add to food was the subject of four reports considered by MEPs on Monday. The regulations considered deal with the authorisation of food additives, enzymes and flavourings and set conditions for their usage.
MEPs want more transparency in the authorisation procedure and sweeteners and colourings banned in baby food. Members also say that the additives must not have a harmful effect on the environment and both flavourings and enzymes should be used only if the desired effect cannot be achieved by using spices.
The regulations cover an existing 300 additives on the market and 2600 registered flavourings. MEPs will hold a vote on the issue today. See the link below for more details.
MEPs debate funding for EU health programme
MEPs debated the European Commission's proposed health programme over the next 6 years. The total for the programme already envisaged is €365.6. Parliament had originally asked for an extra €1,500 million for the scheme when it considered the issue at the first reading.
Although health policy is national an EU-wide programme could help with exposure to pollution and chemicals as well as health and safety at work.
In the debate MEPs criticised the financial aspect but welcomed the health programme as a whole.
Parliament's Rapporteur Antonios Trakatellis (EPP-ED) said that programme is based on prevention: "This is the only way that we can build strong fabric for the economy, growth and development" he said. He went on to stress that "health is not only a common goods and an indicator of prosperity but also investment into productivity".
Linda McAvan of the Socialist PSE Group welcomed the fact that the new health programme will provide NGOs and patients organisations with better access to funding.
Marios Matsakis of the Liberal ALDE Group criticised unequal access to health: "the right to live should be accompanied with the right to health, equal health. Not one for the rich and another for the poor" he told MEPs.
Irena Belohorská - a non-attached Member - noted that "it is striking to see cutting of the Health Programme when "every third citizen of Europe is getting sick through cancer".
The health programme is being considered through the Co-decision procedure where it has reached the 2nd reading. A vote follows on Tuesday.
Opening of session Health programme Video of Plenary session
Tuesday in Plenary: liberalisation of postal services and energy market, mercury
Tuesday saw debates on controversial plans to liberalise Europe's €88 billion a year postal market by 2011 or 2013. A compromise solution emerged allowing time for the measures to be adopted - with special provision for remote places in Europe. MEPs also backed a ban on mercury in non-electrical devices and also discussed liberalisation of Europe's energy markets.
Postal Services - MEPs back liberalisation by 2011 and 2013
MEPs supported the continuation and protection of "universal service" - which means at least one delivery and collection a day, five days a week for every EU citizen. It is also a uniform tariff between rural and urban areas.
There was support for national postal operators to no longer have a monopoly on mail weighing less than 50 grams - the so called "reserved area".
The European Commission - which proposed the directive - sees it as a way to make postal services cheaper and more efficient although fears over job losses have been voiced by postal unions.
The compromise agreed by MEPs contains a reciprocity clause which means that countries that have already opened their markets - such as the Finland and the UK - will be protected from monopolies operating in their markets until full liberalisation takes place.
Markus Ferber's (EPP-ED) report on Community postal services presented by on Tuesday at plenary was praised by most speakers as offering a compromise solution according to which the deadline for liberalising markets would be 31 December 2010, but some countries with difficult topography would have until 31 December 2012 to find ways to maintain universal service. The House will vote on the report on Wednesday, after which it will be for the Council to reconsider its position.
The economic impact of the liberalising the postal service could be enormous. They account for almost 1% of the Union's GDP and 5.2 million people are employed in the sector in Europe.
Mercury banned within two years
MEPs voted to support a ban on non-electrical measuring devices containing mercury - with two years exemption for barometers.
The reason is that mercury is a highly toxic metal which concentrates particularly in the aquatic food chain. Yesterday's vote added up to a global EU-strategy against mercury in electrical devices.
New devices coming on to the market are affected. Existing instruments can still be repaired or bought and sold second hand.
The ban will apply to new fever thermometers for both professional and private use, and also to manometers, barometers, sphygmomanometers, thermometers other than fever thermometers. It should take effect in late 2009.
A liberalised energy market "as soon as possible"
Parliament considered a report prepared by Alejo Vidal-Quadras (EPP-ED) and backed its call for a "fully liberalised European energy market as soon as possible".
The Report focuses on the gas and electricity markets. MEPs consider that public ownership in these sectors distorts EU energy markets and undermines competition
A liberalised internal market would promote "consumer choice in an open competitive environment" and will help ensure "affordable access to energy for every citizen"
The report seeks a "more European approach to regulation on cross-border issues" and that regulators should be independent, strong and have well-defined powers.
Some environmental considerations are that energy companies must have a "statutory obligation to give energy saving advice to customers" and "subsidies for non-renewable energy sources should be eliminated".
Modernization of the labour market
The report prepared by Mr Jacek Protasiewicz (PL, EPP-ED) welcomes discussions on the need to improve labour law to meet the challenges of the 21st century: globalization, rapid technological progress and demographic changes.
Combining flexibility for firms with adequate employment security and protection for the workers is the goal to be reached while the permanent full-time contract should be reinforced as the general form of employment.
The report calls also for reducing administrative burden for firms and better work and life balance, especially for women.
The rapporteur claimed that there was an agreement on “the need to shake up the labour market if we are going to create new jobs and to respond to the expectations”. He admitted that “we will have to be very careful” as there are concerns about threats to the European social model but said that “there is a need to try things out to see what impact they have”. A vote follows on Wednesday. Ferber interview More mercury EP calls for a "fully liberalised European energy market as soon as possible
Wednesday in Plenary: Portugal's Sócrates, MEPs back clear air fares, IGC
Portuguese PM José Sócrates at the European Parliament
Portugal's priorities for its EU Presidency was the first item on the agenda on Wednesday. Portuguese PM José Sócrates told the House that treaty reform and economic and social modernisation were among his priorities. MEPs also called for all taxes and charges to be displayed when airline tickets are advertised. Members also backed a report setting out Parliament's position on the forthcoming IGC. Foreign affairs dominated in the afternoon with Palestine, Pakistan, Kosovo being considered.
Sócrates sets out Portugal's stall
Portuguese Prime Minister José Sócrates used his address to MEPs to set out his priorities for the next six months when his country will hold the Presidency of the EU. These include treaty reform, modernising Europe's economy and society and strengthening the global role of the EU.
On treaty reform he said that an intergovernmental conference would start on 23 July when Portugal would present a draft treaty. In October Mr Sócrates said an informal European Council in Lisbon would be the place to try and find agreement. He welcomed the presence of 3 MEPs at the conference.
Mr Sócrates also stressed the need to rejuvenate the Lisbon agenda. In particular he stressed the importance of job creation, sustainable pensions and environmental and energy policy. Internationally he spoke of the "delicate questions" on the global agenda such as Iran, Kosovo and Darfur. The fight against terrorism, migration and relations with Africa and Latin America were also stressed.
MEPs give green light to Intergovernmental Conference
MEPs yesterday gave a green light to the intergovernmental conference to begin - their vote being a necessary precondition for the process.
The report they adopted welcomed the fact that EU leaders had decided to keep most of the content of the draft constitution after their agreement in June. In particular the EU's legal personality, the increased use of qualified majority voting and the inclusion in the treaty of the Charter of Fundamental Rights. However, it regretted that the flag and anthem had been dropped and that some EU members had secured exemptions from some aspects of the agreement.
Parliament will be represented by 3 MEPs at the conference. They will present the EP's views and report back to the House on progress made. If necessary, they will also put forward for proposals. Parliament's rapporteur, German PES member Jo Leinen told fellow MEPs that "we want an outcome by October" and warned Mr Sócrates "not to let errant states turn the whole process upside down".
MEPs vote for end to "hidden" air charges
"Rome for €20" is the type of tempting offer that airlines often like to lure travellers with. However, as anyone who flied regularly knows this will almost certainly not be the final cost. Taxes, fees and charges can add a considerable amount to a flight. Finding out these extra hidden costs can often be very difficult for air passengers.
With this in mind MEPs yesterday passed a legislation insisting on all airlines to publish all taxes, non-avoidable charges, surcharges and fees in a clear and easily understandable way. Members want air passengers treated like any other consumers and afforded the same rights to information.
With airline security growing ever more stringent and costly MEPs also want any security charges to be clear and transparent. The report was drafted by Lithuanian Liberal MEP Arūnas Degutis.
Palestine, Pakistan, Kosovo, Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
Ahead of Parliamentary resolutions on Pakistan and Palestine on Thursday representatives from the Council and Commission briefed MEPs on the situation in both places given recent upheaval and violence.
On Pakistan - MEPs are expected in their resolution to urge greater democracy and for President Musharraf to relinquish his post as army chief. The resolution is also likely to call for Pakistan to ensure its territory is not used as a base for attacks on NATO forces in neighbouring Afghanistan.
In Palestine, despite the release of BBC journalist Alan Johnston the situation remains bleak. In their resolution today MEPs are expected to condemn the military take over of Gaza by Hamas and call for internal dialogue among Palestinians. In a wider context MEPs are expected to urge the resumption of political dialogue within Lebanon and support negotiations with Syrian as a way out of the regional impasse.
The Council and Commission also made statements on the situation with regards Kosovo. In March this year Parliament supported the proposals of UN envoy and former Finnish President Martti Ahtisaari to give Kosovo some of the trappings of sovereignty without outright independence.
MEPs also debated a report on the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia drafted by Erik Meijer (GUE/NGL). The report calls for EU accession negotiations to start as soon as possible but insisted that the momentum of reforms must be continued. Crucially, it said that resolution of the dispute over the country's name can not form part of the conditions for EU membership.
A plenary date for your diary....
Members voted to fix the parliamentary calendar for 2008. It features 12 four day plenary sessions in Strasbourg and 6 two day sittings in Brussels. A proposal to allow for an additional 8 one day sittings also in Brussels was narrowly defeated. José Sócrates in Plenary Parliament advocates more transparent ticket prices MEPs give green light to IGC 2008 calendar
Thursday in plenary: Ukraine, Darfur, Maritime and cohesion policy
Darfur - "a devils brew" of calamities says Borrell MEPs debated the report of Polish MEP Michał Tomasz Kamiński on Ukraine, welcoming the opening of negotiations and an enhanced cooperation agreement. The House adopted a resolution on the situation in Sudan's Darfur region, following the visit of an EP delegation last month. Two own-initiative reports on the role and effectiveness of cohesion policy in reducing development disparities in the poorest regions of the EU and on a European future maritime policy were also on the agenda .
Based on a report of Polish MEP Michał Tomasz Kamiński (UEN) Parliament on Thursday welcomed the opening of negotiations with Ukraine on a new enhanced cooperation agreement with Ukraine. The Parliament believes the negotiations should aim at an association agreement and favours the establishment of a free trade area with the country.
It also sees a long-term perspective for Ukraine as a member of the EU but urges the country to democratically solve its current political crisis and to combat corruption.
Parliament also voted in favour of opening of accession talks with the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. It called upon the country to maintain the current reform momentum and to follow-up on recent legislation in the areas of police, the judiciary and public administration. MEPs welcomed the fact that the country has changed its flag, and has made constitutional amendments to confirm that it has no territorial claims against neighbouring countries.
Situation in Darfur
On 12 July MEP's adopted a resolution on the situation in Darfur, following the visit of a delegation of five members to the region from 30 June to 6 July. The EP delegation in Darfur visited camps for displaced people in Darfur as well as camps of Sudanese refugees in eastern Chad.
The EP demands that the EU monitor more strictly the arms embargo against Khartoum and enforce a no-fly zone over the region.
It also wants China to cease exporting arms to Sudan and to cease blocking decisions on targeted sanctions against Khartoum at the UN Security Council.
The EP condemns the "blatant violation" of the UN arms embargo by the Government of Sudan, and calls both Chad and Sudan to honour their commitments to stop their support to armed movements.
MEPs are deeply concerned with the human rights situation in the region, in particular human rights abuses and mass displacement of the civilian population. There has been a reported 400.000 deaths and 2,5 million refugees since the conflict began.
The chair of the delegation and of Parliament’s development committee Josep Borrell (PSE) described the situation as a "devil’s brew" - rebels splintered into different groups and bandits all over the place: "We cannot wait another year for security".
The resolution urges the Government of Sudan urgently to come up with a road map for the resettlement of the displaced persons and refugees, for the restitution of their property and compensation to the victims.
Maritime Policy
MEPs adopted a report by Willy Piecyk (PES) on an integrated European maritime policy, containing more than 80 demands touching on environmental, economic questions as well as tourism and fisheries, forming together a comprehensive maritime policy.
Piecyk pointed out the significance of the seas for Europe: as “90 percent of our external trade and 40% of our internal trade is shipped over the seas. About 2 thirds of European prefer the coast for holidays and this tourism generated 72 billion Euro in 2004 alone”. In his words, the “sea doesn’t need us, but we need the sea”. MEPs welcomed Commissioner Joe Borg’s commitment to incorporate their proposals in the future outcome.
Passenger Name Records agreement with the US
Parliament also adopted a resolution that criticizes the recently concluded agreement between the USA and the EU on the transfer of records of flight passengers. MEPs fear that data is not sufficiently protected and says that the agreement lacks democratic oversight as lawmakers on both sides of the Atlantic were not sufficiently involved in the deal.
Cohesion Policy
The EP also adopted a report on the role and effectiveness of cohesion policy in reducing development disparities in the poorest regions of the EU, stressing the need of investing in information technology infrastructure and education and promoting local entrepreneurship. A recent Eurostat report states that per capita GDP ranges from 303% of the EU average in inner London to 24% in North-East Romania.
The next plenary will take place in the first week of September (3-6).
Press releases from the July session Focus on Darfur 5 June 07 maritime policy Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia 12 June 07 Texts adopted during this plenary
EN
1
PHOTO
20070710PHT09020.jpg
EN
2
PHOTO
20070710PHT09018.jpg
EN
5
LINK
/eplive/public/freetext_page_direct/20061020FTX11892-2101/default_en.htm
EN
6
PHOTO
20070710PHT09082.jpg
EN
10
PHOTO
20070711PHT09143.jpg
EN
15
PHOTO
20070712PHT09178.jpg
EN
16
LINK
/news/expert/tous_les_infopress/default/default_en.htm
EN
20
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do;jsessionid=6DCD3049EEEEBED049E297DB06BABE2A.node2?language=EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706IPR08886 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070507IPR06343 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070705STO08854 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706IPR08897 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706IPR08896 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706IPR08899 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706IPR08903 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706IPR08900 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706IPR08901 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070601FCS07344 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070314STO04231 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070611STO07711 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
