EU strategy to protect critical infrastructure from terrorist attacks
Justice and home affairs
2007-07-10 - 13:56
A proposed EU-wide strategy to protect critical infrastructure against terrorist attacks (in fields such as energy, health, communication and transport), was backed by the European Parliament. Nevertheless, MEPs stress that responsibility for protecting critical infrastructure still rests primarily with Member States and private stakeholders.
A draft directive tabled by the Commission in 2006 would oblige Member States to identify and designate existing infrastructure as European Critical Infrastructure (ECI), according to sector-specific criteria established by national governments, the Commission and stakeholders. Once the list is ready, the directive would oblige owners and operators of the ECIs to establish an "operator security plan", with permanent and graduated security measures in the event of a terrorist attack.
Primarily a national responsibility
Parliament's consultation report, drafted by Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert (ALDE, NL), agrees on the need to identify what national facilities can be designated "European Critical Infrastructure" and to assess their protection needs, but stresses that the primary and ultimate responsibility for protecting critical infrastructures lies with the Member States and the owners or operators. A Community approach, say MEPs, can be justified only if at least three Member States, or at least two Member States other than that in which the critical infrastructure is located, would be affected.
Avoid duplicating work
The EU should make every possible effort to avoid duplicating the work of Member States and adding unnecessary costs and administrative burdens for owners and operators, say MEPs. Future common risk assessments should always take into account existing methodologies in each country. Even when a given facility is designated as ECI, its compliance with existing protection measures might be enough to satisfy the requirement to establish and update an "operator security plan".
Finally, the European Parliament agrees with the Commission that appropriate measures must be taken to protect sensitive and confidential information revealing the vulnerability of each piece of infrastructure. According to MEPs, the recent SWIFT case showed that critical data needs to be protected against illegal use by foreign authorities or private actors as well, therefore all sensitive data "shall be carried out within the EU and any mirroring data shall not be allowed in third countries for reasons of security".
An overall strategy to protect critical infrastructure was requested by the European Council in 2004, in the aftermath of the Madrid train bombings, with a view to preventing the potentially disastrous impact that damage to, or the loss of, infrastructure in any one Member State could have on the EU economy and public confidence as a whole.
The rapporteur was satisfied with the adoption of these compromise amendments and hoped the new law will be useful to reinforce EU's strategy to fight terrorism. "Experiences from the past do tell us that if a terrorist attack occurs, the EU Heads of State will be calling for new security proposals within 48 hours, thereby weakening their quality. Or even worse, they come up with measures that are disproportionate and lack transparency, like for example the measures restricting liquids aboard aircrafts", she said in her explanatory statement.
20070709IPR08970 Fight against terrorism: identification, designation and protection of European Critical Infrastructures ECI Text, as adopted by the EP on 10 July, will shortly be available here
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5425462
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
