Tougher sanctions on Khartoum asks EP resolution on Darfur
External relations
2007-07-12 - 12:17
MEPs adopted today in Strasbourg Plenary a resolution on the situation in Sudan's Darfur, following last week's visit of an ad-hoc delegation led by Josep Borrell (PES, ES). MEPs ask Member States of the EU to monitor more strictly the arms embargo against Khartoum and to enforce a no-fly zone over the region. They also call for an in-depth investigation on unpaid African-Union mission soldiers.
The resolution condemns the "blatant violation" of the UN arms embargo by the Government of Sudan as set out in the UN Security Council Resolutions of 30 July 2004 (S/Res/1556) and 29 March 2005..
MEPs consider that "a military no-fly zone over Darfur should be immediately established". Targeted economic sanctions including travel bans and asset freezes should be applied to those violating the ceasefire or attacking civilians, including the Government of Sudan.
The resolution urges Sudan to "arrest Humanitarian Affairs Minister Ahmad Muhammad Harun and Janjaweed leader Ali Kushayb" suspected of war crimes and crimes against humanity and to surrender them to the International Criminal Court.
Unpaid soldiers from African Union Mission in Sudan
The House calls for an in-depth investigation into the fact that "some AMIS soldiers have not received any pay for many months". The Commission and EU states have given over 400 million euros to the African Union Mission in Sudan (AMIS) since it has been deployed to Sudan in 2004.
China
MEPs call on China to cease exporting arms to Sudan and to cease blocking decisions on targeted sanctions against Khartoum at the UN Security Council. The Development Committee welcomes "the signs that China is now more willing to promote peace in Darfur."
Member of the EP delegation which went to Darfur between 30 June and 5 July 2007 were Thierry Cornillet (ALDE, FR), José Ribeiro e Castro (EPP-ED, PT), Frithjof Schmidt (Greens/EFA, DE) and Jürgen Schröder (EPP-ED, DE).
20070710IPR09040 Text, as adopted by the EP on 12 July, will shortly be available here
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
