Postal services: open to competition by 2011, but subject to safeguards
Free movement of services
2007-07-11 - 16:19
MEPs deliver open competition in postal services by the end of 2010
A large majority of MEPs want remaining postal services monopolies in EU Member States to expire by 31 December 2010, two years later than the 1 January 2009 proposed by the European Commission. With 512 votes in favour, 156 against and 18 abstentions, MEPs backed the compromise, proposed by postal services rapporteur Markus Ferber (EPP-ED, DE). This means that postal services should be opened up to competition by 2011, but subject to strict conditions.
During the debate on Tuesday 10 July Markus Ferber said: "We've had monopolies for more than 200 years. Monopolies are not capable of solving the problems the postal services are facing. Those problems can only be solved if there is a fair competition, that takes into consideration working and workers' conditions".
Full market opening
Full market opening implies that national operators will no longer have a monopoly on mail below the maximum weight of 50 grams, known as the reserved area. It was also decided that for new Member States and those with a particularly difficult topography or with numerous islands as well as Member States with a small population and a limited geographical size, the deadline for the opening up of the market will be two years later, i.e. 31 December 2012, to allow extra time to find ways to maintain a universal service.
Although there was no definition of "Member States with a small population", MEPs had referred to Luxembourg (among others) during the debate. These states should have specific characteristics that are particular to postal services.
Universal service
Parliament also said that the universal service or territorial coverage should be retained. This means that also in a liberalised postal sector letters should continue to be delivered and collected at an affordable cost everywhere in the EU. A uniform tariff between rural and urban areas will be applied. MEPs also decided that Member States should ensure that sufficient access and contact points are established that take account of the needs of users in rural and sparsely populated areas. The Member States should determine the minimum number of access and contact points in order to guarantee the universal service.
One key issue in the compromise by EPP-ED, PES and ALDE groups is the funding for the universal service. MEPs say that if market players prove to be unable to provide such services profitably, Member States may set up compensation funds, financed by service providers and/or user fees, to cover universal service costs. Providers of these services could also be compensated by the state. Member States may themselves decide what financing mechanisms are used. Any Member State which concludes that meeting a universal service obligation would entail a net cost will have to draw up national plans for meeting this cost and notify them to the Commission.
Working conditions not affected
It was also stressed that the directive must not affect terms and conditions of employment. Social dumping should by all means be avoided. Maximum work periods and minimum paid annual holidays, minimum rates of pays as well as relations between social partners including the right to negotiate and conclude collective agreements or the right to strike should not be under the scope of the directive.
To prevent any distortion of competition until markets are opened up to competition, Parliament says that postal service providers from countries with a reserved area must not meanwhile be granted an authorisations to operate in countries such as Sweden, Finland and the UK, where postal markets have been fully opened. This means that liberalising Member States may refuse authorisation to operators which are granted a reserved area in another Member State (reciprocity clause).
What's next?
After the vote, it is unlikely that a first reading agreement under the co-decision procedure will be reached. So far, no political agreement has been reached in Council. If there is no agreement, then the existing directive including its universal services measures would lapse at the end of 2008 under the so-called sunset clause, leaving no postal services legislation at all. This would have serious consequences for the sector, a scenario that all parties concerned are doubtless keen to avoid.
British speakers during the debate on Tuesday 10 July in Strasbourg
Speaking for the Employment and Social Affairs Committee, Stephen Hughes , PES, UK, Labour North East said "W e would have preferred to make the full accomplishment of the postal internal market subject to a new prospective study, showing that universal service could be maintained in each Member State, and looking at how to maintain or improve the employment situation in the postal sector. However, sometimes politics is about the art of the possible, and I know my good friend Brian Simpson negotiated the best possible deal he could with the rapporteur and the other shadows in the Committee on Transport and Tourism.
We are pleased at the clear emphasis placed on maintaining the provision of universal service and on the number of safeguards built into the report in the form in which it will come before this House. We are also happy about the report’s focus on the need to ensure good social and employment standards as liberalisation begins to unfold. This is an important point given that even Deutsche Post has expressed some disquiet over declining employment standards amongst some new entrants to the German postal market. We accept that this was the best achievable deal at this late stage in the liberalisation process."
Brian Simpson (PES, UK, Labour, North West) said: "Postal services are a highly personal and highly political issue. That is why they are different to other sectors, like telecoms and energy, because post, as I have often said in this House, is about people; it is about frontline public service. That is why it is important and generates a lot of interest. I know in the work we have done in committee we have tried to take on board the views of other committees and political groups. And, after a lot of hard work, and I have to say a great deal of good will, we reached an agreement, which I think is a good one.
So let us look at the key issue. How do we guarantee a universal service, and a universal service that treats all citizens equally, irrespective of where they live? That is why we support the guarantee of access points in rural and peripheral areas. How do we finance that universal service? How do we have the national plans in place to enable that to happen? How do we protect the workers and their working conditions, and how do we ensure that the new Member States are not forced into competition that they cannot sustain? That is where the timescale is important. They are the issues we have addressed in this report and in the compromise that we reached and I hope Parliament will support that compromise tomorrow."
20070706IPR08902 Postal services: creating a single market, further opening of the market to competition (amend. Dir. 97/67/EC) Text, as adopted by the EP on 11 July, will shortly be available here Background note on postal services - 5.7.07
EN
1
PHOTO
20070710PHT09082.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5401032
EN
3
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070703BKG08766 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
