2008 Budget: Parliament deplores cuts in competitiveness and cohesion lines
Budget
2007-07-13 - 15:44
The July budgetary conciliation prepared the ground for further negotiations but left Parliament and Council with a number of challenges for the 2008 Budget. Cuts applied by Council in the competitiveness for growth and jobs and a reduction of payments for cohesion are not supported by Parliament.
Parliament's strategy is underpinned by the idea of a "budget for results" promoted by General Rapporteur Kyösti Virrankoski (ALDE, Finland). "We need to establish clearly what we can get from this budget: the allocation of financial resources must follow political priorities, and not the contrary", the rapporteur said.
Challenges in the "Lisbon lines"
The biggest stumbling blocks are to be found in Heading 1a ("Competitiveness for growth and employment"). The European Parliament delegation deplored the cuts applied by Council in the so-called "Lisbon agenda lines" which deal with research and innovation.
Despite the intention of Council to "relaunch" the Lisbon strategy, these cuts are likely to harm Heading 1a programs. "This insufficient funding for competitiveness programs was flagged up by Parliament in the context of the Financial Perspective talks", Budgets Committee Chairman Reimer Böge said. "We can hardly accept any further cuts at this stage, so soon after the financial framework for 2007-2013 has been agreed".
External issues
On Heading 4 ("the EU as a global player"), a number of issues are expected to take centre stage in a later phase of the 2008 Budget preparation. Financial needs for Kosovo, CFSP and Palestine will have to be found in Heading 4 in full respect of Parliament's priorities. Not unlike previous budgetary procedures, there is hardly any margin for manœuvre in Heading 4.
The European Commission has confirmed that Heading 4 will, in any case, be short of at least €250m next year and announced an amending letter to its proposed Pre-Draft Budget.
Agencies
Finally, the institutions agreed declarations on a number of issues, including on agencies. Parliament and the Commission will work on a revised code of conduct for the creation of new executive agencies, cost-benefit analysis and clear lines of responsibility and accountability will be prioritised. Evaluations will be carried out for existing decentralised agencies over the 2007-2013 period.
Transparency is key for Parliament, which wants to have a clear view of agencies' administrative costs. Both Council and Parliament agreed that such an assessment was needed.
Parliament's first reading of the 2008 Budget in committee is expected to take place on the first week of October, with the view to a plenary vote on 25 October.
2007-07-17 Committee on Budgets In the Chair: Reimer BÖGE EPP-ED DE
20070713IPR09196
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
