President of Portugal stresses solidarity as key European value
Institutions
2007-09-04 - 14:27
The President of Portugal, Aníbal Cavaco Silva, gave an address to the House in which he focused above all on the theme of solidarity "as a fundamental pillar of European integration". Introducing Mr Cavaco Silva, Parliament's President Hans-Gert Pöttering said that previous Portuguese presidencies had been particularly "ambitious" in their scope and also that Portugal's history gave it a special position:
When Lisbon had sent ships to all corners of the world starting in the 14th century, this had marked "the dawn of globalisation". Mr Pöttering also highlighted Portugal's "culture of tolerance and global thinking".
Reform Treaty
The Portuguese President told the House that one of the priorities of his country's EU presidency over the coming months would be to finalise the Reform Treaty based on the compromise reached at the European Council in June". He hoped this would "overcome a period of erosion of the European integration process".
Solidarity highlighted
Once the treaty was concluded, said Mr Cavaco Silva, the EU must concentrate on the challenges that worry European citizens: economic growth, employment, security, the environment, energy and globalisation.
He then turned to the central theme of his speech - solidarity - quoting from the Schumann Declaration of 1950: “Europe … will be built through concrete achievements which first create a de facto solidarity” and adding "To be a real Union we must preserve the feeling of community that was, and not by chance, the original designation of European integration".
Seeing poverty and social exclusion as crucial problems, he told the House "The principle of solidarity includes an ethical and moral idea of progress, for without it the founding values of the European idea will fade".
As President of Portugal, he had highlighted social inclusion as a top priority for his country. But, he added, "it is also true that Europe as a whole is also some way short of the social cohesion objectives that it aims to achieve and that it cannot forsake".
He pointed out "In the five-year period between 2001 and 2005, the risk-of-poverty rate in the countries of the Union stood at 16%". Moreover, "a more detailed look at these indicators shows that the old, the unemployed, particularly the long term unemployed, isolated persons and lone-parent families are the social groups facing the greatest risk of poverty and material deprivation".
What are the solutions? "I ask myself if our traditional social protection policies may not be reaching the limits of their efficacy", said Mr Cavaco Silva. Nowadays "we must acknowledge the need for the social model to adapt to the new challenges and the new contexts of the global world and of the information and knowledge society". Ultimately, "the best protection against poverty and social exclusion we can give citizens is to facilitate their participation in the job market". Therefore "We need more and better economic growth" together with education and training "to make the habit of lifelong learning widespread".
Africa, energy, environment
Moving on to external affairs, the President drew the House's attention to Africa, saying it was "a continent that we should advisedly consider and treat as a priority partner. Europe’s inertia in relation to Africa may carry a heavy strategic price for the Union". He attached great importance to the forthcoming EU-Africa Summit set to take place during the Portuguese Presidency.
He also stressed the importance of energy and the environment, saying these areas reflected "common vital interests and must be seen as the new driving force of European integration". He complimented his compatriot, Commission President José Manuel Barroso, on his "strategic vision and determination" on this front.
Lastly, Mr Cavaco Silva spoke of the role of the EU on the international stage, saying that "ensuring the conditions for Europe to be a central, influential actor in the global, multilateral and multipolar world that is emerging is crucial for the very sustainability of the European integration process".
Portugal's history as a leader of globalisation makes it "well aware that its capacity to act as a credible, influential actor on the world scene is decisive for the future of Europe", said the Portuguese President, who then concluded his speech by praising the European Parliament as "an institution that has always been at the forefront in defending the values and principles that forged the identity of Europe and wove the 'de facto solidarity' bequeathed by the founders".
20070823IPR09759 President of Portugal
EN
1
LINK
http://www.presidencia.pt/index.php?idl=2
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
