"Return to democratic government," says European Parliament to Pakistan
External relations
2007-07-12 - 13:23
The European Parliament expressed its solidarity with the people of Pakistan following the recent siege of the Red Mosque in Islamabad. In a resolution adopted today, MEPs also expressed their concern at the erosion of democratic values in Pakistan, and urged the government to step up its activities for ensuring that its northern regions are not used by terrorists fighting in Afghanistan.
The EP expressed its "solidarity with the people of Pakistan, who are victims of the violence perpetrated by the armed extremists" and its great concern about the still unknown number of casualties at the Red Mosque . The House also "recognises the challenges the siege posed to the Government of Pakistan, regrets the loss of life and supports the efforts to bring those responsible to justice."
Return to democratic government
The Parliament expressed its concern about several areas of democracy in Pakistan, as well. It urged the government of Pakistan to "return to democratic government by holding free, fair and democratic elections" notably by encouraging President Musharraf to relinquish his post of army chief, as previously agreed with the EU. Members also "deplored the suspension of Chief Justice Chaudhry of the Supreme Court on alleged charges of misconduct which was widely regarded as an effort by the government to maintain control over the Judiciary in an election year."
They also worried about the upcoming Parliamentary elections. The EP expressed its worry about the neutrality of the caretaker government that will be in place three months before the elections, and about the lack of legitimacy of a future President, were he or she to be elected by the outgoing Assembly, instead of the new one. The House also urged the removal of academic qualifications as a precondition for standing as a candidate, as these mandatory qualifications would preclude 70% of Pakistani women from standing for election.
Stronger commitment to human rights, tougher stance on terrorism
MEPs condemned all attempts by the Government to control media freedom and noted with concern the "continuing reports of repression against religious minorities." They were similarly concerned by the "numerous and well-documented cases of 'disappearances" of journalists, students, political activists as well as terrorist suspects.
With respect to terrorism, the EP worried that the "domestic political alliances that exist between the Government, the military and religious fundamentalists may hamper the ability of the Government to address the issue of extremism and fundamentalism." Members therefore urged the Pakistani government to "take immediate and effective steps to prevent any political or armed force from using its territory as a sanctuary and as a base for operations in Afghanistan."
20070710IPR09046 Motions for resolutions - Situation ikn Pakistan Text, as adopted by the EP on 12 July, will shortly be available here
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/motion.do?language=EN
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
