Towards a future maritime policy
Transport
2007-07-12 - 13:23
Parliament adopted an own-initiative report by Willy Piecyk (PES, DE) on a European future maritime policy. After tough negotiations between the responsible Transport Committee and the committees on the Environment, Industry and Research, Fisheries and Regional Affairs, Members were able to vote a report with a rather holistic approach. The environmental dimension, economic importance, tourism, fisheries policy as well as social aspects were consequently key topics in the report.
Members firstly asked for a drastic reduction of CO2, SO2 and nitrogen oxide emissions from ships by assessing the feasibility of emissions trading and by promoting renewable energies for shipping. They also called for better European shipping with better European ships by stressing that goods transported by ships was one of the least environmentally damaging ways of transport; A European quality label for ships should be introduced.
They also asked for a proposal as to ensure that bunker oil for engine oil for engine fuel in new ships had to be stored in safer, double hull tanks and for a European coast guard to be set up in order to increase cooperation and coordination for the different problems in the maritime sector. Special attention should be paid to sustainable coastal tourism and a Commissioner for maritime policy should be introduced.
During the debate, MEPs saw many of their wishes already incorporated in the proposals Commissioner Joe Borg announced. He agreed that speedy progress should be made on legislative proposals like the third maritime package which are now before the Council. On 10 October, the Commission will present an ambitious maritime policy package including a European Maritime Policy and Action Plan as is suggested in the Piecyk report.
The policy will focus on Europe's maritime reality and on the importance of an integrated approach to maritime affairs. In line with the EP report, the Commission will focus and promoting and developing the sustainable use of the oceans and the seas, delivering the highest quality of life in coastal areas, providing transparency and raising the visibility of maritime Europe, strengthening Europe's maritime international leadership role and reaching for the EU's full knowledge and innovation potential in maritime affairs.
20070710IPR09041 Towards a future Maritime Policy for the Union: A European Vision for the Oceans and Seas Text, as adopted by the EP on 11 July, will shortly be available here
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5420622
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
