Heart disease: Europe's number one killer
Public health
2007-07-12 - 13:23
The European Parliament called on the EU Member States and the European Commission to tackle today's biggest killer in Europe: cardiovascular disease. Prevention strategies, public awareness campaigns, and the promotion of healthy lifestyles are urgently needed, believe MEPs.
Other major diseases have in the past been singled out for special attention by the European Parliament, including diabetes and breast cancer. Now MEPs believe the time has come for action on heart disease and related conditions.
Cardiovascular disease accounts for 1.9 million deaths each year, i.e. 42 percent of all fatalities in the EU, generating costs of €169 billion, of which €105 billion are for treating the condition in the EU and €64 billion are attributable to lost productivity and the cost of informal care. No better illustration is needed of the economic value of preventive healthcare.
Healthy lifestyles the key
Parliament asks the Commission to bring forward a policy recommendation to promote regular exchanges of experience and data between all those involved in combating these diseases and to encourage tobacco and alcohol controls, better dietary habits and more physical activity, with a view to preventing obesity and high blood pressure.
Member States are urged to review national public health strategies so as to include health promotion as well as early high-risk management strategies on cardiovascular health, and to develop health impact assessments to measure the burden of these ailments on national healthcare systems.
Since this disease is a pan-European problem, Parliament stresses the need for "equity of access to prevention, treatment, diagnosis and control of disease for all Europeans". It also highlights the gender dimension.
It also calls on the EU "to encourage the equipment of large public spaces, such as railway and metro stations, airports and stadia, with pre-hospital system care such as early defibrillation for victims of cardiac arrest".
EU funding already available
Lastly, says the resolution, the Commission should point out to Member States "the funding opportunities available" for high blood pressure screening and prevention methods and "for further research into cardiovascular disease such as through the 7th Research Framework Programme, Structural Funds and the European Development Fund".
20070710IPR09090 Text, as adopted by the EP on 12 July, will shortly be available here
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
