Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia EU prospects unrelated to its dispute with Greece
External relations
2007-07-12 - 13:23
Welcoming recent reforms in the country, the European Parliament urged the start of actual accession negotiations as soon as possible, while insisting that the momentum of reforms must be maintained. The own-initiative report by Erik Meijer (UEL/NGL, NL) on the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (fYRoM) was adopted by a large majority (558-47-8), and made it clear that the contested issue of the country's name can not form part of the conditions for EU membership.
The report welcomed the progress made by the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia since its application for EU membership, and pointed out that "the reform momentum must be maintained, and that the adopted legislation must now be properly and promptly implemented." MEPs were especially concerned about reforms in the fields of police, judiciary and public administration, as well as the fight against corruption. The House also commended the government for its cooperation in the field of CFSP and ESDP, and for its "constructive position on the future status of Kosovo." Nevertheless, it urged the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia to reach an agreement with the province on unresolved frontier demarcation issues.
Members noted with satisfaction the Ohrid Framework Agreement, which established the application of the double majority principle (the so-called Badinter principle) protecting non-majority communities in parliamentary decision-making. They also regretted the practice of boycotting the Parliament, and pointed out that such practices "are incompatible with functioning parliamentary institutions." The EP therefore welcomed the successful consultations between government and opposition on the use of Albanian in public institutions, and the agreement on the list of laws to be subject to the Badinter principle.
A candidate by any other name
The most enduring controversy surrounding the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia still seems to be the country's official name. The EP welcomed the fact that the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia has changed its flag, and has made constitutional amendments to confirm that it has no territorial claims against neighbouring countries. MEPs urged the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Greek governments to conclude talks on this issue as soon as possible, while reiterating that "the name issue is not an obstacle to the opening of negotiations for EU accession." While welcoming the initialling of visa facilitation and readmission agreements with the EU, the House also took note of the difficulties faced by the citizens of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia "due to the non-recognition by one Member State of the EU of its passports."
20070709IPR08945 2006 Progress report on the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia Text, as adopted by the EP on 12 July, will shortly be available here
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5420042
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
