Piano and Politics II: Erna Hennicot-Schoepges - Luxembourg MEP
Institutions
2007-07-25 - 08:00
Erna Hennicot-Schoepges: MEP, pianist and cultural advocate
Erna Hennicot-Schoepges has been a leading politician in Luxembourg since the 1970's - mainly through her involvement in cultural policy. She has also held the post of Cultural Minister of Luxembourg. She is also - like fellow MEP Vytautas Landsbergis - a highly skilled pianist. We spoke to her about her experiences in the cultural field - both on a national level and in the European Parliament where she sits as an MEP for the European People's Party and European Democrats.
Are there any skills and talents that can be applied both to piano playing and politics?
Music and politics are complementary. A piece of music obliges one to start from scratch every time. This calls for a significant amount of discipline and an attitude of humility because irrespective of the music level reached, every piece is a fresh challenge each time. Playing music requires working consistently and insistently.
What is lacking in politics is certainly harmony and colours, the art of looking at details and of observation and feeling. The danger of politics lies precisely in the potential loss of one's character and the acquirement of wooden language. Citizens are horrified by these empty words which consist of speaking but saying nothing.
Should politicians be involved in the arts?
One should not confuse culture with art. One forms part of the other but culture is profound. It differentiates us from other species and gives us especially in Europe a better knowledge of others and a predisposition to dialogue.
In art politics should not interfere in the content but politics must ensure the conditions to carry it out. Negative examples of political interference in art like in Nazism and Communism are still fresh in our minds. Back then art was encouraged and financed to ensure national glory, but at the cost of interference in its contents.
In the EU we are now at a crossroads. Those countries of the EU which did not experience communism knew insufficient financing and poor, unstructured social conditions for artists. In other countries which knew generous financing, artists have seen a regression in their material conditions. Freedom requires a terrible sacrifice. For liberty one has less money.
Thus the Union today must arrive at a balance. The other model is that of the USA where culture is completely privatised and sponsors influence the contents.
Aside from music, culture is of great importance to you. What do you hope to achieve in this field in the Parliament?
In Luxembourg I was a Culture Minister - in Parliament I can speak about and say things that others cannot say because they do not know the issue in depth. My goal is to ensure that culture is admitted as a policy field in its own right. It is also a wide subject like the environment. One can speak about culture in law, industry and education. Culture is everywhere.
In your experience, how compatible are artistic and political lifestyles?
The political world is very creative and is like art in that respect. I chose politics firstly to show that a musician can bring lots of ideas to politics. Secondly, as a woman in Luxembourg a lot remained to be done back then as is still required today in the field of male-female equality and the combination work-family today.
Finally, what is your favourite piece of music?
A delicate question indeed...but one of my many favourites includes the Goldberg Variations of Bach.
20070705STO08861 Erna Hennicot-Schoepges
EN
1
PHOTO
20070716PHT09249.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/members/public/yourMep/view.do?name=hennicot&partNumber=1&language=EN&id=29019
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
