MEPs look for lessons from turbulence on world's money markets
Economic and monetary affairs
2007-08-30 - 15:25
World markets under the spotlight
What lessons can we learn from this summer's turbulence on world financial markets? As uncertainty continues, the European Parliament Wednesday will debate Europe's response to, and the longer-term lessons of, the crisis. Meanwhile, the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee will hold a special session to question the head of the European Central Bank about its role in the summer's events.
What went wrong? Who or what is to blame? Did regulatory authorities act correctly? How can turbulence in world financial system be avoided in future? We look at the background to the crisis and speak to some MEPs who follow the issues. For many, it is the role of credit rating agencies that has become the focus of attention.
Problems born far away
It all started on the US housing market. Prices rose steeply in the early years of the decade on the back of low mortgage rates and a booming property market meant lenders offered home loans to borrowers with poor or no credit histories at higher than normal repayment rates, creating “sub-prime mortgages”.
The recent sharp increase in defaults on repayments of sub-prime loans, due to higher interest rates and a cooling housing market prompted a knock-on effect in financial markets across the world because the debt involved had been repackaged and sold on to international investors. "The problem is not about bad lending in the housing market but about the effect on our bank system, about the use of banking loans in other parts of the world," said British Socialist Peter Skinner.
This in turn meant less money was available in the markets as banks and investors became more cautious about lending. To offset this, the ECB injected liquidity into Euro Zone money markets. "The central banks have properly acted in intervening to stop a possible monetary liquidity crisis, but this has been a short-term emergency solution...we need to promote and impose more transparency ," said Italy's Renato Brunetta, of the European People's Party and European Democrats
Who's to blame?
Credit-rating agencies assess lending risks, so were they too slow in highlighting those companies with exposure to high-risk mortgage lending by downgrading their debt? "They should have given more timely warnings about possible risks to the market," said French Socialist and chair of the Monetary Affairs Committee Pervenche Berès. "The surveillance mechanism in place should be monitored and reviewed since rate agencies are themselves paid by the enterprises they have to rank."
Mr Skinner wants more information and transparency about the financial markets, particularly better scrutiny of credit rating agencies' assessments. A more structured and continuous dialogue with US authorities could help in avoiding similar problems in the future, he said.
José Manuel Garcia Margallo of the Spanish People's Party sees the recent financial crisis as a good occasion to think about supervision and control at EU level. "We have to look more closely at the effectiveness of those mechanisms...would they have been enough if a similar crisis had originated in the EU?" The control mechanism is based on coordination by national central banks. Would it be more efficient and effective "if we had a mechanism at European level," he said.
What's next in the EP?
MEPs will debate the situation on world financial markets with the Commission and Council during the Plenary Session Wednesday.
The ECB's role will be examined in detail by Parliament's Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee the following week. Ms Peres has invited ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet to attend an extraordinary hearing, in addition to his regular quarterly attendance at the committee.
20070823STO09819 EP report on role and methods of rating agencies Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee ECB website
EN
1
PHOTO
20070828PHT09873.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/activities/expert/committees/presentation.do?committee=2351&language=EN
EN
4
LINK
http://www.ecb.eu/home/html/index.en.html
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A5-2004-0040 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
