Highlights: MEPs to discuss terrorism, turbulent markets 3-6 September
Institutions
2007-08-31 - 15:39
In the first of two September plenary sessions, MEPs will gives their views about the fires in Greece over the summer and the recent instability in the money markets. They will also debate counter-terrorism, combating alcohol -related problems and the inland transport of dangerous goods. Portuguese President Aníbal Cavaco Silva will address MEPs in Strasbourg Tuesday.
On Monday MEPs will speak about the fires in Greece over the summer and the Commission will make a statement about the lessons to be learnt for future prevention and alert measures. P lenary will also debate ways to simplify regulation in the EU.
Tuesday looks set to be busy with an address by Portugal's president Aníbal Cavaco Silva at noon and the presentation of the 2008 budget by the Council, as well as debates of reports on:
t he review of the single market that says "There is a need to complete the opening of network industries, such as transport, telecommunications, postal services and energy transport"
the inland transport of dangerous goods . The Commission is proposing harmonising rules that are as user-friendly as possible and would cover transport by road, rail and inland waterways.
an EU strategy to aid Member States in their efforts to reduce alcohol-related harm including the issues of labelling and health warnings, binge-drinking, "alcopops" and reducing accidents caused by drinking and driving.
three reports on the milk sector , which say school milk aid needs to be raised and necessary adjustments to Europe's dairy market should not jeopardise the existing private storage scheme.
On Wednesday the House will debate the fight against terrorism and MEPs will vote on a resolution on restrictions imposed by the EU on liquids that passengers can take on board aeroplanes . The Transport Committee is asking the Commission to review "urgently and on an ongoing basis" the EU-regulation regarding the introduction of liquids onto aircraft. The afternoon sees a debate about the recent instability in the world's financial markets with the Council and Commission, a day before the European Central Bank is set to decide interest rates. Later MEPs will discuss an own-initiative report by the Foreign Affairs Committee on human rights dialogue that calls for more coherence in the EU's human rights dialogues with third countries.
On Thursday Parliament will debate and vote on a report recommending that a review of eight consumer protection directives focusing on updating creating coherence between them. As is usual, the session will end with three debates and on human rights topcis, Burma, Bangladesh and the financing of the Special Court for Sierra Leone.
20070830STO09900 Press Service briefing Watch the plenary live from 1700 Monday
EN
1
PHOTO
20070831PHT09912.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/eplive/vod/livestream/default_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070716BRI09221 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
