José Sócrates: "Strong Europe for a better world"
Institutions
2007-07-12 - 13:23
Portuguese Prime Minister Jose Socrates during a press conference at the EP
Portugal's Prime Minister José Sócrates was in the Parliament on Wednesday to outline to MEPs the priorities for his country's Presidency of the EU. He told MEPs that top of his agenda is nailing down a new reform treaty giving life to the deal brokered by German Chancellor Angela Merkel in Brussels last month. The objective: "a stronger Europe for a better world".
Mr Sócrates has experienced the demands of an EU Presidency before, as Minister for the Environment in the last Portuguese Presidency of 2000. Since then he acted as one of the organisers of the 2004 UEFA European Football Championship.
Now in 2007, this Porto-born civil engineer takes centre stage. He was left in little doubt as to the work to be done and the expectations placed on him by MEPs. In his speech to Parliament, he spelt out his vision for the coming months.
Treaty reform
Mr Sócrates told MEPs that he expects to have the first treaty draft by 23 July - and he is hoping the treaty will be adopted at the October Summit.
Asked by a journalist about the name the treaty would have ("Would it be called the treaty of Lisbon?"), he replied "I am more interested in getting the treaty first".
On the issue of ratification he said that "parliamentary ratification is legitimate in a representative democracy, parliaments have the legitimacy to approve the treaties".
Mr Sócrates also underlined that it is essential that the House is better represented with 3 members participating in the IGC and thanked the major political groups for their support.
He also stressed the need for modernisation of the economy calling for a "new cycle" of the Lisbon strategy for competitiveness. Using football terminology he said that "we have to score this goal as quickly as possible " and that "it is important we give a clear signal to citizens and the world that we are able to end this crisis" .
Europe and the wider world
He is also committed to strengthening Europe throughout the world. Speaking to journalists he said that the world is expecting Europe to have strong presence.
On Africa he said that "the EU cannot pay the price of not having structured dialogue with Africa" - having a Summit with Africa will help to deal with hunger, governance and human rights issues. He also stressed climate change, the creation of a European Institute of Technology and more use of biofuels as effective ways of reducing CO2 emissions.
During his time in Strasbourg he also spoke about immigration policy and the need for it to be based on the fight against illegal immigration, a humane inclusive policy and proper coordination with the countries of origin. He said that "we must achieve an integrated approach. There is no need to have 27 national systems".
The Parliament's President, Pöttering, summed it up by saying: "this was a good day for European unification", "we have trust in you" adding "if you succeed, the EU will succeed".
20070705STO08864 Portuguese PM Sócrates tells MEPs new EU reform treaty in October Treaty reform: Parliament gives green light to Intergovernmental Conference Portuguese Presidency website Resolution on the convening of the IGC: EP's opinion
EN
1
PHOTO
20070712PHT09161.jpg
EN
4
LINK
http://www.eu2007.pt
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706IPR08899 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706IPR08900 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A6-2007-0279 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
