Parliament endorses report on reducing regional development disparities
Regional policy
2007-07-12 - 13:23
Investing in information technology infrastructure and education enabling everyone to use it, promoting local entrepreneurship, and building the administrative know-how to use EU regional funds productively, are key ways to reduce development disparities among EU regions, says an own-initiative report on the role and effectiveness of cohesion policy in reducing development disparities in the poorest regions of the EU, approved by a show of hands in plenary session on 12 July.
The report, drafted by drafted by Lidia Joanna Geringer de Oedenberg (PES, PL), calls for "resolute action" to reduce the most acute development shortcomings in the poorest EU regions, and says Member States that have joined the EU since 2004 need special support to overcome their "institutional, administrative and economic shortcomings".
Eurostat calculates that per capita GDP currently ranges from 303% of the EU average in inner London to 24% in North-East Romania.
New Member States: a special case
Unemployment rates in some of the poorest EU regions exceed 20% . The report stresses the need to invest European Social Fund aid in improving the education and qualifications of young people, women and elderly persons and accompanying support, community and care services that improve employment opportunities.
Also, the mere fact that funding is granted does not guarantee per se that it will be put to good use.(Recital P) Authorities in some poor regions lack the appropriate skills and experience, as well as the essential matching funds (Para 4), to be able to make full use of the EU funding, says the report, which calls on the Commission to step up an appropriate training programme.
Yardstick of success
If structural funding is to be successfully implemented, says the report, then it must "ensure substantial economic growth for the poorest regions, such as will enable them gradually to catch up with the more developed regions in terms of per capita GDP"
Roll out infrastructure, foster entrepreneurship
To spur economic growth, investment and balanced sustainable development in the poorest regions, regional authorities and Member States should give priority to projects that open them up, by providing infrastructure for transport, information technology and telecommunications, says the report.
The report encourages Member States to promote entrepreneurship in schools and to support training schemes for future entrepreneurs, aimed in particular at young people, women and the elderly.
As private equity, venture capital rotating funds and micro-credits for start-ups are also vital for entrepreneurship, innovation and job creation, the report also encourages the Commission, Member States and local authorities to build an integrated system of economic and social incentives for investors, and to simplify procedures for setting up new businesses. It advocates public-private partnerships (PPPs) as an effective means of involving private capital, with due regard to the long-term impact on public finances.
Simplify grant procedures, tailor to local needs, draw on local assets
New Member States in particular find it difficult to meet complicated cohesion policy requirements, and often lack sufficient private capital to pre-finance EU grants, so potential beneficiaries are unable to obtain funds that they could put to good use. The report encourages Member States and the Community to simplify procedures, so that funds are allocated transparently, efficiently, and delivered swiftly to final beneficiaries.
The report also suggests that EU regional aid should be tailored to the specific needs of the poorest regions, and aim to exploit their specific economic potential. It encourages Member States to make these regions more attractive to investors, by drawing on natural and cultural assets to develop traditional economic activities and create new ones.
Prospects
Ms Geringer de Oedenberg notes in her explanatory memorandum that Bulgaria and Romania in particular have particularly high growth potential, and so should be well-placed to take advantage of EU regional funding.
Preliminary estimates from the Commission's fourth report on cohesion, published on 30 May, suggest that over the period 2007-2013, cohesion policy will help to increase the GDP of Lithuania, Latvia, and Czech Republic by around 8.5%, Poland by around 5.5%, and Greece by around 3.5%.
Between 1960 and 2002, Spain's GDP rose from 60.76% to almost 85% of the Community average, Portugal's from 40% to 69%, Greece's from 44% to 66% and Ireland's from 65% to 122%.
20070710IPR09050 Role and effectiveness of cohesion policy in reducing disparities in the poorest regions of the EU Text, as adopted by the EP on 12 July, will shortly be available here
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5363002
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
