Parliament's 3 Intergovernmental MEPs speak ahead of July conference
Intergovernmental Conference
2007-07-16 - 10:54
3 IGC MEPs: from left: Brok, Barón Crespo and Duff
In Strasbourg last week MEPs voted to support the convening of an intergovernmental conference to draft a "reform treaty" to replace the draft constitution. This vote is a requirement under existing treaties before an IGC can begin. On Thursday leaders of the Parliament's groups selected 3 MEPs to represent them when the IGC meets at a ministerial level. They are Elmar Brok (EPP-ED), Enrique Barón Crespo (PES) and Andrew Duff (ALDE). Ahead of the IGC we spoke to them.
The aim of the IGC will be to draft a new treaty based on the agreement brokered in June by EU leaders. This kept much of the substance of the draft constitution - like qualified majority voting - although some symbols like the flag were dropped. The "constitution" tag was also abandoned.
Last week MEPs called for the bulk of the draft constitution to be kept - although the House deplores the ditching of symbols and the opt-out agreed for the Charter of fundamental rights. The Intergovernmental Conference brings together representatives of all 27 governments of the European Union. The Parliament will be also represented by its President when the IGC meets at the level of Heads of State or Government. The conference opens on 23 July.
What are the main issues to be dealt with?
We began by asking the 3 MEPs - who between them have 56 years of expertise in the European Parliament - what they consider to be the main issues the IGC will have to deal with.
Brok: It has been initiated to ensure that the conclusions of the June summit will be implemented into a coherent legal text. All the important questions concerning the content and the form have been clarified. The aim is to fulfil the mandate of the IGC instead of constantly overloading it with new ideas or additional demands.
Barón-Crespo: We have to define where the citizens as well as the Charter of Fundamental Rights can be placed in the new Treaty. It is important that the IGC finishes the technical work before October, but it is also essential to do an exhaustive political work to keep on progressing in the European project.
Speaking to Spanish journalists recently he said that "we have managed to keep the essence of the constitutional treaty. The new treaty will allow us to be more efficient, strengthen our democratic system and reaffirm our values".
Duff: The job of the IGC is to transform the European Council's mandate of 23 June into a proper treaty. This means clearing up ambiguities, ensuring legal certainty and confirming political consensus. The three representatives of the Parliament must work to protect all the many advances made on behalf of the Parliament in the 2004 constitutional treaty. We are also in a good position to help open the IGC to press and parliamentary scrutiny in preparation for the successful ratification of the new treaty.
Will the new treaty be clear and understandable for people?
We then moved on to the question of whether the new treaty will be clear and understandable for people.
Brok: Unfortunately, the reform treaty cannot be expected to be any more intelligible to citizens than the current treaties. During the EU summit in June, EU leaders decided against a uniform, more clearly structured text, which was envisaged by the draft EU constitution.
Mr Brok also said that "this does a disservice to the transparency required for the EU. Nevertheless, important reforms as regards the content have been achieved this will make the EU more efficient and democratic".
He went on to say that expansion of qualified majority in the Council will make the Union "more efficient and improve its ability to act. In the future, the European Parliament as the only direct representative of the European citizens is going to be able to directly express people's will in 90 percent of all the political fields".
He also mentioned the importance of the "High Representative" for foreign affairs which will give the EU a stronger role in the world.
Barón-Crespo: the great loss (vis a vis the draft constitution) is the eligibility, the transparency and the clarity. To Spanish journalists he said he would draw on earlier political experiences to help him: "I have dedicated my political life to two constitutional projects. First, the Spanish Constitution, which was successfully carried in 1978; second, the constituent process in the European Union, that needs to receive a new impulse".
Duff: The new treaty is neither a mini-treaty nor a simplified treaty. But we live in the world of real politics, and if this renegotiation of the 2004 constitutional treaty is necessary to get national ratification in all member states, so be it.
Launching his country's Presidency of the EU last week Portugal's new Prime Minister José Sócrates told MEPs that he hoped the IGC would have a new draft treaty ready by October.
20070712STO09169 Press release: EP backs IGC: 11 July
Parliament's opinion on the IGC: 11 July José Sócrates addressed MEPs Elmar Brok Enrique Barón Crespo Andrew Duff
EN
1
PHOTO
20070713PHT09188.jpg
EN
5
LINK
/members/expert/alphaOrder/view.do?language=EN&id=1263
EN
6
LINK
/members/expert/alphaOrder/view.do?language=EN&id=1352
EN
7
LINK
/members/expert/alphaOrder/view.do?language=EN&id=4514
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706IPR08900 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0328 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706IPR08899 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
