Identifying farm aid beneficiaries to strengthen public support for the CAP
Agriculture
2007-09-12 - 11:30
European taxpayers view the management of EU farm aid as unfathomable and riddled with flaws, which undermines the legitimacy of the common agricultural policy. So a European Commission proposal to improve the transparency and budgetary implementation of this aid was welcomed by the EP Agriculture Committee on Wednesday, although its members would like to go even further.
In 2006 the European Union decided to make public the identities of recipients of aid granted under the common agricultural policy (CAP). Last March the Commission proposed amending the regulation governing the financing of the CAP, with the aim of putting this initiative on transparency into effect throughout the EU and also defining its scope more precisely. The proposal also seeks to tighten up the rules on penalties for any shortcomings in the Member States' control systems.
In a consultation report by Jorgo Chatzimarkakis (ALDE, DE), adopted on Wednesday with a few amendments, the Agriculture Committee stresses that Parliament has been eagerly awaiting these measures. The report nevertheless makes some amendments to improve transparency even more, while still abiding by rules on data protection.
Measures to improve transparency
The Agriculture Committee would like all national lists of recipients of EU direct farm aid to be published on the internet and for links to be created from the Commission's website to websites of the paying agencies in the Member States. Currently thirteen Member States have set up on-line registers accessible to the public via the Europa website. In the case of company-run farms, MEPs call for the names of the directors and investors to be published.
The committee also urges that data on payments under the rural development fund (EAFRD) be broken down to enable the broad areas that receive funding to be identified. It also calls for other minimum criteria be introduced to make data published by different Member States easier to compare. Member States should be free to publish even more detailed breakdowns of funds, in line with their priorities and national legislation but would only be "encouraged" to publish details of additional payments from national funds (top-ups).
Since transparency is a key factor in any improvement of budgetary control, MEPs believe the procedures regarding any failure to observe the rules on publishing information need to be clarified. They say that, in the event of "major errors", payments for the paying agency concerned should be reduced by a flat rate of 2%.
Data protection and other safeguards
At the same time, MEPs highlight the need to include provisions on data protection in the Council regulation itself, and not just in its implementing arrangements. For example, there should be advance warning to the individuals concerned before their data are published and people consulting or using the data should be required to register first.
Lastly, the Agriculture Committee wants the regulation to spell out that publication of this information is justified as part of the deal by which Europe's farmers receive fair compensation for the services they provide to society.
Procedure: Consultation - Plenary vote: 10-11 October, Brussels
2007-09-11 Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development In the chair: Neil Parish EPP-ED UK
20070910IPR10216 Member State websites providing information on beneficiaries of CAP payments (links accessible via the Europa site)
EN
1
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/agriculture/funding/index_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
