Tuesday in Plenary: Portugal's President, budget and Gdansk
Institutions
2007-09-05 - 15:28
31 August: Gdansk shipyard workers protest at Commission HQ in Brussels
Tuesday saw MEPs adopt a report on the EU's single market which identifies gaps in the energy and telecommunications sectors. The Portuguese Presidency of the EU also featured with Portugal's President Anibal Cavaco Silva addressing the House whilst finance minister Emanuel Santos presented the draft EU budget. The iconic Gdansk shipyard in Poland made a return to politics as its future was debated by MEPs. With the yard facing bankruptcy, the Commission is investigating state aid it received.
President Cavaco Silva took the opportunity to pass on a strong message to parliamentarians about the need for the Union to address poverty and social exclusion, both at home and in the wider world. Without such solidarity, European citizens would not see the EU as offering answers to their concerns according to the President.
As head of state of the country holding the EU presidency, he also addressed institutional questions, expressing hope that the presidency would see agreement on the text of the new reform treaty, allowing Europe to "overcome a somewhat erosive period in the construction process”. Then, in his words, the EU would be able to “concentrate with renewed confidence on the challenges that worry European citizens: economic growth, employment, security, the environment, energy and globalisation”.
Iconic Gdansk shipyard - MEPs press McCreevy
Polish MEPs put up a staunch defence of the Gdansk shipyard when Internal Market Commissioner Charlie McCreevy was in Plenary yesterday. The yard is almost bankrupt and facing closure and the Commission is investigating state aid it received from the Polish government.
In the 1970's and 80's the yard was the centre of the anti-Communist "Solidarity" trade union. Mr McCreevy said that the Commission is not trying to close the yard down but he stressed the need for state aid rules to be adhered to. Polish MEPs focused on the job losses that could result from closure and reminded him that social solidarity is a key EU aim.
EU Budget 2008
Portuguese Secretary of State for Finance Emanuel Augustos Santos presented the Draft Budget of the EU as adopted by national finance ministers in Council on 13 July.
Santos said that the “carefully controlled” increases in the Council’s 2008 draft budget (compared with the 2007 budget) responded to the challenges to enhance the dynamism of the European economy, the information society and the need to develop sustainable energy supply.
In reply Parliament's rapporteur, Finnish MEP Mr Kyösti Virrankoski (ALDE), criticised the €2.1 billion cuts made by the Council to the Commission’s proposal. In his view, Europe had to be prepared to provide the funds to meet its ambitions. The figures were “unrealistically low”, he said.
He deplored in particular that no provisions were made to come up with the funding needed to get the EU’s satellite navigation project Galileo off the ground. He also said the European Institute of Technology (EIT) needed a “solid basis" and that “we can not base it on ideas and wishful thinking”.
This was echoed by the Budget committee chair Reimer Böge (EPP-ED), who noted the Council’s figures are over 10 billion below the levels agreed by the member states themselves in the long term budget deal in 2006, (the "Multiannual Financial Framework") as the right figure to implement EU policies.
He also raised the question of how closer cooperation and improved capacities in civil protection could be reflected in the 2008 budget and requested funding proposals for Galileo and the EIT from the Commission. Budget Commissioner Dalia Grybauskaitė said the Commission would present proposals 19 September.
The rapporteur for the European Parliament's own budget, Finnish MEP Ville Itala, (EPP-ED) pointed out that the Parliament had made a great effort to keep the spending at the same level as last year, making it a "taxpayers budget". It is now for Parliament to amend Council's draft in its first reading of the budget in October.
Other debates
In the course of the day MEPs put the spotlight on the EU single market, looking at what it had brought EU citizens and its prospects for the future. MEPs noted that the single market remained incomplete, with gaps in sectors such as energy and telecommunications. It adopted a report on the EU's Single Market, drafted by French MEP Jacques Toubon (EPP-ED), underlining the need for the single market project to retain the support of citizens generally.
On Tuesday, MEPs also adopted four reports on better regulation in the EU, as well as a joint resolution on natural disasters. In the evening MEPs debated a reform of the EU’s milk market and alcohol abuse.
20070830STO09909 Watch it live President of Portugal EU funds needed to get Galileo into orbit: June 07 A €115 billion question: making sense of the EU budget: April 2007
EN
1
PHOTO
20070905PHT10062.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/eplive/vod/livestream/default_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823IPR09759 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070615STO07872 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061106FCS12347 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
