Unified position needed on desertification conference
Environment
2007-09-06 - 12:35
MEPs expressed their support for the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification, and its reform process and call on the Commission and the Member States to present a unified position in the COP meeting, in close cooperation with ACP partners. This was the message of a resolution adopted on the EU objectives for the 8th meeting of the Conference of Parties (COP8) to the to be held in Madrid from 3 to 14 September 2007.
The House expresses its support for a strategic plan for action with time-bound targets. MEPs call for the EU to engage constructively in the formulation and negotiation of the 10-year strategic plan in order to build strong and efficient mechanisms for an effective implementation of the Convention. In this connection, the House calls for particular attention to be given to:
∙ achieving progress on the ground and in local communities
∙ the synergies with achieving UNCCD and Millenium Development Goals
∙ capacity building beyond central level, focusing on local stakeholders;
MEPs recommend organising a Conference to assess the implementation and effectiveness of Action Plans in the most affected regions, notably in Africa, before future Conferences of Parties.
MEPs call for the CAP reform to introduce binding criteria on combating desertification and land degradation in the affected areas in the European Union. Parliament calls, moreover, for a prevention and implementation policy in order to maintain people in the rural areas.
The European Parliament also want the Commission to consider the establishment of a European Drought Observatory, that would collect knowledge and propose mitigation and follow-up measures in order to minimise the effects of the droughts on Europe.
The House calls for comprehensive forest care to reduce as much as possible the fire load of forests and the spread and velocity of fires and points out that the recovered biomass could contribute to the economic feasibility of the operation.
Finally, the House calls on the Commission and the Member States to step up international cooperation in the implementation of the UNCCD by providing additional incentives and financial support, and to support transboundary cooperation water programmes. MEPs call, furthermore, for the issue to be put to the agenda of next EU-Africa summit.
20070903IPR09986 Motion for a resolution - Convention on the fight against desertification Text, as adopted by the EP on 6 September, will shortly be available here
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//TEXT MOTION B6-2007-0329 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
