Parliament will work to raise awareness of the Iraqi refugee crisis in Syria, say MEPs in Damascus
External relations
2007-09-12 - 14:10
The recent influx of 1.5 million Iraqi refugees places a huge strain on Syria, a problem not sufficiently realised by the international community, said the European Parliament delegation for relations with the countries of the Mashreq on Wednesday. The delegation, led by its Chair, Béatrice Patrie (PES, FR), is visiting Syria for its 9th interparliamentary meeting, and gave a press conference in Damascus today on the results of its political meetings so far.
MEPs held political talks with Syrian President Bachar Al-Assad, Foreign Minister Waleed Al Moallem, Vice Prime Minister for Economic Affairs Abdullah Dardari, as well as Parliament President Mahmoud Al Abrache and Foreign and Arab Affairs Committee Chair Suleiman Haddad, and the Governor of the Central Bank, Adib Al-Mayaleh. The main subjects discussed were the plight of Iraqi refugees in the country, the pending Association Agreement with the EU, political and economic reforms in the country, and the Middle East peace process.
The delegation will also meet with religious leaders for a cultural-religious dialogue in Aleppo, among them the Syrian Grand Mufti Ahmad Badr-Eddine Hassoun, Orthodox Archbishop Jean Ibrahim, Catholic Archbishop Antoine Odo and Protestant Reverend Harotian Sleimanian.
Iraqi refugees
Representatives of the Syrian government, parliamentarians and business leaders underlined the urgency of facing up to the economic and social consequences of the massive influx of refugees from Iraq. On 10 September, the Syrian government instituted new visa requirements for Iraqis, following the influx of 1.5 million Iraqi refugees to Syria in the past few years, fleeing sectarian violence. These refugees have increased Syria's population by 7%, putting ever-increasing stress on the country's health services and educational facilities, as well as threatening to destabilise the economy.
The EU responded to this crisis through the ECHO programme, and has already allocated € 4 million to organisations such as the UNHCR and the Dutch Red Cross, enabling them to extend their operations in Syria, and to provide basic health services. The delegation visited an ECHO-funded clinic in Sayda Zeinba, meeting both doctors and patients to discuss the programme's impact and challenges. Further EU assistance is envisaged for the Syrian Arab Red Crescent, and the EU has also pledged € 11 million for specific cooperation programmes in the fields of health and education services in Syria.
Even so, and despite efforts such as the April 2007 Geneva Conference, more international aid is needed, and Chairwoman Patrie pledged to work to raise international awareness of the great strain that this vast migration flow has put on Syria's economic and social structures, and which may threaten the country's stability.
EU-Syria association agreement
Syria and the European Union initialled an association agreement in October 2004, but it has yet to be signed. The delegation reminded its various interlocutors that the European Parliament is supportive of the agreement citing its resolution of 26 October 2006. The Members emphasised that the European Parliament has done its part, and that the responsibility to act now lies with the Council of Ministers. The delegation therefore called on the Council to put the agreement on its agenda, in line with Parliament's previous recommendations.
Domestic economic and political reforms
At a meeting held by the Syrian Enterprise Business Centre (SEBC), Chairwoman Patrie reminded business leaders that Syria is in the midst of a difficult transformation from a planned economy to a social market model. She congratulated the government on the progress achieved so far, but the delegation nevertheless noted that much had yet to be done, such as establishing a legal framework for a market economy, including bankruptcy laws, a truly independent central bank and the creation of a private banking sector. The delegation also stressed the importance of accelerating the pace of political and administrative reforms, and noted that serious shortcomings in guaranteeing human rights and fundamental freedoms still needed to be addressed.
Middle East peace process
Chairwoman Patrie stressed the fact that Syria was an indispensable partner for any peaceful resolution of the many tensions in the Middle East. In the context of the Arab-Israeli conflict, violence in Iraq and high political tension in Lebanon, she urged the Syrian government to contribute positively to efforts to stabilise this volatile region.
The other Members of the EP delegation are:
Carlo Casini (EPP-ED, IT), Jana Hybaskova (EPP-ED, CZ), Jamila Madeira (PES, PT), Pasqualina Napoletano (PES, IT), Miguel Portas (EUL/NGL, PT), Christa Prets (PES, AT), John Purvis (EPP-ED, UK) and Tadeusz Zwiefka (EPP-ED, PL).
2007-09-10 Delegation for relations with the Mashreq countries Chair Béatrice PATRIE PES FR
20070910IPR10224
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
