Face to face with Portugal's President Cavaco Silva
Institutions
2007-09-05 - 11:34
All smiles: Portugal's President Cavaco Silva (left) and Parliament's Pöttering
The fight against poverty and social exclusion were at the forefront of an address by Portugal's President Aníbal Cavaco Silva to MEPs yesterday. He also stressed the importance of solidarity between EU nations. During his time in Strasbourg we caught up with him and put a few questions to him about the state of Europe.
Given that it is more than 20 years since Portugal joined the EU, what would you say to the citizens of the "new" states that have joined since 2004.
The presence of Portugal in the EU has been very, very positive. The results are clear, not just in terms of stability and democracy but also in terms of economic and social development. Portugal is an example that deserves to be observed by the new countries, for the reforms we have made in the period since our accession.
For example let's have a look at the internal market. To be able to compete in such a market required deep reform of our economy. I think it is also worthwhile for the new members to analyse the mistakes we made after integration into monetary union. We thought everything would be easy but it was not the case. To be in the monetary union is very demanding, it's not just about benefits from the declining interest rates,it's necessary to maintain budgetary discipline. I am now confident about the future of Portugal.
The new reform Treaty could be completed under the Portuguese Presidency, what do you hope this will bring for the future?
I wish for a strong Europe with a strong voice on the international scene. An EU able to answer the people's concerns on employment, security, economic goals, energy, climate change....I hope that during the Portuguese Presidency there will be a real chance to have a reformed treaty and to overcome the difficulties (the EU faced after the rejection of the Constitution in France and the Netherlands). I think we should take advantage of this "new mood" in all States and, on the basis of the mandate of June's summit, to approve in October in Lisbon the new Treaty.
In your speech in the EP you stressed the need to fight against poverty and social exclusion. Why did you choose this forum to deliver this message?
Solidarity is a fundamental pillar of the European construction; without it, it would be difficult to maintain political stability within the EU and would be difficult to convince European citizens that the EU is the answer to their concerns. Parliament is the House of the European citizens, and we have to face this structural problem - 16% of Europeans live in poverty - it should be seen as a European problem.
We have a social agenda and European programs to fight poverty and social exclusion. That's why I wanted to call this to the attention of MEPs. It's not comfortable for me as European to know that there are several million EU citizens living in poverty. The EP is the best place to underline the importance of this subject.
20070830STO09908 Speech in detail Portuguese Presidency website Lisbon strategy
EN
1
PHOTO
20070905PHT10054.jpg
EN
3
LINK
http://www.eu2007.pt/UE/vEN/
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823IPR09759 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070202BKG02682 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
