Inland transport of dangerous goods - simplifying EU legislation
Transport
2007-09-05 - 14:23
By a large majority, the EP adopted a report on harmonising the rules for the transport of dangerous goods by making them as user-friendly as possible. Boguslaw Liberadzki (PES, PL) says that the new proposal integrates the existing rules into one piece of EU law which will cover the land transport modes road and rail and include inland waterway transport as well. It is expected that this report at first reading in co-decision may lead to a direct agreement with Council.
The House also adopted an amendment which stipulates that Member States may still lay down specific requirements for the national and international transport of dangerous goods within their territory as regards vehicles, wagons and inland waterway vessels not covered by the new directive, where specified, the use of prescribed routes, including the use of prescribed modes of transport and special rules for the transport of dangerous goods in passenger trains.
A broad majority of MEPs believe that the proposals will contribute to the objective of legislative simplification and that these simpler rules would also mean safer transport. The current EU laws on the transport of dangerous goods already covers road and rail transport but these rules are complicated and difficult to implement for citizens, transport operators and national authorities.
In including inland waterways as well, the new legislative format will be much easier to understand and apply than the current legislation. So far, no EU rules for inland waterways exist. Taking into consideration that the impact of this sector is growing, it is felt that an accident in inland waterways might have serious consequences and that one single set of rules would reduce this risk.
The total amount of dangerous goods transport in the EU is about 110 billion tonne/kms a year, of which 58% by road, 25% by rail and 17% by inland waterway. The share of dangerous goods transport in total freight transport is 8%. The current international agreements regulating international transport of dangerous goods are based on UN Recommendations, which have been implemented in the inland transport sector in Europe by means of three instruments:
- European Agreement concerning the international carriage of dangerous goods by road (ADR);
- Regulations concerning international carriage of dangerous goods by rail (RID);
- European Agreement concerning the international carriage of dangerous goods by inland waterways (ADN)
ADN is in the process of ratification and is expected to be in force in 2009 at the latest. According to Commission information, nine of the EU countries are signatories of ADN. Two other ADN-based systems (ADN-R and ADN-D) are currently applied in the areas of the Rhine and Danube.
But for historic reasons, the existing EU legislation on the transport of dangerous goods is rather complicated. The Commission says that, if nothing is done, the current complex rules are to become even more complex with changes in international agreements. Obsolete rules would remain and confuse the sectors and the risk of non-compliance would increase.
The new proposal would repeal four existing directives and two Commission decisions. MEPs also take the view that this simplified Community legislation would also simplify the transposition into national legislation. Administrative procedures for consignor and consignee, will be easier with simplified and harmonised rules. Documentation of transport operations and vehicles is also expected to be simpler with harmonised rules, as would be the training of persons involved and the work dangerous goods safety advisors.
Although welcoming the proposal, the Parliament endorsed amendments including several of technical nature which permit Member States to regulate for safety reasons the transport of dangerous goods not yet covered by the Directive and especially in passenger trains. Based on the two-year rhythm of the international agreements ARD, RID and ADN (see above) the period of renewing the authorisation is brought to six instead of five years.
20070823IPR09758 Inland transport of dangerous goods Text, as adopted by the EP on 5 September, will shortly be available here
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5429032
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
