The Week Ahead 10-16 September 2007
Institutions
2007-09-07 - 10:56
Committee Week - Brussels
Immigration. A draft directive on immigration, to be put to the vote at the Civil Liberties Committee, seeks to lay down standard rules on the return of third country nationals residing illegally in the EU (Wednesday) .
Financial instability. Following recent turbulence on the financial markets, European Central Bank president Jean-Claude Trichet will appear before the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee, as will Commissioners Charlie McCreevy and Joaquín Almunia (Tuesday) .
China/product safety. Commissioner Meglena Kuneva will report to the Internal Market and Consumer Protection Committee on her discussions with the Chinese authorities on product safety, amid concern at potentially dangerous imported toys (Wednesday).
Composition of the EP. Initial proposals for allocating seats within the EP as part of negotiations on the new treaty are the focus of a draft report to be discussed at the Constitutional Affairs Committee (Monday) and of a press conference by the co-rapporteurs Alain Lamassoure and Adrian Severin (Tuesday).
Pesticides. A co-decision report at the Environment Committee deals with the authorisation of new pesticide products (Wednesday) .
Open skies? The Transport Committee will vote on the recent agreement between the EU and USA on air travel (Tuesday).
Wine. The reform of the wine sector in Europe is the subject of a hearing at the Agriculture Committee as well as a seminar organised by the EP press service (Wednesday and Thursday) .
EP-Serbia. EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering will hold a meeting with Serbia’s Prime Minister Vojislav Kostunica followed by an informal press briefing (Wednesday).
EP-Syria. Nine members of the EU-Mashreq delegation travel to Syria for meetings with their Syrian counterparts as well as President Assad (Monday-Friday) .
Sakharov Prize. Nominations for the 2007 Sakharov Prize will be presented at a joint meeting of the Human Rights Subcommittee, the Foreign Affairs Committee and the Development Committee (Tuesday) .
20070906IPR10147 For full details see the Agenda
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20073700AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
