Plenary session 3-6 September
Institutions
2007-09-10 - 17:54
September Plenary in focus
The first Plenary session after the summer break saw MEPs reconvene with a debate on the recent forest fires in Greece. MEPs called for financial aid from the EU's Solidarity Fund to be made available as soon as possible. The week also saw Members debate reports on ways of making simpler, clearer laws as part of the "better regulation" initiative. The week also featured an address from Portugal's President as well as deliberations on the EU budget for 2008.
For a full round up of events from the first Strasbourg session of September please follow the day by day sections of this focus.
20070906FCS10160
Forest fires in Greece debated on Monday opening day
Smoke from forest fires in the Greek Peloponnese With over 60 people dead and 130 towns and villages destroyed it was hardly surprising that forest fires in Greece featured highly in the first plenary debate since the summer. As the fires continue to rage in Greece the causes of the conflagration and what to do about them took centre stage. MEPs deplored the criminality of the arsonists, expressed sympathy with the victims and called for the EU solidarity fund to be used to compensate some of the estimated €5 billion losses.
The fires that have taken lives, consumed houses and damaged archaeological sites were described as a "disaster of a biblical scale" by Greek EPP-ED member Nikolaos Vakalis. His party colleague Rolf Berend supported use of the EU's solidarity fund to help the "return to normality" and a sign "the EU wants to help citizens in difficult situations". Pöttering pays tribute to Gaston Thorn and Raymond Barre Over the summer two prominent European statesmen passed away and Parliament's President Hans-Gert Pöttering used his opening remarks to pay tribute to them. They were former MEP, Luxembourg PM and Commission President Gaston Thorn and Raymond Barre, a former French Prime Minister and Vice President of the European Commission. He also made a statement marking the hundredth anniversary of the birth of Altiero Spinelli, who he called "one of the great architects of European Integration". President Pöttering finished his remarks by leading a one minutes silence in the House for the victims of the forest fires in Greece, the earthquake in Peru, continuing violence in Iraq and the lives lost at sea as immigrants struggle for a new life in the EU. Solidarity to fight fires Whether the EU should have a "disaster agency" or rapid reaction force to deal with such events was dismissed by Socialist leader Martin Schulz. He told the House the best way to deal with disasters was in a decentralised way. Liberal ALDE speaker Vittorio Prodi of Italy stressed the need for prevention against hot summers and drought - namely action against climate change. Vladimir Špidla - European Commissioner for Employment and International Assistance - told the House he would use a fast-track procedure to release assistance under Solidarity Fund, LIFE+ and the European Social Fund Mr Špidla called the assistance to Greece ”striking example of solidarity” as not only had other EU states responded with offers of help but also Switzerland, Serbia, Russia and Israel had pledged assistance. He said the challenge now was to mobilise further resources to deal with the continuing requests for help. This followed MEPs observations that the EU had been unable to cope with Bulgaria's request for help. During the debate MEPs also urged the Council to reach a decision on the new EU Solidarity Fund regulation. Finally, several Members drew attention to the wider picture - this year alone seeing severe forest fires in Spain, Bulgaria, Italy as well as in Greece and catastrophic floods in the UK - linking these events to changes in the climate caused by global warming. Vote today on better regulation reports On Monday evening MEPs also debated four reports related to making EU laws clearer and more straightforward. They will vote on these today (Tuesday). This is far from a purely technocratic issue, according to rapporteur (Ms) Katalin Lévai (PSE, Hungary): it is "fundamental to ensure a fair and competitive market place, citizen's welfare and the effective protection of public health and the environment". She also emphasised the inherent value of legislating at European level, pointing out that it "has reduced much red tape. One common rule to apply in all Member States is much simpler and more efficient than a complex web of varying rules at national and regional level. European legislation has been effective in removing harmful barriers to competition and conflicting national rules". Parliament's Press service EP Resolution on forest fires 3 Sept Post briefing
Tuesday in Plenary: Portugal's President, budget and Gdansk
31 August: Gdansk shipyard workers protest at Commission HQ in Brussels Tuesday saw MEPs adopt a report on the EU's single market which identifies gaps in the energy and telecommunications sectors. The Portuguese Presidency of the EU also featured with Portugal's President Anibal Cavaco Silva addressing the House whilst finance minister Emanuel Santos presented the draft EU budget. The iconic Gdansk shipyard in Poland made a return to politics as its future was debated by MEPs. With the yard facing bankruptcy, the Commission is investigating state aid it received.
President Cavaco Silva took the opportunity to pass on a strong message to parliamentarians about the need for the Union to address poverty and social exclusion, both at home and in the wider world. Without such solidarity, European citizens would not see the EU as offering answers to their concerns according to the President. As head of state of the country holding the EU presidency, he also addressed institutional questions, expressing hope that the presidency would see agreement on the text of the new reform treaty, allowing Europe to "overcome a somewhat erosive period in the construction process”. Then, in his words, the EU would be able to “concentrate with renewed confidence on the challenges that worry European citizens: economic growth, employment, security, the environment, energy and globalisation”. Iconic Gdansk shipyard - MEPs press McCreevy Polish MEPs put up a staunch defence of the Gdansk shipyard when Internal Market Commissioner Charlie McCreevy was in Plenary yesterday. The yard is almost bankrupt and facing closure and the Commission is investigating state aid it received from the Polish government. In the 1970's and 80's the yard was the centre of the anti-Communist "Solidarity" trade union. Mr McCreevy said that the Commission is not trying to close the yard down but he stressed the need for state aid rules to be adhered to. Polish MEPs focused on the job losses that could result from closure and reminded him that social solidarity is a key EU aim. EU Budget 2008 Portuguese Secretary of State for Finance Emanuel Augustos Santos presented the Draft Budget of the EU as adopted by national finance ministers in Council on 13 July. Santos said that the “carefully controlled” increases in the Council’s 2008 draft budget (compared with the 2007 budget) responded to the challenges to enhance the dynamism of the European economy, the information society and the need to develop sustainable energy supply. In reply Parliament's rapporteur, Finnish MEP Mr Kyösti Virrankoski (ALDE), criticised the €2.1 billion cuts made by the Council to the Commission’s proposal. In his view, Europe had to be prepared to provide the funds to meet its ambitions. The figures were “unrealistically low”, he said. He deplored in particular that no provisions were made to come up with the funding needed to get the EU’s satellite navigation project Galileo off the ground. He also said the European Institute of Technology (EIT) needed a “solid basis" and that “we can not base it on ideas and wishful thinking”. This was echoed by the Budget committee chair Reimer Böge (EPP-ED), who noted the Council’s figures are over 10 billion below the levels agreed by the member states themselves in the long term budget deal in 2006, (the "Multiannual Financial Framework") as the right figure to implement EU policies. He also raised the question of how closer cooperation and improved capacities in civil protection could be reflected in the 2008 budget and requested funding proposals for Galileo and the EIT from the Commission. Budget Commissioner Dalia Grybauskaitė said the Commission would present proposals 19 September. The rapporteur for the European Parliament's own budget, Finnish MEP Ville Itala, (EPP-ED) pointed out that the Parliament had made a great effort to keep the spending at the same level as last year, making it a "taxpayers budget". It is now for Parliament to amend Council's draft in its first reading of the budget in October. Other debates In the course of the day MEPs put the spotlight on the EU single market, looking at what it had brought EU citizens and its prospects for the future. MEPs noted that the single market remained incomplete, with gaps in sectors such as energy and telecommunications. It adopted a report on the EU's Single Market, drafted by French MEP Jacques Toubon (EPP-ED), underlining the need for the single market project to retain the support of citizens generally. On Tuesday, MEPs also adopted four reports on better regulation in the EU, as well as a joint resolution on natural disasters. In the evening MEPs debated a reform of the EU’s milk market and alcohol abuse. President of Portugal http://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/public/story_page/057-7907-169-06-25-909-20070615STO07872-2007-18-06-2007/default_en.htm
Liquid ban, terrorism and financial turbulence dominate Wednesday Plenary
The US sub-prime mortgage market prompted the recent financial crises MEPs Wednesday called for a review and possible repeal of restrictions on the taking of liquids onto planes, citing cost and the "disproportionate" nature of the measure. In a debate on terrorism, MEPs criticised ineffective EU action and the failure to appoint an EU anti-terrorism coordinator, while Europe's Security Commissioner lauded anti-terror arrests in Germany and Denmark. Later Members debated the financial crisis and called for greater supervision of financial instruments and lenders.
Liquid restriction on planes: MEPs urge review, possible repeal Fed up with handing over drinks and perfumes to security staff at airports? MEPs have called for a rethink of the policy in light of the cost and disruption caused by in their view "disproportionate" measures. In a resolution passed on 5 September MEPs urged the Commission to review and (if there are no new facts) to repeal restrictions on liquids. In the resolution MEPs recognise the cost of the current restrictions to airports, operators and passengers as well as the "substantial inconvenience and disruption". Later in a press release Transport Commissioner Jacques Barrot said,"the regulation cannot be repealed so long as the threat of liquid explosives remains and we have not developed other methods of effectively controlling it ". The restrictions on liquids and gels in hand luggage were introduced in November 2006 following a foiled plot to blow up several transatlantic airliners. MEPs raise questions on fight against terrorism The fight against terrorism and the level of cooperation between European countries was also debated on Wednesday morning, particularly the state of current anti-terror legislation and data sharing. The continuing absence of a European anti-terrorism coordinator drew sharp comments from MEPs. The speakers for the main groups, the Centre right EPP-ED, Socialist PSE and Liberal ALDE group all urged Europe to do more. Manfred Weber (EPP-ED) called for an assessment of current laws on the fight against terrorism and said that the roots of terrorism need also to be addressed at the cultural level. Michael Cashman (PES) said that the 27 Member States of the Union should act in conjunction with their allies, including the US. For the Liberals Alexander Alvaro said that there is no long-term strategy for the fight against terrorism. "I do not see any movement in terms of measures. There is no real plan. We have to define the role Europe is going to play" he told the House. Franco Frattini, the Commissioner for Freedom, Security and Justice noted that 2 days ago terror suspects were arrested in Germany and Denmark. He described this as a "a fantastic result." He went on to say that although all sources reflect that a threat for new terrorist acts remains high". Frattini said a new package of measures will be adopted this autumn, while Manuel Lobo Antunes, Portugal's Secretary of State for European affairs, representing the Council said the new EU anti-terrorism co-ordinator would be appointed soon. Financial turbulence: MEPs urge oversight of complex financial products In a debate on the recent financial instability brought on by disturbances in the US "sub-prime" mortgage market in the US, MEPs backed the European Central Bank's response to the crises and called for a proper oversight of financial services and markets to limit the risks of bad lending. John Purvis for the EPP-ED group blamed "new financial instruments" that are so complex that even banks could not understand them. "Normally conservative but naive banks have been tempted too by high rated instruments too good to be true". He praised the ECB for a "sensible" reaction. Robert Goebbels of the PSE group called for greater supervision of financial markets and financial lenders and said a lack of information and transparency aggravated the crisis. Victims are families taking mortgages on the basis of eternal growth in the property market. He asked why the ECB has paid out more to shore up markets than the US Fed. Margarita Starkevičiūtė of the ALDE group said the crisis had ultimately been caused by aggressive financial policies outside EU, when trying to resolve the .com bubble. The EU cannot dictate decisions in third countries, but can have dialogue with their financial supervisors. She called for regulation of the non-bank sector where "even supermarkets are involved" in lending. Commissioner McCreevy: "need to remain vigilant and draw lessons" Internal Market Commissioner Charlie McCreevy said "I hope that the Boards of all financial firms will examine their actions and draw appropriate conclusions. We believe that 'light touch', principle-based regulation is the best approach for the financial sector. It has proven its value. But we need to remain vigilant and draw lessons. All parties need to take their responsibility – and take it seriously". Next week Parliament's Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee will question ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet about the Bank's handling of the liquidity crisis. You can watch the hearing live on the website on Tuesday at 1500 . Press release on liquids: 5 Sept Press release on the debate on terrorism: 5 Sept Financial markets - background: 30 August
Thursday Plenary: consumers, action on drugs, 112 distress number, Primate testing
MEPs voted to support a €21 million anti-drug programme Consumer protection and action against drug use were just two of the issues MEPs gave their support to on Thursday. The day also saw MEPs urge greater coherence in the EU's consumer protection rules. In particular fears over the safety of Chinese toys and protection for online shoppers featured in the debate. The day also saw two written declarations adopted - one calling for the European "112" emergency number to be more publicised and another one calling for an end to testing on primates.
Consumer protection: MEPs support more coherent rules Members gave their support to a European Commission Green Paper which aims to give greater coherence to the 8 EU directives that currently cover consumer protection. The House voted to support a report drafted by French Socialist Béatrice Patrie. Two issues raised in the debate were concerns raised over the standards of Chinese toys following recent recalls of products for safety reasons in the US. Speaking in the debate, Liberal MEP Diana Wallis, from the Parliament's Legal Affairs Committee, stressed the importance of coherence in Consumer protection. In particular she addressed her remarks to the Meglena Kuneva - the European Commissioner responsible who also took part in the debate. MEPs were also concerned about the protection afforded to consumers by online shopping - especially as this form of trade is increasingly making national borders irrelevant. Finnish member Alex Stubb of the centre right EPP-ED regaled his colleagues with his own experiences: "I am a mega shopper - I love to shop on the internet". However, he said that "things do not often go well, you buy something and Amazon.com send you the wrong books". He called for a revision and a modernisation of the present consumers´ rights. The European Commission's "review of the Consumer Acquis" (EU law) was launched in 2004 and forms part of the wider "better regulation" drive aimed at simpler, clearer European law. MEPs support €21 million anti-drugs drive Yesterday members of the European Parliament gave their backing for a 7 year anti-drug programme across the European Union. With €21.35 million allocated to prevent and reduce drug addiction MEPs are hopeful it can help improve the lives of many people living with drug addiction across the 27 countries of the Union. The vote by members at the second reading stage on Thursday followed a report by Swedish Social Democrat Inger Segelström. It forms part of the "Fundamental Rights and Justice Programme" which runs until 2013. 112 distress number - more callers needed If you have an emergency while abroad you can use the 112 emergency number to call for help. Unfortunately not many people across the European Union know this. A total of 512 MEPs have signed a written declaration calling for the Commission to promote the number and ensure it works effectively in all EU states. One idea mentioned in the declaration is a "European 112 Day" to raise awareness. A written declaration is a method MEPs use to start or prompt a debate on a particular subject. To be formally adopted the declaration must be signed by over half of the 732 members. Opposition to primate testing and experimentation Another written declaration on Thursday saw MEPs unite in opposition to the use of apes and wild-caught monkeys in scientific experiments. It is believed that 10,000 primates are used in experiments across the European Union each year. Primates share more than 90% of their DNA with humans and there capacity for suffering and distress has been well proven. Speaking after the debate, Slovenian Liberal member Mojca Drčar Murko said that "biologists convinced me that a gradual replacement of scientific experiments on primates by alternative methods is needed". She called such experiments "morally questionable". The MEPs also adopted report on human rights dialogues on human rights with third countries. The session ended with a debate and vote on human rights issues, namely in Burma, Bangladesh and about the financing of the Special Court for Sierra Leone. The next plenary will take place 24-27 September in Strasbourg. 112 Written declaration 112 Press release on Primates Written declaration on Primates Press release consumer acquis Press release on drug prevention
EN
1
PHOTO
20070907PHT10193.jpg
EN
2
PHOTO
20070903PHT09975.jpg
EN
6
PHOTO
20070905PHT10062.jpg
EN
8
LINK
EU funds needed to get Galileo into orbit: June 07
EN
9
PHOTO
20070905PHT10110.jpg
EN
13
PHOTO
20070906PHT10179.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070716BRI09221 ITEM-001-EN NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT MOTION P6-RC-2007-0323 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823IPR09759 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823IPR09766 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823IPR09765 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823STO09819 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070906IPR10134 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT WDECL P6-DCL-2007-0044 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070905IPR10104 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT WDECL P6-DCL-2007-0040 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070903IPR09989 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070903IPR09985 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
