Post-Briefing - 3-6 September 2007 - Strasbourg plenary session
2007-09-10 - 13:45
NB: An audio summary of 3-6 September Strasbourg plenary session can be accessed via the link here and at the end of this publication.
Condolences to this summer's disaster victims; deceased European leaders remembered
Parliament's President Hans-Gert Pöttering opened the plenary session following the summer recess by expressing his sadness at the recent deaths of Gaston Thorn and Raymond Barre, "who both served as distinguished European Commissioners and as prime ministers of their respective countries" (Luxembourg and France). He also sent Parliament's condolences to the victims of this summer's natural disasters in Europe, including the floods in Britain, the heatwave in the Mediterranean and the forest fires in Greece. He also mentioned the 500 victims of the earthquake in Peru on 15 August, the thousands of deaths from the violence in Iraq and the many refugees who risked their lives seeking to reach the EU via the Mediterranean and the Atlantic. The House observed a minute's silence in honour of the lives of all these people.
President of Portugal stresses solidarity as key European value
The President of Portugal, Aníbal Cavaco Silva, addressed the House in which he focused above all on the theme of solidarity "as a fundamental pillar of European integration". Introducing Mr Cavaco Silva, Parliament's President Hans-Gert Pöttering said that previous Portuguese presidencies had been particularly "ambitious" in their scope and also that Portugal's history gave it a special position:
MEPs adopt four reports on Better Regulation in the EU
The key points of this package include emphasising plain and simple language, the importance of adequate and independent impact assessments, based on wide-ranging consultation of stakeholders and that "soft law" all too often constitutes an ambiguous and ineffective instrument which is liable to have a detrimental effect on Community legislation.
Natural disasters, EU solidarity fund needed without delay and European reaction force
In adopting a joint resolution on natural disasters, MEPs call on the Commission to mobilise the current EU Solidarity Fund in the most flexible manner possible, without delay, while calling for greater spending on flood defences. The House also request the creation of a European force that could immediately react in emergencies. On the fires in Greece, MEPs want the Member States to abstain from commercialisation, to strengthen penal sanctions for criminal acts that damage the environment.
MEPs debate the fight against terrorism - a new EU anti-terrorism co-ordinator?
The debate against the fight against terrorism with the participation of the Commission and the Council focused on whether current EU legislation and data-sharing between the Member States should be fully assessed as to its effectiveness. MEPs also questioned whether the Council should appoint a new EU anti-terrorism co-ordinator following Mr de Vries decision to step down in February 2007. The House will vote on a resolution on the issue during its plenary session in Brussels in October. (10-11 October).
MEPs call for liquids on planes legislation to be repealed unless new conclusive facts are brought forward
The House adopted a resolution with 464 votes in favour, 158 against and 70 abstentions on the restrictions imposed by the EU on liquids that passengers can take on board aeroplanes. MEPs call upon the Commission to review urgently and – if no further conclusive facts are brought forward – to repeal Regulation (EC) No 1546/2006 (introduction of liquids onto aircraft). The particular amendment on the possible repeal was adopted with 382 votes in favour, 298 against and 15 abstentions.
Unified position needed on desertification conference
MEPs expressed their support for the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification, and its reform process and call on the Commission and the Member States to present a unified position in the COP meeting, in close cooperation with ACP partners. This was the message of a resolution adopted on the EU objectives for the 8th meeting of the Conference of Parties (COP8) being held in Madrid from 3 to 14 September 2007.
Fundamental Rights and Justice": specific programme "drugs prevention and information", 2007-2013
The European Parliament adopted, at second reading, the report on the Council common position for the specific programme "Drug prevention and information" as part of the General programme "Fundamental Rights and Justice" 2007 -2013. Parliament approved the Council common position as soon as was possible in order to ensure the timely launch of the specific programme.
MEPs concerned about alcohol, alcopops and binge drinking
The European Parliament adopted an own initiative report on the European Union strategy to support Member States in reducing alcohol-related harm. The report raises several issues including: labelling and warnings, binge-drinking, "alcopops" and reducing accidents caused by drinking and driving. The report was adopted by a large majority in a show of hands.
An efficient European emergency number ("112") and increased safety for its citizens
The European Parliament adopted a written declaration requesting an evaluation of the quality of the operation of "112", the little known European emergency number. The declaration was adopted with the largest majority ever to have been attained for a written declaration (530 MEPs out of a total of 785). The declaration calls upon the Member States and the Commission to engage the necessary processes and resources for ensuring an efficient 112 service all over the EU.
Inland transport of dangerous goods - simplifying EU legislation
By a large majority, the EP adopted a report on harmonising the rules for the transport of dangerous goods by making them as user-friendly as possible. Boguslaw Liberadzki (PES, PL) says that the new proposal integrates the existing rules into one piece of EU law which will cover the land transport modes road and rail and include inland waterway transport as well. It is expected that this report at first reading in co-decision may lead to a direct agreement with Council.
Megatrucks on EU roads? Yes, but under strict conditions
The European Parliament adopted by a large majority (577 votes in favour to 52 against with 51 abstentions) proposing that the controversial use of mega-liners or 60 tonne lorries in the EU should only be allowed for certain routes at the request of, and within the Member States.
The Single Market Review: tackling barriers and inefficiencies
In adopting a report, the House welcomed the Commission’s work on the Single Market Review (SMR), noting that the Review - which aims to review existing mechanisms and to identify gaps - is an opportunity to demonstrate the benefits to be reaped from the effective implementation of the internal market. As MEPs underline, an improvement in the functioning of the Single Market is still necessary. "There is a need", reads the report, "to complete the opening of network industries, such as transport, telecommunications, postal services and energy transport."
Review of the EU consumer acquis - MEPs gave their views
This own initiative report on the Commission's review of the consumer acquis, adopted by Parliament, recommends that the scope of this review concentrate on updating and creating coherence between the eight consumer protection directives named in the Green Paper.
Use of primates in experiments is not acceptable say MEPs in written declaration
The European Parliament adopted a written declaration urging the EU to use the revision process of Directive 86/609/EC as an opportunity to make ending the use of apes and wild-caught monkeys in scientific experiments an urgent priority. They also want to establish a timetable for replacing the use of all primates in scientific experiments with alternatives. As of 6 September 2007, 433 MEPs had signed the written declaration.
Reform of the milk market, but not at excessive cost to producers say MEPs
For the European Parliament, savings generated by the milk market reform "mini-package" proposed by the European Commission must benefit the sector. School milk aid needs to be raised, and the necessary adjustments to Europe's dairy market should not jeopardise the existing private storage scheme. This is thrust of a series of reports adopted by the European Parliament.
Maximising the impact of human rights dialogues
Parliament adopted on an own-initiative which calls on the Commission and Council to ensure a greater degree of coherence in the EU's human rights dialogues with third countries. MEPs particularly stress the need for Parliament to be informed of the content of ongoing dialogues and urge the use of more stringent criteria and monitoring mechanisms.
Human rights: Burma, Bangladesh, war crimes tribunal in Sierra Leone
In three resolutions adopted at the end of Thursday's plenary sitting, Parliament condemns the military crackdown on this summer's demonstrations in Burma, urges the Bangladesh Caretaker Government to accelerate the restoration of democracy and calls on the international community to guarantee continued funding for the special war crimes court in Sierra Leone.
Maximum Sustainable Yield - time is not ripe to propose introduction, says the EP
The European Parliament deplores the "deficient analysis" and "inadequate solutions" offered by the Commission's communication "Implementing sustainability in EU fisheries through maximum sustainable yield (MSY)". In a report adopted the House states that "the strict application of MSY would result in the short term in a considerable, and in some cases drastic, reduction in activity, employment and income for the Community fleet."
How to match national fleets to existing resources?
In a report adopted in the European Parliament on Member States' efforts to achieve a sustainable balance between fishing capacity and fishing opportunities, the House calls on the Commission to adopt the relevant initiatives for the possible transition from a fleet management system based on restricting vessel tonnage and power to a scheme under which fishing effort can be controlled through management by "geographical fishing areas."
Adopted texts from the Strasbourg plenary session 3-6 September 2007 can be found here : The draft agenda for the second September Strasbourg plenary - 24-27 September 2007 will shortly be available:
Draft Agenda - September II 20070823BRI09755
EN
1
A
/eplive/expert/multimedia/20070907MLT10181/media_20070907MLT10181.mp3
EN
2
A
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
3
A
/activities/public/plenSession.do;jsessionid=69CC4459FCFA627FCF32BA5E8A1B16B5.node2?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Opening of the Strasbourg session: condolences to this summer's disaster victims; deceased European leaders remembered
2007-09-10 - 13:45
Parliament's President Hans-Gert Pöttering opened the first plenary session following the summer recess by expressing his sadness at the recent deaths of Gaston Thorn and Raymond Barre, "who both served as distinguished European Commissioners and as prime ministers of their respective countries" (Luxembourg and France). He also sent Parliament's condolences to the victims of of this summer's natural disasters in Europe. The President had earlier reminded the House that last weekend marked the hundredth anniversary of the birth of Altiero Spinelli MEP, saying "his draft constitution for a European Union, which Parliament approved by a large majority in 1984, laid the foundations for many of the key changes introduced by successive treaty amendments, including a very substantial increase in the legislative power of this Parliament".
Natural disasters in Europe this summer
Mr Pöttering voiced sorrow at the impact of this summer's natural disasters in Europe, including the floods in Britain, the heatwave in the Mediterranean and the forest fires in Greece. A vote on a resolution on natural disasters took place on Tuesday, 4 September.
The President also mentioned the 500 victims of the earthquake in Peru on 15 August, the thousands of deaths from the violence in Iraq and the many refugees who risked their lives seeking to reach the EU via the Mediterranean and the Atlantic.
The House observed a minute's silence in honour of the lives of all these people.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
President of Portugal stresses solidarity as key European value
2007-09-10 - 13:45
The President of Portugal, Aníbal Cavaco Silva, gave an address to the House in which he focused above all on the theme of solidarity "as a fundamental pillar of European integration". Introducing Mr Cavaco Silva, Parliament's President Hans-Gert Pöttering said that previous Portuguese presidencies had been particularly "ambitious" in their scope and also that Portugal's history gave it a special position: When Lisbon had sent ships to all corners of the world starting in the 14th century, this had marked "the dawn of globalisation". Mr Pöttering also highlighted Portugal's "culture of tolerance and global thinking".
Reform Treaty
The Portuguese President told the House that one of the priorities of his country's EU presidency over the coming months would be to finalise the Reform Treaty based on the compromise reached at the European Council in June". He hoped this would "overcome a period of erosion of the European integration process".
Solidarity highlighted
Once the treaty was concluded, said Mr Cavaco Silva, the EU must concentrate on the challenges that worry European citizens: economic growth, employment, security, the environment, energy and globalisation.
He then turned to the central theme of his speech - solidarity - quoting from the Schumann Declaration of 1950: “Europe … will be built through concrete achievements which first create a de facto solidarity” and adding "To be a real Union we must preserve the feeling of community that was, and not by chance, the original designation of European integration".
Seeing poverty and social exclusion as crucial problems, he told the House "The principle of solidarity includes an ethical and moral idea of progress, for without it the founding values of the European idea will fade".
As President of Portugal, he had highlighted social inclusion as a top priority for his country. But, he added, "it is also true that Europe as a whole is also some way short of the social cohesion objectives that it aims to achieve and that it cannot forsake".
He pointed out "In the five-year period between 2001 and 2005, the risk-of-poverty rate in the countries of the Union stood at 16%". Moreover, "a more detailed look at these indicators shows that the old, the unemployed, particularly the long term unemployed, isolated persons and lone-parent families are the social groups facing the greatest risk of poverty and material deprivation".
What are the solutions? "I ask myself if our traditional social protection policies may not be reaching the limits of their efficacy", said Mr Cavaco Silva. Nowadays "we must acknowledge the need for the social model to adapt to the new challenges and the new contexts of the global world and of the information and knowledge society". Ultimately, "the best protection against poverty and social exclusion we can give citizens is to facilitate their participation in the job market". Therefore "We need more and better economic growth" together with education and training "to make the habit of lifelong learning widespread".
Africa, energy, environment
Moving on to external affairs, the President drew the House's attention to Africa, saying it was "a continent that we should advisedly consider and treat as a priority partner. Europe’s inertia in relation to Africa may carry a heavy strategic price for the Union". He attached great importance to the forthcoming EU-Africa Summit set to take place during the Portuguese Presidency.
He also stressed the importance of energy and the environment, saying these areas reflected "common vital interests and must be seen as the new driving force of European integration". He complimented his compatriot, Commission President José Manuel Barroso, on his "strategic vision and determination" on this front.
Lastly, Mr Cavaco Silva spoke of the role of the EU on the international stage, saying that "ensuring the conditions for Europe to be a central, influential actor in the global, multilateral and multipolar world that is emerging is crucial for the very sustainability of the European integration process".
Portugal's history as a leader of globalisation makes it "well aware that its capacity to act as a credible, influential actor on the world scene is decisive for the future of Europe", said the Portuguese President, who then concluded his speech by praising the European Parliament as "an institution that has always been at the forefront in defending the values and principles that forged the identity of Europe and wove the 'de facto solidarity' bequeathed by the founders".
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Better regulation in the EU - MEPs adopt four reports
2007-09-10 - 13:45
MEPs adopted four reports on better regulation in the EU. The key points of the package include emphasising plain and simple language, the importance of adequate and independent impact assessments, based on wide-ranging consultation of stakeholders and that "soft law" all too often constitutes an ambiguous and ineffective instrument which is liable to have a detrimental effect on Community legislation. "Better Regulation in the EU"
The first report strongly supports the process of Better Regulation with a view to strengthening the effectiveness, efficiency, coherence, accountability and transparency of EU law.
Plain and simple language
The House insists that, when presenting a legislative proposal, the Commission must avoid unclear and redundant expressions and preferably use plain and comprehensible language, whilst retaining terminological precision and legal certainty. The Parliament considers, in particular, that the practice of using incomprehensible acronyms and the over-abundance of needless recitals must be abandoned. The report encourages all levels of government to use, whenever possible, clear language that is easily understandable by citizens.
"Gold plating"
The report deplores Member States' practice of 'gold plating', and calls upon the Commission to investigate what further measures might be taken to prevent it, including the introduction of a right of direct action for citizens. The report calls for 'follow-up impact assessments' analysing how decisions are in fact implemented in Member States and at local level. MEPs support the increased use, where appropriate, of regulations.
Impact assessments
The report accepts that the Council, like Parliament, must consider the impact of its major amendments upon the Commission's impact assessment. The House stresses the need for cost-benefit analyses that better reflect the complex regulatory cost structures when directives are implemented by way of national legislation and change the regulatory framework within which companies and individuals operate. The report strongly advocates transparency and independent scrutiny of the carrying-out of impact assessments.
The House agrees with the Commission that better lawmaking cannot be achieved without an overall picture of the economic, social, environmental, health and international impact of each legislative proposal. The report fully supports, therefore, the setting-up within the Commission of an Impact Assessment Board under the authority of the Commission's President in order to monitor the application of these principles in the drafting of impact assessments by the responsible staff of the Commission. The House stresses, nevertheless, that, in order to guarantee a minimum level of independent scrutiny in the drafting of impact assessments, an independent panel of experts should be set up to monitor, by means of spot checks, the quality of opinions delivered by the Impact Assessment Board, and that representatives of interested parties should also be allowed to assist in conducting them.
Subsidiarity and proportionality - independent impact assessments needed
In a second own-initiative report on the application of the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality, the House considers that bad regulatory quality in the Member States and at Community level weakens the rule of law and alienates citizens from their institutions. The House stresses the importance of adequate and independent impact assessments, based on wide-ranging consultation of stakeholders.
Do nothing?
The House calls on the Commission to provide a sufficient number of scenarios and policy options (including ‘do-nothing’ options if necessary) as a basis for cost-effective and sustainable solutions.
Reduce administration costs by 25 % by 2012
The report welcomes the Commission action programme to measure the administrative cost for undertakings in Europe and to reduce needless and disproportionate administrative burdens by 25% by 2012. The House notes that the strategy for a 25% reduction refers to needless administrative burdens for undertakings and cannot, therefore, be equated to a deregulation, nor lead to a change in the policy objectives and level of ambition contained in Community legislation. The report calls on the Commission to ensure that the reduction in needless administrative burdens arising from regulations should not be at the expense of the original objectives of the regulations concerned.
In this light, the Parliament supports the Commission proposal for the introduction of thresholds for all information requirements, limiting them for SMEs wherever possible.
MEPs call on the Member States to extend their efforts to reduce the burden resulting from purely national legislation.
MEPs welcome strategy for the simplification of the regulatory environment
In a third report MEPs welcome the fact that, for the first time, the simplification initiatives have been included in the Commission’s legislative and work programme for 2007, in confirmation of the political priority to be given to the simplification strategy.
The House calls on the Commission systematically to include from now on the simplification initiatives in a specific part of the legislative and work programme, to indicate therein what priority it intends to give to each individual simplification initiative and, to that end, to set out its simplification proposals already in its annual policy strategy at the start of the annual legislative programming process. The report calls on the Commission to avoid the proliferation of documents containing lists of simplification initiatives, in order to have as clear a reference framework as possible.
National level
The report calls on the Commission to make every effort to ensure that the process being promoted at European level to simplify regulation and generally to improve its quality is not undermined at national level by internal rules or technical barriers. It calls on the Commission to guide and monitor this process also at national level, for instance by acting as a centre for collecting and disseminating the best practices developed within the European Union and its Member States and, not least, responding to indications from stakeholders.
Finally, MEPs stress that regular and thorough impact assessments play a key role in the simplification process and that such assessments should be considered by the Council and Parliament when amendments are made to a proposal during the legislative process.
Soft law" instruments: "Too often ambiguous and ineffective"
The final an own-initiative report on the institutional and legal implications of the use of "soft law" instruments considers that, in the context of the Community, soft law all too often constitutes an ambiguous and ineffective instrument which is liable to have a detrimental effect on Community legislation and institutional balance and should be used with caution, even where it is provided for in the Treaty.
The report recalls that so-called soft law cannot be a substitute for legal acts and instruments, which are available to ensure the continuity of the legislative process, especially in the field of culture and education.
Consumers
MEPs call on the Commission to give special consideration to the effect of soft law on consumers and their possible means of redress before proposing any measure involving soft-law instruments.
Sharing of best practice
The report considers the open method of coordination to be legally dubious, as it operates without sufficient parliamentary participation and judicial review. The House believes that it should therefore be employed only in exceptional cases and that it would be desirable to consider how Parliament might become involved in the procedure. Text adopted by the EP
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert.do#
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Environment
Natural disasters, EU solidarity fund needed without delay and European reaction force
2007-09-10 - 13:45
In adopting a joint resolution on natural disasters, MEPs call on the Commission to mobilise the current EU Solidarity Fund in the most flexible manner possible, without delay, while calling for greater spending on flood defences. The House also request the creation of a European force that could immediately react in emergencies. On the fires in Greece, MEPs want the Member States to abstain from commercialisation, to strengthen penal sanctions for criminal acts that damage the environment. The resolution which was adopted by a large majority in a show of hands makes reference to the devastating fires and the violent floods which have caused death and destruction throughout the European continent, in particular in Greece and the United Kingdom, during the summer of 2007, affecting EU Member States, outermost regions, in particular Martinique and Guadeloupe, which were hit by Hurricane Dean, applicant countries and the EU's immediate neighbours. MEPs point out that the area burned in July alone was as large as the total area burned during the whole of last year.
European Union Solidarity Fund
The House asks the Commission to mobilise the current EU Solidarity Fund (EUSF) in the most flexible manner possible and without delay, avoiding time-consuming procedures or administrative obstacles. MEPs consider, in this respect, that the necessary resources need to be made available immediately for the purpose of relieving the suffering and satisfying the needs of victims and their immediate families by means of the EUSF, any other Community Instrument (e.g. Structural Funds or EARDF), or any other possible financial means.
MEPs urge the Commission, especially of a financial nature, so as to support the rehabilitation of the regions which have suffered heavy damages, restore the productive potential in the affected areas, seek to re-launch job creation and take the appropriate measures to compensate the social costs inherent in the loss of jobs and other income sources.
A European disaster force?
MEPs request the creation of a European force that could immediately react in emergencies, as proposed in former Commissioner BARNIER's report (see link below), and regret the lack of response and follow-up in this respect. The House also emphasises, in this context, the need to continue the development of a rapid reaction capability based on the civil protection modules of the Member States. MEPs ask the Commission to draw up a concrete proposal to this end while underlining the role of Member States and their local authorities in effectively preventing and combating fires.
Failed to demonstrate "sufficient solidarity"
MEPs note that Member States' resources to combat forest fires, especially by aerial means, are limited and that it is not always possible for Member States to offer support when the resources are needed nationally. The House notes, as a result, that some Member States received less assistance than others and had to rely on bilateral agreements with non-EU states for assistance. MEPs regret, therefore, that in some cases the EU as a whole failed to display sufficient solidarity.
The EP expresses its condolences to and strong solidarity with the relatives of those who lost their lives and with residents in the affected areas. MEPs pay tribute to the fire-fighters, professionals and volunteers who have worked tirelessly and risked their lives to extinguish fires, rescue people and limit damage from this summer’s natural disasters, as well as to the many individual citizens who fought to save their livelihoods and their surrounding environment.
Floods in the UK
The House emphasises the need to speed up the procedure to access EU funds for the recovery of agricultural land following floods and fires and for more financial aid to be made available in the development of flood defences.
James ELLES (EPP-ED, UK, Conservative, South East) said: "We have had amongst the wettest months of June and July on record, in my country. As a result, the Association of British Insurers reckons damages could be up to EUR 5 billion. Ten lives have been lost, countless homes have been destroyed, countless businesses dislocated and infrastructure has been destroyed. Therefore, it would be extremely important that floods are also included in any action which the Commission wishes to propose."
Richard CORBETT (PES, UK Labour Yorkshire and the Humber) said: "I draw attention in particular to the floods that affected many parts of England, including my own constituency of Yorkshire and the Humber. I would urge the Commission and all those involved in processing the requests that have now been made for assistance from the European Union budget – and for the solidarity that our Union can display – to make sure that in all these cases those funds are mobilised as rapidly as possible without undue bureaucratic impediment. As long as the decision is taken quickly and people know that the money is on its way, it is possible to plan even before the money actually arrives. It is also very important, symbolically and politically, to make this gesture of solidarity with all the regions that have suffered this summer."
Forest fires - abstain from commercialisation and increase penal sanctions
MEPs call on the Commission to carry out more research geared to improving forest fire prevention and forest fire-fighting methods and materials and to review planning and land use. The House urges the Member States, therefore, to take strong action to improve and implement their forest protection legislative framework and to abstain from commercialisation, reclassification and privatisation activities, thus limiting intrusion and speculation.
The EP deplores the fact that so many of these forest fires appear to have been started by acts of arson, and is particularly concerned that criminal acts of arson are increasingly to blame for forest fires in Europe. The House calls on the Member States, therefore, to strengthen penal sanctions for criminal acts that damage the environment and, in particular, for those causing forest fires.
The House condemns the practice of legalisation of illegal construction on protected and generally non-authorised areas, and urges that all attempts at reducing forest protection via changes to the Greek Constitution (Article 24) be stopped immediately.
Finally, the House urges the Member States to ensure that all burned forest areas will remain forests and are covered by reforestation programmes, and that no land use change should be allowed, to implement adequate legislation on conservation and appropriate land use including sustainable farm and forestry practices, water management and efficient risk management and to immediately plan extended reconstruction policies for tourism and the affected local economy. Text adopted by the EP on this summer's natural disasters - 4 September 07
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0362 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Environment
Unified position needed on desertification conference
2007-09-10 - 13:45
MEPs expressed their support for the United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification, and its reform process and call on the Commission and the Member States to present a unified position in the COP meeting, in close cooperation with ACP partners. This was the message of a resolution adopted on the EU objectives for the 8th meeting of the Conference of Parties (COP8) to the to be held in Madrid from 3 to 14 September 2007. The House expresses its support for a strategic plan for action with time-bound targets. MEPs call for the EU to engage constructively in the formulation and negotiation of the 10-year strategic plan in order to build strong and efficient mechanisms for an effective implementation of the Convention. In this connection, the House calls for particular attention to be given to:
∙ achieving progress on the ground and in local communities
∙ the synergies with achieving UNCCD and Millenium Development Goals
∙ capacity building beyond central level, focusing on local stakeholders;
MEPs recommend organising a Conference to assess the implementation and effectiveness of Action Plans in the most affected regions, notably in Africa, before future Conferences of Parties.
MEPs call for the CAP reform to introduce binding criteria on combating desertification and land degradation in the affected areas in the European Union. Parliament calls, moreover, for a prevention and implementation policy in order to maintain people in the rural areas.
The European Parliament also want the Commission to consider the establishment of a European Drought Observatory, that would collect knowledge and propose mitigation and follow-up measures in order to minimise the effects of the droughts on Europe.
The House calls for comprehensive forest care to reduce as much as possible the fire load of forests and the spread and velocity of fires and points out that the recovered biomass could contribute to the economic feasibility of the operation.
Finally, the House calls on the Commission and the Member States to step up international cooperation in the implementation of the UNCCD by providing additional incentives and financial support, and to support transboundary cooperation water programmes. MEPs call, furthermore, for the issue to be put to the agenda of next EU-Africa summit.
Text adopted by the EP on 6 September 07
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0380 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Justice and home affairs
MEPs debate the fight against terrorism - a new EU anti-terrorism co-ordinator?
2007-09-10 - 13:45
MEPs debated the fight against terrorism with statements from the Commission and the Council. The debate focussed on whether current EU legislation and data-sharing between the Member States should be fully assessed as to its effectiveness. MEPs also questioned whether the Council should appoint a new EU anti-terrorism co-ordinator following Mr de Vries decision to step down in February 2007. The House will vote on a resolution on the issue during its plenary session in October. EU Member States must go on co-operating in their implementation of counter-terrorism measures, so as to ensure they respect fundamental rights and freedoms, stressed Mr Manuel Lobo Antunes Minister for European Affairs, speaking for the Council.
Terrorism is a scourge that must be fought at both national and international levels - it is a global threat that needs a global answer, he continued. Efforts to improve information exchange and co-ordination with third countries are under way in international fora, led by the United States, and also closer to home, e.g. through dedicated Euro-Mediterranean meetings and work on the Mediterranean code of conduct against terrorism.
Progress in implementing the EU's counter-terrorism strategy, which relies on prevention, protection, prosecution and reaction, is reviewed in the Council every six months. For example, measures to combat radicalisation, recruitment, and terrorist fund-raising are regularly reviewed for effectiveness.
Co-ordination among Member States has produced concrete results, such as the recommendation on explosives. However, noted Mr Lobo Antunes, although Europol has "effective" files fed by Member States, police and judicial co-operation is hampered by the requirement of unanimity in the Council, and it is to be hoped that the reform treaty will help to overcome this.
Mr Lobo Antunes stressed that the EU Joint Situation Centre (SITCEN), provides threat assessments useful to the Council, but has no co-ordinating role. The Council, and the High Representative for Common and Foreign Security Policy, are considering whether to appoint a new counter-terrorism co-ordinator.
Franco Frattini, Vice-President of the Commission with responsibility for Justice, Freedom and Security, told the House that the Commission "continues to be fully committed to the implementation of the EU counter-terrorism strategy" and to finding the right balance between "the right to life" and "the right to privacy and procedural rights".
All sources indicated that "the threat of new terrorist attacks continues to be high", he said and pointed to the thwarting this week of planned terrorist attacks in Denmark and Germany. At least this proved the effectiveness of prevention measures: he described the stopping of the attacks as "fantastic result", to applause from the House.
Mr Frattini then outlined a package of measures in preparation by the Commission. First, an EU Action Plan on the security of explosives to be adopted in November, which would set up an EU explosives database and early warning system, e.g. for use if explosives are stolen. Second, draft legislation to make terrorist misuse of the internet punishable EU-wide. Third, legislation for an EU system of passenger name records, since "the Union is at least as much a potential target of a terrorist attack as the United States and the use of PNR is an important law enforcement tool" for protecting EU citizens. Fourth, a report evaluating the implementation by the Member States of the EU framework decision on terrorism.
The Commissioner stressed the need for mutual trust and exchange of information between Member States to combat terrorism, arguing that this required both an appropriate legal framework and the promotion of shared international experiences.
In conclusion, he said, "we should not forget that an overwhelming majority of our citizens - 84% according to a recent Eurobarometer poll - are strongly in favour of EU action to combat terrorism and organised crime". Naturally any such action must be line with fundamental rights and Article 6 of the Treaty.
Political group speakers
Speaking for the EPP-ED, Manfred WEBER (DE) said that the recent arrests in Denmark and Germany had shown that there was a still a lot of work to do. Terrorists, he said, used networks and the Internet to communicate and therefore there was a need to work at an EU level. He called for a an assessment of current laws on the fight against terrorism as well as a new impetus. The roots of terrorism need also to be addressed at the cultural level.
Jan Marinus WIERSMA (NL) for the PES group that there should be co-operation at the EU level. It was paramount to tackle "recruitment and radicalisation and the combating of religious extreme right-wing groups" at the EU level. The EU should examine a Dutch initiative where funding was made available to focus on those who may be susceptible to radicalisation.
Graham WATSON (UK), speaking for the ALDE group, said: "Once again laws that take away our freedoms risk entering by the back door. I do not argue that counter terrorism laws are unnecessary. The arrest yesterday of three people in Germany, the arrest this morning of another three in Denmark shows the continuing threat that terrorists pose to our society. My Group is united in its belief that we need more judicial cooperation to make EUROPOL and EUROJUST as effective as possible. Here in Parliament we should be insisting on sunset clauses for anti-terror laws so that legislation susceptible to abuse does not remain on the statute books any longer than necessary. Karl Popper once said, 'We must plan for freedom, and not only for security, if for no other reason than only freedom can make security secure'."
For the UEN group, Konrad SZYMAŃSKI (PL) said: "Since the terrorist attacks in New York, Madrid and London, the co-operation between the Member States has improved. The concerns relating to data sharing should not block this co-operation. International terrorism uses armed movements in an unprecedented manner. This is why it is necessary to apply legislation aiming to fight against terrorism".
Speaking on behalf of the Greens/EFA, Cem ÖZDEMIR (DE) stressed the need to take targeted and effective measures. His group would like to have an overall view of existing measures and their effectiveness. It must be possible to justify to citizens what has actually been done. The moral dimension is defending values, which was not done in the case of CIA renditions in Europe. The Commission must understand the imperative need to involve the European Parliament. The human rights violations resulting from inclusion on lists of terrorist organisations, notably in the case of people listed by mistake, must be forwarded to the Civil Liberties Committee. Finally, the Greens/EFA group would like to know the Council's intentions with respect to the role of counter-terrorism co-ordinator and to receive an evaluation of Mr De Vries' activities during the months of his mandate.
For the GUE/NGL group, Tobias PFLÜGER (DE), said that the debate that we are holding here is central for democracy in the European Union. Since 11 September 2001, there has been a war on against terrorism. NATO's military strategy is difficult to reverse. In Afghanistan, we are getting into a situation similar to Iraq. The war against terrorism fuels this terrorism.
Within the EU, the framework decision on combating terrorism is bringing new laws and new definitions of terrorism, as is the case in Germany. This legislation must not encroach upon respect for fundamental rights.
On behalf of his group, Johannes BLOKLAND (IND/DEM, NL) said the central issues were what measures had been taken, had they achieved their goal and were they in line with the rule of law? In his view, for example, the rules on carrying liquids on planes were not effective, nor had the huge amount of data collected for security purposes since 2001 "always been used effectively".
He noted with regret that former EU counter-terrorism coordinator Gijs De Vries had said no Member State was willing to pursue a European policy on counter-terrorism. Mr Blokland urged the Council to at least provide the EP with regular, consistent information on this front.
Andreas MÖLZER (AT), speaking for the Identity, Tradition and Sovereignty group, referred to this week's thwarted terror attacks in Denmark and Germany, emphasising that the threat came from young Muslims within the EU, who attended Koranic schools and encountered "preachers who preach hate". There was now a "parallel society of Islamists in Europe". He added that "our tolerance leads to loopholes" and that "we should stop the multicultural approach and underline our own basic European culture".
Non-aligned MEP Jim ALLISTER (UK) said it was important "to denounce terrorism" but, he asked, "within the EU do we always consistently practise what we preach?" In this connection, he criticised the deputy first minister of Northern Ireland, Martin McGuinness, for "vehemently attacking" the German government for requesting the extradition of an individual suspected of involvement in a terrorist attack some years ago in Germany. "We can't pick and choose in resisting terrorism", he said. He also referred to the "recourse of ETA to active terrorism", arguing that this showed "seldom does a terrorist leopard change its spots".
British and Irish speakers
Sarah LUDFORD (ALDE, UK) stated that Europol tells us that there were almost 500 terrorist attacks in the EU last year. This is, of course, a major criminal threat but so are drug smuggling, people trafficking and corruption. Where is the Council action, she questioned, to insist that all Member States sign and ratify the European Convention on Human Trafficking? Where was the Council protest when the UK Government terminated a major corruption probe in January against national champion arms manufacturer BAE?
As Vice-Chairman of the European Parliament's Inquiry on Extraordinary Rendition, Mrs Ludford stated that she shared the outrage others have expressed about the complete silence of the Council in the face of the findings that many Member States were complicit in massive human rights abuses of abduction and torture.
The Council, she said, would do well to look in its own backyard before it gobbles up the civil liberties of EU citizens. "MEPs have had no information on the implementation of the framework decision on terrorism passed over five years ago. Has every Member State fully transposed it? How many cases have there been? How many investigations or convictions have been recorded? We know that agencies, even within one state, will not share information because of jealousies, power struggles and turf wars, let alone through cross-border cooperation. Why not make that a priority instead of frenetically legislating to take away our privacy all the time?
There is also a lot of inconsistency when it comes to tackling radicalism. This is an important subject, but it also implies the integration of the vast majority of moderate Muslims, yet there are parts of the EU where great difficulties are placed in the way of the building of mosques. Why not look at that?"
Stating that this debate is about the safety of our people and the preservation of our way of life, our liberal democracy, the rule of law and the defence of freedom, Timothy KIRKHOPE (EPP-ED, UK) said that terrorism strikes at the very heart of all of these things. In all its forms, terrorism defines the fight between good and evil, and we must remain ever vigilant. .
Terrorism, Mr Kirkhope stated, "is an act of war on the fabric of our society. It is perpetrated by criminals and murderers who detest our liberal democracy and freedom. Terrorist groups must be banned and those who perpetrate violence, incite terrorism or give succour to terrorists should be tackled. In terms of the action that EU Member States can take together, we saw at the weekend the arrest of ETA bomb-makers. This shows that joint investigation teams add value to the anti-terrorism fight."
"The security of the travelling public must be our prime concern. The concern of ourselves, of governments, airport operators and airlines. But, as with all legislation, improvements can be brought about in the light of experience and I believe there is a case, and a good one, for a review of how that is operating."
At the same time we should rely fundamentally on available intelligence to assist legislators like ourselves in determining the nature and extent of the ongoing threat. He commended Commissioner Frattini's proposals which are positive in that respect. Mr Kirkhope appreciated that there is a delicate balance but, he concluded, we must always do what we can to protect our people from the evil and murderous intent of terrorism.
Michael CASHMAN (PES,UK) welcomed the strategy review and tackling the roots of terrorism. Now above all, he stated, we need to act as 27 Member States, not separately, and act in conjunction with our allies, including the United States. The United States is not a problem. The attacks on the United States did not occur on September 11, they occurred before then, and an attack upon one is arguably an attack upon every single one of us.
Proinsias DE ROSSA (PES, IE) strongly supported the demand for effective, efficient, balanced and accountable security at the European and international level in addressing terrorism.
If we are, he said, to avoid feeding the threat, democratic accountability is essential to ensure balance and proportionality. But a security response, no matter how effective, is not sufficient. We must, he continued, address the international, political and economic injustices which certain demagogues are using to tap into a youthful hunger for justice. Their appeal, he said, is based on a tabloid history, a tabloid politics, which denies the nuances and contradictions which are integral to all of our political and religious traditions.
The battle for hearts and minds requires us to avoid demonising whole communities of religious believers. It requires open dialogue, not confrontation, it requires us to address the real and perceived disconnection that some young people are experiencing. Europe's idea of 'unity through diversity' could help, but that requires courageous political leadership which unfortunately is sadly lacking at Council level.
Concluding, Mr De Rossa appealed to the House to avoid sloppy language which implies sloppy thinking. Equating fundamentalism automatically with terrorism is sloppy thinking. There are, he said, millions upon millions of Catholics, Protestants, Jews and Muslims who believe literally in the old testament, in the new testament and the Koran, but they are not terrorists. There are a tiny number of people who have a literal reading of their religion who are involved in terrorism. We have, he concluded, to address why that is the case.
Council response
Summing up, Manuel LOBO ANTUNES sought to reassure MEPs as to the Portuguese Presidency's readiness to co-operate with Parliament in this "difficult and complex debate".The debate had brought forth praise as well as criticism. Some had wanted counter-terrorism policy to advance, others to retreat, but everyone agreed on the need resolutely to fight this scourge.
Mr Lobos Antunes also stressed that new threats require willingness to learn, improve counter-terrorism methods, including deeper international co-operation and act to prevent further outrages. But the fight must be fought with full respect for our values and principles.
He concluded by reiterating the hope that a new counter-terrorism co-ordinator would be appointed soon.
Vote will take place on 11 October 2007
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Justice and home affairs
Fundamental Rights and Justice": specific programme "drugs prevention and information", 2007-2013
2007-09-10 - 13:45
The European Parliament adopted, at second reading, the report drafted by Inger SEGELSTRÖM (PES, SE) on the Council common position for the specific programme "Drug prevention and information" as part of the General programme "Fundamental Rights and Justice" 2007 -2013. Parliament approved the Council common position as soon as was possible in order to ensure the timely launch of the specific programme. The House expects the Commission to confirm in plenary its commitment to transmit the necessary information relating to the draft annual work programmes to Parliament. There will be a reference to the statement of the Commission in the legislative resolution as there has been a reference to the Commission's statement in the legislative resolution concerning the specific programme "Civil Justice" adopted by Parliament on 11 July 2007.
The general objectives of the programme are re-defined: to prevent and reduce drug use, dependence and drug related harms; to contribute to the improvement of information on drug use; to support the implementation of the EU Drugs Strategy.
It should be noted that the financial envelope for the implementation of the instrument from 1 January 2007 to 31 December 2013 is €21.35m. Text, as adopted by the EP, on drugs prevention and information
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0378 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Public health
MEPs concerned about alcohol, alcopops and binge drinking
2007-09-10 - 13:45
The European Parliament adopted an own initiative report on the European Union strategy to support Member States in reducing alcohol-related harm. The report raises several issues including: labelling and warnings, binge-drinking, "alcopops" and reducing accidents caused by drinking and driving. The report was adopted by a large majority in a show of hands. MEPs are worried about the increase in alcohol consumption among minors and young people and note a worrying trend on their part to start drinking at an ever-earlier age and, given their greater willingness to take risks, to engage in dangerous forms of behaviour such as binge drinking, other forms of hazardous alcohol consumption which aim at drunkenness, mixed consumption of alcohol and drugs, and driving whilst under the influence of alcohol and drugs.
The report calls on the Member States to pay particular attention to vulnerable social groups, such as children, young people and pregnant women, and to address the problems of hazardous and harmful alcohol consumption by young people, workers and drivers by means of information and awareness-raising campaigns and, where appropriate, a review of compliance with existing national laws.
EP calls for a comparative study on labelling and advertising
The report points out that Member States are currently able to introduce obligatory health warnings for alcoholic beverages. The House recalls that front of pack labels may include the warnings that alcohol can cause serious health and mental health problems, that alcohol is addictive and that alcohol consumption during pregnancy may be harmful to the foetus.
MEPs note that the existence of different national labelling requirements has clear implications for the EU internal market and therefore urge the Commission to initiate a comparative study on impact and effectiveness of various information and communication means, including labelling and advertising, applied in Member States with a view to reducing hazardous and harmful alcohol consumption, and to publish the results before 31 December 2009.
The report calls on the Commission and Member States, with the involvement of relevant non-governmental organisations and economic associations in the context of the Health and Alcohol Forum proposed by the Commission, to encourage the exchange of proven practices, in particular with a view to preventing hazardous and harmful alcohol consumption among children and young people, and to adopt the following measures:
(i) to launch education campaigns to be conducted by Member States and interest groups on the risks of hazardous and harmful alcohol consumption, especially through school-based educational programmes directed towards children and adolescents, in particular by encouraging them to engage in regular sports activities, but also towards parents in order to prepare them to speak about alcohol-related problems within a family setting, and towards teachers; the idea of responsible and moderate consumption by adults should also be put across at an early stage,
(ii) to limit the access to and availability of alcoholic drinks for young people, for instance by strictly implementing the existing legislation which prohibits selling alcohol to young people, by intensifying controls on sellers and distributors, such as restaurants and bars, supermarkets and retailers,
(iii) to involve retailers and the catering industry in identifying and implementing concrete measures to prevent the selling and serving of alcohol and alcohol pops to minors,
(iv) to particularly focus on such beverages as "alcopops", which are specifically targeted at young people, in order to ensure that their alcoholic nature can be clearly identified by consumers through measures such as stricter labelling requirements for such drinks, and requirements for clearer separation of alcopops from soft drinks in shops, and the selling to minors prohibited; also to promote higher taxes on such beverages,
(v) to draw up guidelines, to be implemented at national level, setting an age limit for purchasing, selling and serving alcoholic drinks,
(vi) to promote at European level blood alcohol content (BAC) limits as close as is workable to 0.00 % for new drivers, as already proposed by Parliament in its resolution of 18 January 2007 on the European Road Safety Action Programme - mid-term review, bearing in mind that some prepared foods may contain traces of alcohol,
(vii) to provide more possibilities to know and verify the blood alcohol content also through the use of auto-calculation on the Internet and the widespread availability of breathanalysers, especially in discos, pubs and stadiums, and on motorways and roads in general, in particular during night hours, and to ensure that the message conveyed to the consumer is that drinking and driving are not compatible,
(viii) to take any necessary measures to increase controls on drink-driving to the maximum,
(ix) to strengthen the sanctions for drink-driving imposed by Member States, such as prolonged withdrawal of the driving licence,
(x) to encourage Member States to ensure the availability of alternative public means of transportation for drivers who have consumed alcohol,
(xi) to encourage the extension of "designated-driver programmes" ("who drives doesn't drink") through educational means in view of their beneficial impact on road safety, while reminding passengers of the effects of hazardous and harmful alcohol consumption,
(xii) to set up a European prize for the best campaign against hazardous and harmful alcohol consumption directed at schools and young people,
(xiii) to intensify the exchange of best practice between Member States on how to work against hazardous and harmful alcohol consumption, and between national police forces on controls on drink-driving by young people,
(xiv) to promote initiatives designed to guarantee psychological follow-up for individuals taken to hospital with acute alcohol intoxication. Text, as adopted by the EP, on reducing alcohol-related harm
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0377 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Civil protection
An efficient European emergency number ("112") and increased safety for its citizens
2007-09-10 - 13:45
The European Parliament adopted a written declaration requesting an evaluation of the quality of the operation of "112", the little known European emergency number. The declaration was adopted with the largest majority ever to have been attained for a written declaration (530 MEPs out of a total of 785). The declaration calls upon the Member States and the Commission to engage the necessary processes and resources for ensuring an efficient 112 service all over the EU. The number was first introduced in 1991 so that travellers in Europe would be able to dial just one number, rather than having to memorise a different one for each country. (See links below)
This declaration was sponsored by a cross-party coalition consisting of Vice Presidents Diana WALLIS (ALDE, UK), Gérard ONESTA (Greens/EFA, FR) and Alejo VIDAL-QUADRAS (EPP-ED, ES) and by former MEP Marc TARABELLA and Dimitrios PAPADIMOULIS (GUE/NGL, GR).
Speaking in Strasbourg, the five MEPs in an agreed statement said :
"The tragic natural disasters which occurred in Europe this summer should remind us how important it is for all of our citizens to know this emergency number, which is already in operation in all 27 Member States. Another crucial aspect is that all calls should be properly dealt with. Unfortunately, a large majority of European citizens are not familiar with the 112 number, and too many transposition problems persist in the Member States, who often lack the necessary technology or organisation".
The MEPs continued:
"Now that the Parliament as a whole has endorsed our declaration, we fully expect the European Commission to create a European day to promote awareness of "112" (on 11 February), and to proceed without delay to an evaluation of all 112 services in Europe."
"To this day, only Portugal, currently holding the rotating Presidency of the Union, has made such an evaluation. We hope that it will show leadership and encourage the other Member States to go through the same process."
The declaration calls upon the Commission to evaluate by independent bodies the real state of implementation of the 112 throughout the EU, using the methodology developed in 2003. Lastly, the Parliament calls on the Commission to deal with emergency telecommunications by involving all policies concerned and by building upon the example of countries who deal with this issue in new and innovative ways.
MEPs point out that that proper implementation of the 112 concerns several EU policies (telecommunications, health, internal security and civil protection), while affecting others (transport, tourism) and consider that the EU needs to establish high quality, interoperable emergency telecommunications between citizens and emergency services in view of reducing suffering and the loss of human life during everyday accidents and major disasters. Text adopted by the EP on the European emergency call number 112
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/writtenDecl/wdFastAdopted.do?language=EN#
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Transport
MEPs call for liquids on planes legislation to be repealed unless new conclusive facts are brought forward
2007-09-10 - 13:45
The House adopted a resolution with 464 votes in favour, 158 against and 70 abstentions on the restrictions imposed by the EU on liquids that passengers can take on board aeroplanes. MEPs call upon the Commission to review urgently and – if no further conclusive facts are brought forward – to repeal Regulation (EC) No 1546/2006 (introduction of liquids onto aircraft). The particular amendment on the possible repeal was adopted with 382 votes in favour, 298 against and 15 abstentions. In the resolution, MEPs express their concern that the costs engendered by the regulation may not be proportionate to the added value achieved by additional security provisions.
The European Parliament supports all security measures against terrorist risks in aviation. The need for high-quality security is unquestionable. However, security measures need to be "realistically" designed to minimise the risk and may not be "disproportionate".
With regard to the liquids regulation, MEPs argue that it causes increased costs to airports and operators as well as to passengers resulting from the confiscation of private property. MEPs also recognise the "substantial inconvenience and disruption" caused to passengers, especially transit passengers.
Better public information
The House also calls upon the Commission to act, as provided for by Article 232 of the EC Treaty, by publishing and making available to citizens the verbatim text of the prohibitions and restrictions which can be applied to them, as well as the list of exceptions to the same and the reasons for the measure.
During the debate in Strasbourg in February, David MARTIN (PES, UK, Labour, Scotland) said: "I have been slightly surprised at the ferocity of the attacks by some of my colleagues on this system. It is clear that there is a serious and more subtle threat to airport security than we have ever faced and that the screening of hand baggage needs to be made as easy as possible. As the Commissioner rightly said, liquid explosives can be disguised as very innocuous substances, and a patchwork of 27 separate regulations would have been unacceptable. I therefore support the initiative he took in introducing these measures but, as he rightly says, these measures can be improved and need to be examined in the light of experience." Text adopted by the EP on 5 September 07
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0374 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Transport
Inland transport of dangerous goods - simplifying EU legislation
2007-09-10 - 13:45
By a large majority, the EP adopted a report on harmonising the rules for the transport of dangerous goods by making them as user-friendly as possible. Boguslaw Liberadzki (PES, PL) says that the new proposal integrates the existing rules into one piece of EU law which will cover the land transport modes road and rail and include inland waterway transport as well. It is expected that this report at first reading in co-decision may lead to a direct agreement with Council. The House also adopted an amendment which stipulates that Member States may still lay down specific requirements for the national and international transport of dangerous goods within their territory as regards vehicles, wagons and inland waterway vessels not covered by the new directive, where specified, the use of prescribed routes, including the use of prescribed modes of transport and special rules for the transport of dangerous goods in passenger trains.
A broad majority of MEPs believe that the proposals will contribute to the objective of legislative simplification and that these simpler rules would also mean safer transport. The current EU laws on the transport of dangerous goods already covers road and rail transport but these rules are complicated and difficult to implement for citizens, transport operators and national authorities.
In including inland waterways as well, the new legislative format will be much easier to understand and apply than the current legislation. So far, no EU rules for inland waterways exist. Taking into consideration that the impact of this sector is growing, it is felt that an accident in inland waterways might have serious consequences and that one single set of rules would reduce this risk.
The total amount of dangerous goods transport in the EU is about 110 billion tonne/kms a year, of which 58% by road, 25% by rail and 17% by inland waterway. The share of dangerous goods transport in total freight transport is 8%. The current international agreements regulating international transport of dangerous goods are based on UN Recommendations, which have been implemented in the inland transport sector in Europe by means of three instruments:
- European Agreement concerning the international carriage of dangerous goods by road (ADR);
- Regulations concerning international carriage of dangerous goods by rail (RID);
- European Agreement concerning the international carriage of dangerous goods by inland waterways (ADN)
ADN is in the process of ratification and is expected to be in force in 2009 at the latest. According to Commission information, nine of the EU countries are signatories of ADN. Two other ADN-based systems (ADN-R and ADN-D) are currently applied in the areas of the Rhine and Danube.
But for historic reasons, the existing EU legislation on the transport of dangerous goods is rather complicated. The Commission says that, if nothing is done, the current complex rules are to become even more complex with changes in international agreements. Obsolete rules would remain and confuse the sectors and the risk of non-compliance would increase.
The new proposal would repeal four existing directives and two Commission decisions. MEPs also take the view that this simplified Community legislation would also simplify the transposition into national legislation. Administrative procedures for consignor and consignee, will be easier with simplified and harmonised rules. Documentation of transport operations and vehicles is also expected to be simpler with harmonised rules, as would be the training of persons involved and the work dangerous goods safety advisors.
Although welcoming the proposal, the Parliament endorsed amendments including several of technical nature which permit Member States to regulate for safety reasons the transport of dangerous goods not yet covered by the Directive and especially in passenger trains. Based on the two-year rhythm of the international agreements ARD, RID and ADN (see above) the period of renewing the authorisation is brought to six instead of five years. Text adopted by the EP on inland transport of dangerous goods
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0370 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Transport
Megatrucks on EU roads? Yes, but under strict conditions
2007-09-10 - 13:45
The European Parliament adopted by a large majority (577 votes in favour to 52 against with 51 abstentions) proposing that the controversial use of mega-liners or 60 tonne lorries in the EU should only be allowed for certain routes at the request of, and within the Member States. During a lively debate, Members were strongly divided on this matter, with some of them claiming that introducing proposals for admitting 60t lorries would induce a definitive imbalance in favour of only one mode of transport and would have a serious impact on the environment and with others saying that this form of road transport innovation deserved a change.
Parliament adopted an own-initiative report by Inés AYALA SENDER (PES, ES) on a Commission communication on freight transport logistics in Europe in which the issue of the megatrucks was raised. In a compromise reached by the EPP-ED and PES groups, the House is now suggesting that the use of mega-liners should only be allowed for certain routes by the Commission. An evaluation of the requests would have to respect factors such as the existing infrastructures and safety aspects. The use of mega-liners should, consequently, be permitted under strict conditions only.
Transport Commissioner Jacques BARROT told MEPs that the Commission would take a decision after a study regarding experiences with mega-liners and only after a thorough exchange of views on this issue with all those concerned.
During the debate, Mathieu GROSCH (EPP-ED, BE) said that Member States should decide. Gilles SAVARY (PES, FR) took the view that admitting mega-liners would be a disaster for the railways in the Community. Jeanine HENNIS-PLASSCHAERT (ALDE, NL) said that it was not helpful to turn down innovative transport concepts. Eva LICHTENBERGER (Greens/EFA, AT) and Erik MEIJER (GUE/NGL, NL) expressed their "no" towards the megatrucks, as did Margrete AUKEN (Greens/EFA, DK) and Reinhard RACK (EPP-ED, AT). The latter said that European logistic sector lacked software studies on intelligent modes of transport, but not hardware like megatrucks, which should not be allowed in mountain areas and agglomerations at all. Finally, Georg JARZEMBOWSKI (EPP-ED, DE) Corien WORTMANN-KOOL (EPP-ED, NL) were in favour of the compromise.
MEPs further welcome the intention of the Commission to present an Action Plan for Freight Logistics in Autumn 2007, which must serve to put logistics on the political agenda and raise its profile by focusing on its potential, appeal and usefulness.
In order to achieve a further simplification of administrative burden, Members demand that an EU single document for all carriage of transport must provide undertakings with clear legal certainty and replace the large number of existing documents.
They deplore the impact of the Council's position on the funding of the trans-European Transport Networks (TENs) and demand that the added value of the logistics component to be taken into account in future TEN-T funding decisions.
Other amendments were adopted on training attractiveness of logistics professions (priority for training and life-long training for all staff), urban transport planning and statistics. Text adopted by the EP on 5 September 07
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0375 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Consumers
The Single Market Review: tackling barriers and inefficiencies
2007-09-10 - 13:45
It has created millions of jobs, extra prosperity, higher exports and increased investment, delivering benefits to businesses and consumers alike. Still, almost 15 years since its coming into existence (on 1 January 1993), the EU's Single Market remains a work in progress. MEPs make clear their vision of a Single Market for the 21st century in an own-initiative report by Jacques TOUBON (EPP-ED, FR). In the report adopted by 534 votes in favour, 119 against and 27 abstentions, the House welcome the Commission’s work on the Single Market Review (SMR), noting that the Review - which aims to review existing mechanisms and to identify gaps - is an opportunity to demonstrate the benefits to be reaped from the effective implementation of the internal market. As MEPs underline, an improvement in the functioning of the Single Market is still necessary. "There is a need", reads the report, "to complete the opening of network industries, such as transport, telecommunications, postal services and energy transport."
Procurement rules
The report also stresses that public contracts must be awarded in a fair and transparent manner, observing public procurement rules, and that they may also help promote innovation and technological development and help respond to environmental and social concerns, including accessibility for disabled people. The Parliament calls on the Commission to encourage Member States to improve access for SMEs to public procurement contracts and to apply pre-commercial procurement to improve the innovative capacity of the Single Market.
The report, authored by Jacques TOUBON (EPP-ED, FR), focuses on a number of areas where room for improvement is visible and reforms necessary. To that effect, the European Parliament:
- believes the greater harmonisation may be necessary in certain areas, in particular in retail financial services (including means of payment) and in the functioning of the tax system;
- holds the view that tackling climate change and ensuring sustainable development are of paramount importance, and can be achieved only with a balanced energy mix, and that a Single Market policy promoting sustainable and competitive energy is vital to those ends;
- regrets that insufficient emphasis was placed on the potential contribution of nuclear power;
- urges the Commission to adopt a global strategy concerning intellectual property rights, highlighting the importance of establishing a Community Patent;
- underlines the importance of a SM policy promoting sustainable and competitive energy -- regretting, however, "that insufficient emphasis [is] placed on the potential contribution of nuclear power";
- points out that 25% of the goods manufactured in the European Union are still not covered by harmonisation measures. The report calls on Member States, therefore, to make full use of the principle of mutual recognition to ensure the free movement of goods in the interest of consumers and businesses - insists on the pursuit of harmonisation in key areas, in particular retail financial services (including means of payment) and taxation;
- urges the Commission to push ahead with its proposals concerning a common consolidated corporate tax base;
- stresses the importance of encouraging the free movement of workers within the internal market;
- welcomes the Commission's initiatives to identify common principles on Services of General Interest, noting that "strong and modern services of general interest are necessary in order to achieve public interest objectives";
- calls on the EU to position itself with regard to future trends in the global economy so as to ensure the efficiency of its trade defence and sustainable competitiveness; believes that the Transatlantic Internal Market "could be one of the appropriate instruments to achieve this";
- believes that the present VAT and excise duty systems are a barrier to the completion of the Single Market, in particular in relation to cross-border trade. The House calls on the Commission to investigate tax problems related to personal mail order and Internet shopping, and to come forward with proposals for facilitating EU citizens' full benefit from the free movement of goods. Text adopted by the EP on the Single Market Review
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0367 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Consumers
Review of the EU consumer acquis - MEPs gave their views
2007-09-10 - 13:45
The European Parliament adopted an own initiative report on the Commission's review of the consumer acquis. The report recommends that the scope of this review concentrate on updating and creating coherence between the eight consumer protection directives named in the Green Paper. In presenting this Green Paper the European Commission is calling on interested parties to express their views on the “Review of the Consumer Acquis”, which was launched in 2004 within the context of the Better Regulation goals. The review covers eight consumer Directives.
The overarching aim of the Review is to achieve a real “consumer” internal market that strikes the right balance between i) a high level of consumer protection; ii) enterprise competitiveness and iii) respect for the subsidiarity principle. The Review is regarded as a unique opportunity to modernise the existing consumer Directives and to simplify the current regulatory environment – both for consumers and professionals. To this end the Directives are being reviewed both as a whole and individually with a view to identifying the regulatory gaps. This Green Paper concludes the diagnostic phase of the Review as well as summing up the Commission’s initial findings.
Degree of harmonisation
The House points out that harmonisation must not lead to a decline in the level of consumer protection achieved under certain national arrangements, but should lead to a comparable level of consumer protection in all the Member States.
The choice of a mixed approach
The European Parliament expresses its preference for the adoption of a mixed or combined approach, i.e. a horizontal instrument with the primary goal of ensuring the coherence of the existing legislation and enabling loopholes to be closed by grouping together, in consistent law, cross-cutting issues common to all the directives. The report considers that specific questions which are outside the scope of the horizontal instrument should continue to be considered separately in the sectoral directives. Text adopted by the EP on review of the consumer acquis
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0383 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Research and innovation
Use of primates in experiments is not acceptable say MEPs in written declaration
2007-09-10 - 13:45
The European Parliament adopted a written declaration urging the EU to use the revision process of Directive 86/609/EC as an opportunity to make ending the use of apes and wild-caught monkeys in scientific experiments an urgent priority. They also want to establish a timetable for replacing the use of all primates in scientific experiments with alternatives. As of 6 September 2007, 433 MEPs had signed the written declaration. In order for a written declaration to be formally adopted by the European Parliament, more than half of its Members have to sign it. The declaration was sponsored by UK MEP John Bowis, French MEP Martine Roure, Swedish MEP Jens Holm, German MEP Rebecca Harms and Slovenian MEP Mojca Drcar Murko.
Co-sponsor John Bowis (EPP-ED, UK) said: "This is great news for everyone who is interested in animal welfare, but also wants to protect human health. Currently around 3,300 primates are used in British laboratories each year. Alternative practices are increasingly being developed and applied, which mean that this number can be reduced with an eventual aim of a complete phase out of testing on primates.
“I welcome efforts to reduce and replace the use primates used in test, but more action needs to be taken to achieve the end of testing on primates."
“More than a quarter of primate species are in danger of extinction, yet wild-caught primates continue to be captured and taken from their natural habitat to be used for research in EU laboratories.
"Advancements in technology has provided alternative 'test' methods that are proving to be more efficient and reliable than primate experiments and ending the use of monkeys and apes in scientific trials must now be a priority."
David Martin (PES, UK) said: "Primates are so close to humans in their social, mental and emotional functions, that putting them through the extreme trauma of scientific testing should be unthinkable. Aside from this consideration scientific tests on primates are often bad science, and many of the species being used are endangered in the wild. For these reasons I have signed the written declaration calling for an end to scientific testing on apes, and wild-caught monkeys, and for a timetable to be established to phase out all scientific testing on primates."
"Hopefully through channels such as the European Parliament, we can campaign to end this cruel and inhumane practice."
More than 80% of respondents to the 2006 Commission’s public consultation on animals in experiments considered. MEPs point out that more than 10 000 primates are used in experiments every year in EU laboratories. The written declaration notes that almost all primate species share more than 90% of their DNA with humans and it is acknowledged that the primate species have a capacity to suffer greatly in captivity.
The Parliament notes that 26% of primate species are in danger of extinction and wild-caught primates continue to be used in laboratories, in addition it may be difficult to protect primates from threats such as human consumption if it is perceived that these species are used freely by Western academic institutions.
The declaration underlines that advanced technology and techniques now provide alternative methods that are proving to be more efficient and reliable than primate experiments, such as functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), microdosing, computer modelling or tissue and cell culture,
MEPs note that despite genetic similarities, there are important differences between humans and other primates, and primate experiments cannot match the precision of human-based study.
The declaration together with the names of the signatories will be sent to the Council, the Commission and the Member States. Adopted text on primates in scientific experiments
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/writtenDecl/wdFastAdopted.do?language=EN#
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Human rights
Maximising the impact of human rights dialogues
2007-09-10 - 13:45
Parliament adopted on an own-initiative which calls on the Commission and Council to ensure a greater degree of coherence in the EU's human rights dialogues with third countries. MEPs particularly stress the need for Parliament to be informed of the content of ongoing dialogues and urge the use of more stringent criteria and monitoring mechanisms. The report, drafted by Elena VALENCIANO MARTÍNEZ-OROZCO (PES, ES) concerns the human rights dialogues that the European Union conducts with third countries. These rights, according to the report should encompass "not only civil and political rights but also social, environmental, economic and cultural rights," and the "dialogue objectives should be based on the principle that human rights are universal, indivisible and interdependent." In addition, the report warns that "the promotion and defence of human rights in Third countries should not be conditioned by geopolitical or geo-strategic alliances."
The draft report notes that "there is a wide variety of dialogues, each based on different structures, formats, frequencies, and methodologies, thus obscuring the picture and creating confusion about EU action in this area." It offers some recommendations on how to improve the mechanisms. MEPs call on the Council to "set clear criteria for the initiation, suspension or termination of a dialogue," and also urge it to put in place "a post-electoral protocol mechanism to monitor and support the democratisation process, which includes the involvement of the civil society at all stages."
China, Russia, Iran in the spotlight
Although the report focuses on the overall process, and not the individual dialogues or countries concerned, it does single out a number of countries for special attention.
The report emphasises "the need to considerably strengthen and improve the EU-China human rights dialogue" and "stresses that China’s human rights record remains a matter of serious concern". The Commission should ensure "that its trading relationship with China is linked to human rights reforms".
The human rights situation in Russia is described as "worrisome", the key areas being freedom of association, freedom of speech and freedom of the press and the media. MEPs urge the Commission and Council to lay down "concrete obligations and establish efficient mechanisms for monitoring and checking fulfilment of the obligations Russia has taken on".
MEPs are also concerned that the human rights dialogue with Iran has been interrupted since 2004 due to Iran's lack of co-operation. They urge the Commission, meanwhile, to continue financing projects aimed at promoting good governance and to support women's and children's human rights in Iran.
European Neighbourhood Policy
The main purpose of the European Neighbourhood Policy is to establish a privileged relationship with the EU’s eastern and southern neighbours on the basis of a mutual commitment to common values, especially the rule of law, good governance and human rights. MEPs believe "the EU dialogues could have a greater impact on reform in the ENP neighbours" and the report draws attention to "the continual deterioration of the human rights situation in Azerbaijan", which it says underlines the need "to establish a Human Rights Subcommittee as soon as possible with that country". It also calls on the Council to consider the possibility of establishing a human rights dialogue or consultation mechanism with Libya and Syria. The report also stresses the need to set up an "institutionalised human rights subcommittee with Israel, replacing the current provisional mechanism." Text adopted by the EP on Human rights dialogues and consultations on human rights with third countries
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0381 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Human rights
Human rights: Burma, Bangladesh, war crimes tribunal in Sierra Leone
2007-09-10 - 13:45
In three resolutions adopted at the end of Thursday's plenary sitting, Parliament condemns the military crackdown on this summer's demonstrations in Burma, urges the Bangladesh Caretaker Government to accelerate the restoration of democracy and calls on the international community to guarantee continued funding for the special war crimes court in Sierra Leone. BURMA
Following the Burmese army's crackdown on protests against this summer's sharp increase in fuel prices, MEPs - in a resolution adopted by 66 votes to 0 with no abstentions - call on international actors to respond and in particular on EU Member States to press for a binding resolution at the UN.
Human rights abuses and poverty remain rife in Burma and, in a further twist, on 15 August the government withdrew fuel subsidies without warning, leading to a 500% increase in fuel prices, doubling transport costs and inflating the cost of essential goods and services. Over 100 human rights activists and peaceful protesters were arrested in the wake of the ensuing protests.
Meanwhile, the National Convention of Burma has concluded the drafting of the basic principles for a new Constitution, which the European Parliament says "lacks legitimacy and international credibility due to the absence of democratically elected representatives".
Government oppression condemned
In their resolution, MEPs voice grave concern not only at the effect of the price increase in basic commodities on Burma's population but also at the military build-up in Rangoon and the violent attacks by security forces and proxy civilian organisations.
The resolution deplores the government crackdown, which included violent attacks on civilians, particularly women. It demands "the immediate and unconditional release of all those who have been arrested since the protests began on 19 August 2007", including Min Ko Naing and Ko Ko Gyi, and also reiterates its longstanding demand for the release of Aung San Suu Kyi.
The SPDC's "unremitting oppression of the Burmese people and its persistent persecution and imprisonment of pro-democracy activists" are condemned and the EP urges "cessation of the current illegitimate constitutional process, and its replacement by a fully representative National Convention including the NLD and other political parties and groups".
Tougher EU sanctions and UN resolution urged
MEPs regret that Burmese Foreign Minister Nyan Win, who is banned from travelling to the EU, was permitted to attend the eighth ASEM Foreign Ministers’ meeting in Germany this year, only days after the military junta in Burma had extended the illegal house arrest of Aung San Suu Kyi for another year.
Thus, while welcoming the renewal of EU targeted sanctions, the resolution argues that they have failed to achieve the desired impact and "calls therefore on the Council to analyse the weaknesses in the present sanctions system and to introduce further measures". All EU Member States are asked to apply rigorously the restrictive measures already agreed and to discuss measures for strengthening the EU Common Position on Burma.
In particular, the EP urges the governments of EU Member States that are members of the UN Security Council and those that are members of the UN Human Rights Council to seek backing for binding resolutions on Burma by those bodies.
Major world powers and business can play a role
Other actors could play their part, argue MEPs. China and India, as well as Russia, are asked "to use their considerable economic and political leverage with the Burmese regime in order to bring about substantial improvements in the country and, in any case, to cease the supply of weaponry and other strategic resources". And businesses which invest in Burma are urged to ensure that, in carrying out their projects, human rights are genuinely respected.
* * *
BANGLADESH
In a resolution on Bangladesh, MEPs urge the Caretaker Government to act in accordance with the rule of law and to speed up the restoration of democracy.
Following the declaration of a state of emergency in Bangladesh on 11 January 2007 and the postponement of parliamentary elections scheduled for 22 January, after poll-related violence, the Caretaker Government, with the objective of ending corruption, introduced measures including a ban on all political activity and the detention or charging of over 160 political leaders - including three former prime ministers - and 100,000 civilians, says the EP resolution.
The EU Election Observation Mission suspended its operations on 22 January and the United Nations decided to withdraw their support for the electoral process on the same day. Bangladesh's longstanding tradition of secular democracy, including respect for human rights and especially women's rights, freedom of speech and religious tolerance, is increasingly under threat, believe MEPs.
Condemnation of police violence, concern at arrests of political leaders
The resolution therefore voices deep concern at the authorities' actions, including "the disproportionate response of the military and the police against the student protests which erupted in late August 2007 at Dhaka university".
Parliament is concerned about the arrest and justification for ongoing detention of Awami League president Sheikh Hasina and Bangladesh Nationalist Party president Khaleda Zia and about the case of Sigma Huda, who has been sentenced on bribery charges.
The EP urges the authorities to conduct the trials transparently and according to the rule of law and to allow access by international observers to all tribunals.
Bangladesh government pressed to speed up new elections
Overall, MEPs regret that "the Caretaker Government, while making progress on tackling corruption, has been far less assertive on political reform". The resolution thus "calls for a return to democracy and the lifting of the state of emergency in Bangladesh" and in particular "for the lifting of the ban on all political activity, in order to enable all parties and political organisations to prepare for open and fair elections, as provided for under the constitution". The government is asked "to reconsider its present roadmap for elections and to speed up its preparations" and also to "make progress with the creation of a National Human Rights Commission".
EU action
Parliament welcomes the EU's commitment to grant technical support to the Bangladeshi authorities for the organisation of the elections and calls for the EU election observation mission to resume its long-term activities as soon as possible. The Council and the Commission are asked to monitor carefully the human rights and political situation in Bangladesh in the light of recent events and to make representations over the continuing use of the state of emergency.
* * *
FINANCING OF SPECIAL COURT FOR SIERRA LEONE
In a resolution on the Special Court for Sierra Leone, set up to try those responsible for war crimes in that country, Parliament urges the international community to ensure that funding for the court does not run out, particularly ahead of the crucial trial of former Liberian President Charles Taylor.
The court was established by an agreement between the United Nations and the Government of Sierra Leone to prosecute those responsible for serious violations of international humanitarian law and Sierra Leonean law in the territory of Sierra Leone since 30 November 1996, notably war crimes and crimes against humanity.
The trial against Charles Taylor - indicted on 17 counts of crimes against humanity and war crimes, including murder, mutilation, rape, sexual slavery and the recruitment of child soldiers - is a seen as a test case. However, his trial has been adjourned until 7 January 2008 - and the court is likely to exhaust its funding by October 2007.
Precedent-setting role of the special court
In its resolution, adopted by 69 votes to 0 with one abstention, Parliament describes the court as "a precedent-setting development in international law, as it is the first tribunal to indict a sitting African head of state for war crimes and crimes against humanity". It points out that "the fight against impunity is one of the cornerstones of the Union’s human rights policy, and the international community bears responsibility for supporting it in order to promote the effectiveness of the accountability mechanisms put in place".
The inability to bring the trial of Charles Taylor to a conclusion would, say MEPs, undermine the establishment of a lasting peace in the region and also prejudice the development of international criminal justice.
Financial contributions needed urgently from all states
The court currently receives financial support from the EU through the EIDHR. In addition, EU Member States, especially the United Kingdom and the Netherlands, have contributed consistently.
Parliament urges "all States, including EU Member States, to contribute further to the operations of the Special Court for Sierra Leone in order to ensure that the Special Court can take its work to a successful conclusion". It also asks the European Commission "to provide continuing funding for the Special Court in the forthcoming national programmes with Sierra Leone" and "calls on the UN Secretary-General, in consultation with the UN Security Council, to explore all the possible financial ways to enable the Special Court to complete its crucial functions".
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Fisheries
Maximum Sustainable Yield - time is not ripe to propose introduction, says the EP
2007-09-10 - 13:45
The European Parliament deplores the "deficient analysis" and "inadequate solutions" offered by the Commission's communication "Implementing sustainability in EU fisheries through maximum sustainable yield (MSY)". In a report adopted the House states that "the strict application of MSY would result in the short term in a considerable, and in some cases drastic, reduction in activity, employment and income for the Community fleet." Maximum Sustainable Yield (MSY) is a reference point whose objective is to maximise the economic yield of a fishery in relation to the biological capacity of the stock.
In its communication "Implementing sustainability in EU fisheries through maximum sustainable yield", the Commission proposes a change in fisheries regulation through a change in the management model that will allow the sustainable use of fisheries resources in order to guarantee the industry's viability. In the Commission's own words, fisheries should be managed "looking for success rather than to seek merely to avoid failure".
In the face of such a challenge as that posed by changing the model of Community fisheries management, "it is regrettable that the Commission communication is somewhat simplistic, since it fails either to give a clear account of the need for this change of approach or to provide a detailed description of the type of model to be opted for", says the rapporteur, Carmen FRAGA ESTÉVEZ (EPP-ED, ES).
MEPs deplore the "absence of an in-depth evaluation of what applying an MSY model would actually mean", in terms of its shortcomings, the particularities of its application, and the potential risks of any errors in the model. They regret, notably, the absence of an analysis of the evolution of the MSY concept and the potential advantages of the different approaches.
According to the EP, "the time is not ripe to propose the introduction of an MSY system.". MEPs say that a deeper and more rigorous analysis is needed of the problems, shortcomings and objectives of the Community's conservation and management policy as such, "with a view to deciding, with all political courage, the most suitable measures for introducing the changes that are most needed to the present Common Fisheries Policy."
The House believes that the Commission must seize this opportunity to devise a system of access to resources that puts the accent on sustainability, discourages discards, simplifies the technical measures, eliminates discrimination and excessive competition for stocks, introduces the necessary flexibility, and boosts the sector's competitiveness.
The report underlines that any change to the management system must necessarily include "suitable and financially acceptable compensation mechanisms", and that this will require an assessment of the social and economic impact of the final proposal.
MSY not appropriate for multi-species fisheries
The EP also warns that it will be difficult to apply the MSY model to multispecies fisheries (i.e. the majority of those in the EU), since "if the MSY applied were that of the main species the others could be overfished, while if, as would seem logical, one applied that of the most vulnerable species it would be necessary to stop catching those species that were in a good biological state, with adverse effects in economic, employment and competitiveness terms, a situation which would be in total contradiction with the notion of MSY as such." Text adopted by the EP on Sustainability in EU fisheries through maximum sustainable yield
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0382 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Fisheries
How to match national fleets to existing resources?
2007-09-10 - 13:45
In a report adopted in the European Parliament on Member States' efforts to achieve a sustainable balance between fishing capacity and fishing opportunities, the House calls on the Commission to adopt the relevant initiatives for the possible transition from a fleet management system based on restricting vessel tonnage and power to a scheme under which fishing effort can be controlled through management by "geographical fishing areas" The Commission's annual report on Member States' efforts to achieve a sustainable balance between fishing capacity and fishing opportunities describes the situation of the fleet and its development over 2003-2005, broken down by data for the continental fleet and for the fleet in the outermost regions, together with a series of assessments of the content of reports forwarded by national administrations. The report drawn up by Paulo CASACA (PES, PT), adopted in plenary, relates to this information.
MEPs urge the Commission rapidly to submit proposals for guidelines that will ensure that the Member States present "harmonised information making it possible to carry out comparative analyses of developments in the various national fleets" and provide each of the Member States with disaggregated information on the level of catches by vessels operating in its coastal areas.
The EP considers it "unacceptable" that Member States fail to comply with their obligations to gather and forward data in relation to matching their fishing capacity to the state of stocks and calls on the Commission to "consider this non-compliance as serious misconduct and penalise it accordingly", as is the case for fishermen's obligations as regards catch data..
States with large fleets such as Italy and France were late submitting their reports, and one of the main states, the United Kingdom, did not submit any report at all, notes the rapporteur.
Management by geographical fishing areas
In view of the current situation and the continuing existence of overcapacity, "it might be desirable to reconsider the usefulness of the current schemes for bringing the Community fleet into line with fishing opportunities, leaving room in the Community policy on fisheries conservation and management for other more efficient systems which may themselves lead to capacity reductions even greater than those laid down by Community legislation", states the report.
MEPs call on the Commission to adopt the relevant initiatives for the possible transition from a fleet management system based on restricting vessel tonnage and power to a scheme under which fishing effort can be controlled through management by geographical fishing areas and the use of appropriate technical measures for the sustainable management of resources.
The Commission should also submit proposals to improve the safety of small-scale coastal and artisanal fishing vessels in the EU aimed at increasing the size and power of engines and renovating vessels so as to improve the hygiene and safety conditions on board, "without thereby implying an increase in fishing effort."
Protect the marine environment and rebuild fish stocks
The report reiterates the need for a "more wide-ranging approach" to measures to protect the marine environment and rebuild fish stocks, in particular by considering and studying certain factors which have a significant impact on the marine environment and the state of fish stocks, such as coastal and offshore pollution, industrial and agricultural effluents, bottom dredging and maritime transport, to complement current management methods. According to the EP, a Community initiative in this area is a "priority.".
There has been a gradual reduction in the overall capacity and power of the fleet (approximately 2% per year) but "there has been no reduction in the level of exploitation of stocks", notes the report, since the technical improvements made to vessels cancel out or exceed the possibilities as regards yield and fishing effort that these "modest reductions" represent.
"Member States are still not sufficiently involved in matching the size of the fleet to the available resources", says the rapporteur. "Perhaps in view of the economic and social consequences of adopting measures which would be consistent and necessary but also highly unpopular, the Member States are pursuing a policy of 'laisser faire, laisser passer', in the hope that normal developments, the ever sharper fall in catches, will themselves cause the fleet to cease operating owing to the lack of any economic interest, since exploiting the resources will no longer be viable", he adds.
The EP underlines that dialogue and the industry's participation in all measures laid down to achieve a balance between the fleet and the state of resources are essential conditions if these measures are to prove effective.
Specific Regional Advisory Council for the outermost regions
With regard to the capacity of the fleets registered in the outermost regions and its variation between 2003 and 2005, the results show that the fleet registered in the Spanish and Portuguese outermost regions has been significantly reduced both in terms of tonnage and power. For the French overseas departments there has been a slight decrease in the total number of vessels and their tonnage and an increase in power.
The EP calls on the Commission to submit a proposal for the setting-up of a specific Regional Advisory Council for the outermost regions of the EU. Text adopted by the EP on Balancing fishing capacity and fishing opportunities
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0368 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Agriculture
Reform of the milk market, but not at excessive cost to producers say MEPs
2007-09-10 - 13:45
For the European Parliament, savings generated by the milk market reform "mini-package" proposed by the European Commission must benefit the sector. School milk aid needs to be raised, and the necessary adjustments to Europe's dairy market should not jeopardise the existing private storage scheme. This is thrust of a series of reports adopted by the European Parliament. To simplify the common market organisation (CMO) in milk and milk products, in February the Commission proposed three sets of amendments to regulations and directives. Three reports by Elisabeth JEGGLE (EPP-ED, DE) on each of these texts were adopted by the European Parliament under the procedure for consulting the European Parliament. They endorse the bulk of the measures proposed by the Commission, but also propose several amendments to balance certain aspects of this "mini-reform".
School milk aid rate
MEPs favour introducing a single school milk aid rate, to simplify the management of this scheme. But they consider that aid should be raised from €16.11/100kg to €18.15/100kg - as the EU's German Presidency also suggested in parallel discussions with the Council - to encourage efforts to promote balanced nutrition and combat obesity. MEPs also ask the Commission to assess the possibility of widening the range of products covered by the scheme, notably to include new, innovative and healthy products.
The European Parliament recommends approving without amendment the Commission proposals to:
- reduce the skimmed milk powder intervention price by 2.8%, to €169.80 for 100 kg;
- abolish the system that activates the buying-in of butter when market prices fall below 92% of the intervention price for two consecutive weeks: cumbersome to manage, this system has also outlived its usefulness and should be replaced by a mechanism that allows buying-in at a lower price for a longer period during the year;
- harmonise definitions of butter quality (there are currently 27 national classes);
- abandon mandatory import certificates (which new control systems have rendered unnecessary):
- abolish the arrangement that allows the armed forces to buy cut-price butter (considered superfluous today).
Simplifying the milk market CMO (amending Regulation 1255/1999)
The House considers that budget savings stemming from changes to the CMO (a total of €117.3m from 2008 to 2013, according to the European Commission) must benefit the dairy sector. It therefore calls for a milk fund restructuring programme from 1 January 2008 to:
- help producers and processors to cope with the growing liberalisation of the market,
- upgrade promotion measures and the dissemination of nutrition information,
- maintain and modernise production in mountainous regions, and
- strengthen the school milk distribution scheme.
According to the rapporteur, these measures could facilitate a "soft landing" for the sector with a view to the CAP "health check" planned for 2008 and forthcoming discussions on the expiry of milk quotas.
MEPs also oppose the abolition of private storage aids for cream and skimmed milk powder. Ms Jeggle says this instrument needs to be retained as a "safety net". She underlines that similar mechanisms were retained in other sectors in the last reform of the common agricultural policy, and that abolishing them would be an essentially political decision, which must be considered as part of the "health check".
Liberalisation for drinking milk (amendment of Regulation 2597/97)
The House recommends approving, with some clarifications, the proposal to liberalise drinking milk production and marketing rules, so as to take account of new consumer preferences for less fatty products.
At present, only three milk categories are authorised in the EU: skimmed milk (maximum 0.5% fat), semi-skimmed (from 1.5% to 1.8% fat) and whole milk (3.5% fat). The Commission wants to authorise marketing of milk outside these categories, provided fat content is clearly labelled. To avoid confusing consumers, MEPs say that the names of these products should be stated on the label, and the proposed margins of tolerance for stating fat content (+/- 0.2%) should be deleted.
Standardisation for preserved milk (amendment of Directive 2001/114)
Finally, Members recommend approving without amendment the Commission proposal to bring authorised protein content for milk powder and condensed milk - currently between 31% and 37% - into line with the international (Codex) standard of 34%. The aim of this is to put European exporters on an equal footing with other exporters. Text adopted by the EP on 5 September 2007
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert.do#
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Adopted texts
2007-09-10 - 13:45
Texts adopted during the Plenary session 3-6 September can be accessed via the link hereunder. Texts adopted during the session. Texts adopted 3-6 September 2007
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Audio summary of September I Strasbourg Plenary
2007-09-10 - 13:45
Audio summary of September I Strasbourg Plenary can be accessed via the link hereunder. Audio summary 3-6 September 2007 Audio summary, plenary 3-6 September 2007, Strasbourg
EN
1
MULTIMEDIA
20070907MLT10181.mp3
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Draft Agenda for September II - Strasbourg
2007-09-10 - 13:45
The draft agenda for the 24-27 September Plenary in Strasbourg can be accessed via the link hereunder. Draft Agenda - 24-27 September 2007. Draft Agenda - 24-27 September 2007
EN
1
LINK
/activities/public/plenSession.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-FULL DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-FULL DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09755 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
