Megatrucks on EU roads? Yes, but under strict conditions
Transport
2007-09-05 - 14:23
The European Parliament adopted by a large majority (577 votes in favour to 52 against with 51 abstentions) a report proposing that the controversial use of mega-liners or 60 tonne lorries in the EU should only be allowed for certain routes following Member State approval and within the Member States.
During a lively debate, Members were strongly divided on this matter, with some of them claiming that introducing proposals for admitting 60t lorries would induce a definitive imbalance in favour of only one mode of transport and would have a serious impact on the environment and with others saying that this form of road transport innovation deserved a change.
Parliament adopted an own-initiative report by Inés AYALA SENDER (PES, ES) on a Commission communication on freight transport logistics in Europe in which the issue of the megatrucks was raised. In a compromise reached by the EPP-ED and PES groups, the House is now suggesting that the use of mega-liners should only be allowed for certain routes by the Commission. An evaluation of the requests would have to respect factors such as the existing infrastructures and safety aspects. The use of mega-liners should, consequently, be permitted under strict conditions only.
Transport Commissioner Jacques BARROT told MEPs that the Commission would take a decision after a study regarding experiences with mega-liners and only after a thorough exchange of views on this issue with all those concerned.
During the debate, Mathieu GROSCH (EPP-ED, BE) said that Member States should decide. Gilles SAVARY (PES, FR) took the view that admitting mega-liners would be a disaster for the railways in the Community. Jeanine HENNIS - PLASSCHAERT (ALDE, NL) said that it was not helpful to turn down innovative transport concepts. Eva LICHTENBERGER (Greens/EFA, AT) and Erik MEIJER (GUE/NGL, NL) expressed their "no" towards the megatrucks, as did Margrete AUKEN (Greens/EFA, DK) and Reinhard RACK (EPP-ED, AT). The latter said that European logistic sector lacked software studies on intelligent modes of transport, but not hardware like megatrucks, which should not be allowed in mountain areas and agglomerations at all. Finally, Georg JARZEMBOWSKI (EPP-ED, DE) Corien WORTMANN-KOOL (EPP-ED, NL) were in favour of the compromise.
MEPs further welcome the intention of the Commission to present an Action Plan for Freight Logistics in Autumn 2007, which must serve to put logistics on the political agenda and raise its profile by focusing on its potential, appeal and usefulness.
In order to achieve a further simplification of administrative burden, Members demand that an EU single document for all carriage of transport must provide undertakings with clear legal certainty and replace the large number of existing documents.
They deplore the impact of the Council's position on the funding of the trans-European Transport Networks (TENs) and demand that the added value of the logistics component to be taken into account in future TEN-T funding decisions.
Other amendments were adopted on training attractiveness of logistics professions (priority for training and life-long training for all staff), urban transport planning and statistics.
20070823IPR09762 Freight transport logistics in Europe - the key to sustainable mobility Text, as adopted by the EP on 5 September, will shortly be available here Freight Transport Logistics in Europe – the key to sustainable mobility - COMMUNICATION FROM THE COMMISSION 28 June 2006
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5386202
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
3
LINK
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/site/en/com/2006/com2006_0336en01.pdf
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
