Mobility week 2007 - clearing the roads of traffic
Environment
2007-09-21 - 16:25
From Hemicycle to Bicycle: Parliament's President
This week cities across Europe marked "Mobility Week" aimed at encouraging sustainable non-polluting transport in our towns and cities. Now in its 6th year, the idea is to reduce pollution and improve people's quality of life. This year's theme was "streets for people" which encourages local authorities to use roads for pedestrians and bikes. The possibility not to use a car is clearly possible for more and more people. Latest figures show that 10% of all car journeys are less than 1 km.
Traffic jams, pollution and noise are just three side effects of the ever growing amount of traffic on the road. Between 1990 and 2004 the numbers on Europe's roads rose by a third. Public health - mainly in the form of respiratory illnesses - is another concern. It is in response to issues like these that Mobility week was founded in 2002.
"Change of mentality a long process"
Mobility Week may be firmly established and growing fast, but what tangible effect can it have? Does it succeed in drawing people's attention to the issues we face with mobility across the European Union? We asked a panel of MEPs for their views.
Italian Green MEP Sepp Kusstatscher noted that "actions during mobility week would scarcely bring anybody to question their behaviour. The change of mentality is a very long process. But I think the sum of the initiatives and the persistence provokes a change of perception and thinking".
Zuzana Roithova (EPP-ED) used her personal experience in the Czech Republic to back up Mobility week. "I supported the initiative "AUTO*MAT" in Prague, which wants to make the city more accessible for pedestrians and cyclists. I believe this can help other cities to follow the example" she said.
Michael Cramer - a German Green MEP - called mobility week "an excellent initiative". However, he called for it to be expanded into public policy "instead of a limited week once a year, cities should actively change the modal split towards more sustainable modes of transport permanently".
Bulgarian Socialist MEP Evgeni Kirilov praised mobility week as "citizens learn more, become more conscious about the problems and how to solve them, including personal contribution by using bicycles and public transport instead of private cars, especially single users".
Cities "car friendly" not "human friendly"
To propose solutions to the growing issue of traffic it is important to know the problems our cities face. We asked the MEPs what they thought were the biggest challenges in this area.
Jens Holm (GUE/NGL) of Sweden thought there were "too many cars" and not "sufficient alternatives" to getting around. He believes that cheap if not free public transport should be a "public responsibilty". He cycles as much as possible although admits that traffic in Brussels seems sometimes "too aggressive".
On future strategies for dealing with the problem, Romanian MEP Alexandru Mortun (ALDE) believes that "building more roads is not the answer". He thinks authorities should "create traffic-calmed or car-free zones; launching speed reduction programmes; improving cycle networks and facilities".
Italian MEP Alessandro Foglietta (UEN) blames the "lack of education and of respect of the rules". He also points to the problem of "the difficulty in leaving our cars at home especially when we live in areas which are not served by public transport or when we have special needs like health problems or with children".
One solution to traffic usage could be imaginative solutions. Spending time in Brussels on her bike (which she rides to work), Zuzana Roithova has been impressed by the "bike lanes marked in colour and signs allowing cyclists to ride their bikes into one-way streets".
For Sepp Kusstatscher - a man who walks to work - the balance is all wrong; cities are "car friendly" and not "human friendly". He goes on to say that "there exists really good examples how traffic - and mobility problems can be solved, namely by right of way for pedestrians and cyclists and by a good public local traffic network for persons".
20070913STO10375 Mobility week homepage Best practice guide Participating cities and towns Mobility week 2006: 22 September 06 Article: Environment MEPs back compulsory CO2 cap on cars: 19 September
EN
1
PHOTO
20070921PHT10546.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.mobilityweek.eu/
EN
3
LINK
http://www.mobilityweek.eu/IMG/pdf_best_practice_en.pdf
EN
4
LINK
http://www.mobilityweek.eu/cities/participants_en.php?page=rubrique
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060922STO10912 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070913STO10369 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
