Male-female equality in Europe
Women's rights/Equal opportunities
2007-09-27 - 12:46
The European Parliament adopted a report on equality between women and men in the EU in 2007 which takes as its starting point the fourth annual Commission report on gender equality and gender mainstreaming in policy areas. Two major initiatives in 2006 had a bearing on gender equality in the EU: the Commission's adoption of the Roadmap for equality between women and men for 2006-2010, and the adoption of the Pact for Gender Equality.
While welcoming these initiatives, the report drafted by Piia-Noora Kauppi (EPP-ED, FI), makes numerous proposals for promoting gender equality further.
Mrs Kauppi said in the debate: "Although much has been achieved in the past decades, important challenges remain. The focus of the Commission report is on employment issues. For example, gender pay gap, insecurity in the job market and reconciliation of professional family life are issues that have a bearing in the lives of millions of women every single day. They also have a clear link to the demographic challenge facing Europe. As the Commission reports indicates, 6 million of the 8 million jobs created in the EU since 2000 have been taken up by women. Most of these 6 million new jobs for women come from the services sector. 11.7 million new jobs created by the services sector are mostly occupied by women. That is why the services sector, its growth and the internal market is such a key issue for many women in Europe. However, the majority of new jobs for women are part-time jobs, some of them being unsafe and insecure with low salaries."
Employment and pensions: women still disadvantaged
MEPs call on the Commission to propose awareness-raising campaigns, the exchange of best practice, dialogues with citizens and public-private partnership initiatives. They also say the Commission should monitor compliance by Member States with existing Community policy on male-female equality, particularly employment policy. A study on how Member States implement Community legislation is recommended, along with "appropriate action in the event of non-transposition or infringement".
The House advocates gender analysis of the impact of pension reforms on women's lives in the EU as well as the dissemination of best practice on the working environment policies that allow for an effective work-life balance.
Female immigrants and "multiple discrimination"
Women immigrants and those from ethnic minorities can suffer "multiple discrimination", both racial and gender-based, stress MEPs. At the same time the committee argues that immigrants entering the EU must be made aware of the values and existing laws and social conventions on gender equality in the host countries' societies.
Trade agreements and gender issues
Noting that one effect of increased globalisation is the feminisation of poverty, MEPs call on the Commission to ensure that all future trade agreements, for example those within the framework of the WTO, are also scrutinised in the light of gender issues.
Gender equality targets needed
Member States are called upon to develop specific gender equality objectives and targets within the EU Social Inclusion Strategy in order to combat poverty and social exclusion, including a set of policy actions to support non-traditional and one-parent families.
Mainstreaming gender issues into regional development
Lastly, the report argues that EU regional development strategies should take more account of gender equality. The European Social Fund should support measures to improve women's access to the labour market. And regional funds should have a gender budget line for promoting gender equality and for surveys assessing the impact of policies relating to the situation of women.
20070925IPR10685 Equality between women and men - 2007 Text, as adopted by the EP on 27 September, will shortly be available here Audio (EN, 03:08)
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5466232
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
3
MULTIMEDIA
20070917MLT10440.mp3
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
