Highlights: MEPs to discuss energy, immigration, rail, toys in 2nd September Plenary
Institutions
2007-09-21 - 17:34
Fortress Europe? Immigration is debated Wednesday
On the agenda when MEPs return to Strasbourg for the second plenary session in September are the EU's railway market, the European Institute of Technology, immigration and dangerous toys imported from China. MEPs will also vote on a report about the rights of EU citizens residing in another member state to vote and stand in elections to the European Parliament for EU citizens residing in another Member State.
The session opens Monday with a debate on a report on renewable energy , which calls on the Commission to present a proposal for a new renewable energy legislative framework by the end of 2007. The report urges a sectoral approach setting clear and realistic binding targets for the electricity, transport and heating and cooling sectors. MEPs will also discuss the opening up of the rail market , a European licence for train drivers and the rights of rail passengers.
Away from the plenary, at 1900, a short-list of three candidates for the 2007 Sakharov Prize will be announced during a joint meeting of the Foreign Affairs Committee, Development Committee, and the Human Rights sub-Committee.
Tuesday - sugar, toys, energy
Tuesday starts with a joint debate on sugar. MEPs will also debate and vote on a resolution on the import of dangerous toys manufactured in China following the recent recall of 21 million toys by US manufacturer Mattel over concerns they contain lead. Commission Vice-President Günter Verheugen in charge of Enterprise and Industry will take part in the debate. The House will then turn to a report on the setting up of the European Institute of Technology . The Industry Committee backs it but wants the name to include "innovation" and call for a pilot phase to test its feasibility. MEPs in the committee also want the Council to negotiate funding with Parliament. Next up is a report on working towards a common European foreign policy on energy . "The Energy Charter Treaty should be the cornerstone of the common European foreign policy on energy," says a report by the Foreign Affairs Committee. It also advocates creating a post for a "High Official of Foreign Energy Policy", to co-ordinate the EU's activities in the field, and recommends diversification and increased energy efficiency to improve the EU's energy security. Wednesday - immigration, secret detentions, EU elections
The key debate of the week is on immigration focusing policy plans for legal migration and the fight against illegal migration with the participation of Commission Vice-President Franco Frattini. The afternoon sees the European Parliament return to a well known issue with a debate on secret detentions and unlawful inter-state transfers involving Council of Europe member states. The House will also vote on a report on a Commission proposal to make it easier for EU citizens residing in another Member State to vote and stand in elections to the European Parliament. The report from the Constitutional Affairs Committee inserts two new provisions to improve the portability of electoral rights within the EU: one on multiple candidatures and the other on deprivation of electoral rights. Thursday - equality
The House will debate a non-binding report on equality between women and men. MEPs call on the Commission to propose awareness-raising campaigns, the exchange of best practice, dialogues with citizens and public-private partnership initiatives. They also say the Commission should monitor compliance by Member States with existing Community policy on male-female equality, particularly employment policy.
20070913STO10376 Briefing - 24-27 September 2007 - Strasbourg plenary session Watch the plenary live from Monday at 1700 CET
EN
1
PHOTO
20070921PHT10544.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/eplive/vod/livestream/default_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070831BRI09932 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
