MEPs call for the harmonisation of law on the obligations of service providers
Free movement of services
2007-09-27 - 12:46
The European Parliament's adopted an own initiative report on the obligation of cross-border service providers drafted by Lasse LEHTINEN (PES, FI) with 526 votes in favour, 38 against with 13 abstentions. MEPs note that the Services Directive (to be transposed into national law by 28 December 2009) creates a new overarching legal framework of the cross-border provision of services but "'does not address the substantive obligations of service providers" nor the remedies of the customer.
Community law does not provide any general regulation of the legal relationship between providers of services and customers through provisions of secondary law. Relevant rules within the laws of EU Member States vary considerably. This places the additional burden upon the provider and the customer to inform themselves of the diverging legal conditions in other Member States. This concerns the cases in which the service provider does not perform a service or performs it badly, as well as the additional cases in which the safety of the customer in connection with the service is compromised.
MEPs propose to harmonise the laws relating to the obligations of service providers. The purpose is to enable small and medium sized businesses to appreciate their obligations and associated risks and chances in cross-border transactions and, at the same time, to enhance confidence of the consumer to avail himself of cross-border services. They are convinced that these kinds of general measure will dynamise the cross-border provision of services within the internal market.
In the opinion of MEPs, the EU, before setting up any new rule, should "examine the impact of existing and upcoming legislation in the internal market to the field of obligations of cross-border services providers and the need for a possible broad horizontal instrument". They call on the European Commission to "submit, within 12 months, a work programme for an appropriate assessment".
20070823IPR09796 Obligations of cross-border service providers
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5319202
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
