Wednesday in plenary: MEPs focus on Burma, Immigration, illegal renditions
Institutions
2007-09-27 - 16:35
"Blue card "?
On Wednesday, MEPs turned their attention to the escalating crisis in Burma, as well as holding a keynote debate on legal and illegal immigration, during which the idea of a European "blue card" for skilled immigrants (similar to the US green card system) was considered. Also on the agenda: the follow up of the EP report on alleged CIA secret detention and "rendition" operations involving EU member states, and so-called "dys" conditions.
Speakers from across the House condemned what Geoffrey Van Orden, speaking for the EPP-ED group, described as the "odious" Burmese regime. Noting that a "desperate situation has now turned to tragedy", he underlined the need for strong action, notably tougher sanctions, and called in particular for China to use its leverage in Burma to improve the situation. For the Socialist Group, Barbara Weiler noted that the protests begun by Buddhist monks enjoyed the support of the broad population. She ended on a positive note, expressing confidence that "in this region it is possible to build democratic systems", calling on the UN, EU and other countries in the region to work together to this end.
There was cross-party support for a joint motion calling for coordinated international action to deter the Burmese regime from violence against its own people and to encourage a move to genuine pluralist democracy. The EP also once again called for the release of opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi, a past winner of the European Parliament's Sakharov Prize for freedom of thought, and the integration of her National League for Democracy organisation in the national political process.
"Blue card" for Europe
MEPs debated reports about immigration and illegal immigration, relating to a policy plan for legal migration and the priorities in the fight against illegal immigration. The door is now open to the possibility of establishing an EU work permit for highly skilled workers (the so-called blue card). They said that illegal immigration cannot be countered unless means and channels of legal immigration are established at the same time.
On the issue of mass regularisation of illegal immigrants, MEPs said it "should be a one-off event since such a measure does not resolve the real underlying problem." The principle of respect of human dignity was underlined throughout the debate. After all, as one MEP said, "the only crime of these people is to have been born in poor countries".
Illegal renditions back in Parliament
Secret detentions, unlawful inter-state transfers and supposed illegal CIA operations involving EU member states were back on the agenda Wednesday. Most MEPs criticized the lack of co-operation from the EU Council of Ministers. Italian Socialist Claudio Fava said, “We have asked the Council to put pressure on governments to give information. We’re not satisfied! Public opinion is worried: the silence of the EU Council and the governments are a lost occasion for Europe”. However, Jas Gawronski (IT, EPP-ED) recalled his group didn’t support Fava’s report and said evidence was insufficient. “Let’s stop arguing about this subject on which nothing new has been discovered, let’s leave the investigations to magistrates and let’s concentrate on political proposals.”
Franco Frattini said the Commission will present a report on the efficiency of anti-terrorist measures. He said he is still expecting answers from the Polish and Romanian governments about their investigations. A representative for the Council of Ministers underlined that the EU doesn’t have competences on secret services surveillance, and that national investigations are ongoing. In the fight against terrorism, “our strongest weapons are our values and principles,” he said.
"Dys" problems
Late Wednesday EU strategy on "dys" problems (dysphasia, dyspraxia, dyslexia, dyscalculia or attention deficit disorder, etc), which concern more than 10% of children, were under debate.
20070921STO10553 Burma: prepare targeted economic sanctions, say MEPs Parliament adopts priorities on legal and illegal immigration policies European "blue card" to solve problem of aging population? CIA report: MEPs reflect on the controversy a week on
EN
1
PHOTO
20070927PHT10856.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070926IPR10742 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823IPR09787 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070921STO10548 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070216STO03274 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
