Trichet tells MEPs more data needed before taking new interest rate decisions
Economic and monetary affairs
2007-10-09 - 16:52
ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet told MEPs on Tuesday that risks to price stability were still on the upside, but that more data was needed before any new decision on interest rates could be taken. The economic fundamentals were favourable, though risks to growth prospects were on the downside.
Speaking to the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee in the regular quarterly ‘monetary dialogue’ between the ECB and Parliament, he said annual inflation rates would be above 2 per cent in the next few months before falling back, with the Bank predicting average inflation of around 2 per cent for 2008 as a whole. As for growth, “the economic fundamentals support a favourable medium-term outlook” but this assessment was “surrounded by heightened uncertainty” with risks on the downside.
Maintaining price stability as emerging markets grow more prosperous
Asked by Alexander Radwan (EPP-ED, DE) whether increasing prosperity in emerging market economies, which have helped keep European inflation low by supplying cheap products, would now lead to higher prices, Mr Trichet said increasing prices for raw materials and energy reflected a “demand shock” rather than a “supply shock.” “This is why we see it as very important to continue following headline inflation on a medium term basis,” he said, adding that if global growth continued, then changes in relative prices between raw materials and manufactured goods were likely to continue.
Given the financial market situation, asked Wolf Klinz (ALDE, DE), could interest rates stay at their present levels while meeting inflation goals? Mr Trichet would not be drawn: “We need more information and new data before taking new decisions on monetary policy in the context of a situation where risks for inflation are on the upside,” he said.
Exchange rates with China and US
Gay Mitchell (EPP-ED, IE) asked about the impact of the high exchange rate for the euro, notably against the dollar. The ECB President said exchange rates were a very important issue, but “we need to be as disciplined as possible when we authorities speak publicly. I reaffirm that exchange rates should reflect economic fundamentals, and that excess volatility is undesirable. In emerging countries with large and growing current account surpluses, and this is the case with China, it is desirable that their effective exchange rate moves so that necessary adjustments will occur,” adding that he, Eurogroup Chair Jean-Claude Juncker and Commissioner Joaquín Almunia would discuss this with the Chinese authorities when they visit the country in the months ahead. “On the US dollar, I have noted with great attention the US authorities saying a strong dollar is in the interests of the US economy,” he said, adding that he would continue to monitor the markets closely.
Financial market turmoil
Mr Trichet said that there were tentative signs of improvement in the situation on the money markets, as market players began to differentiate between commercial papers with different underlying assets and different bank sponsors. He identified four steps to restore confidence in the global credit market: firstly, more transparency and better risk management; secondly, an assessment of the role of ratings agencies; thirdly, a review of the regulatory framework, including its treatment of liquidity; fourthly, a very careful examination of non-regulated entities – hedge funds, private equity investments, special purpose vehicles and conduits, among others. “I am pleased to see that international and EU level initiatives are already underway to address these issues. [...] There is a common understanding on the need for finding solutions that can be applied consistently at a global level,” he said.
ECB market intervention – how much and to whom?
Robert Goebbels (PES, LU) asked about the ECB’s intervention to provide liquidity to the credit market. Why was this on a much larger scale than the US Federal Reserve’s intervention? The ECB President said the absolute figures on intervention were simply not comparable, since the eurozone had routine refinancing requirements which were much larger for structural reasons. He stressed that the initial loans on 9 August had been for a 24 hour period and had been fully repaid, and the same was true for the following days, so it was wrong to add up the figures for each day as some newspapers had done in reporting the total liquidity injection. He stressed that the Bank had created no new instrument in its support operations.
Committee Chair Pervenche Berès (PES, FR) asked why and how non-euro area banks had drawn on the ECB facilities during the crisis. Mr Trichet noted that he had not spoken of a crisis, referring instead to a “market correction with episodes of high market volatility, overshooting and turbulence.” He said the ECB facilities were available to banks operating in the euro area, regardless of where their parent company was based. As to why banks may have chosen to use the ECB facilities more than those available from other central banks, he had no information to offer, simply noting that: “currencies, rates, collateral and refinancing mechanisms are all different on the other side of the Atlantic and the other side of the Channel.”
2007-10-08 Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs In the chair Pervenche Berès PES FR
20071008IPR11333 The full text of Mr Trichet's opening statement is available from the ECB website
EN
1
LINK
http://www.ecb.eu/press/key/date/2007/html/sp071009_1.en.html
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
