EU Strategy for Africa: Development Committee calls for stronger parliamentary dimension
Development and cooperation
2007-10-03 - 14:43
The EU Strategy for Africa needs a stronger parliamentary dimension, says an own-initiative report, adopted by the EP Development Committee on Wednesday, that sets out priorities for the EU-Africa Strategy to be adopted at the second EU-Africa Summit in Lisbon in December. MEPs will meet African MPs in Lisbon prior to the Summit.
"The 2005 EU Strategy for Africa was adopted without in-depth consultation with the African Union (AU) institutions and African governments and parliaments", notes the committee, which wants to see co-operation between the EP, the Pan-African Parliament (PAP) and the African regional parliaments encouraged.
The committee report, drafted by Maria Martens (EPP-ED, NL), was adopted unanimously.
Lisbon parliamentary meeting
A 25-strong delegation of MEPs, most of whom are Development Committee members, will meet 25 members of the Pan-African Parliament in Lisbon on 7 December, where a joint declaration by both Parliaments is likely to be adopted. EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering and PAP President Gertrude Mongella will be invited to address the Heads of States and Governments meeting on 8 December.
Arms control
The report says that existing commitments to control the arms trade should be implemented in full and that the EU Code of Conduct on Arms Exports should be upgraded to a legally-binding Common Foreign and Security Policy Common Position. The EU should also accelerate the implementation of the EU Strategy to Combat the Illicit Accumulation and Trafficking of small arms and light weapons (SALW), it adds.
Migration and brain drain
The joint strategy should address the root causes of migration and to pay particular attention to the rights and the integration of migrants and to the issue of the "brain drain", particularly in the health sector, by proposing practical solutions for successful "circular" migration, says the report.
Crimes against humanity and impunity
Provisions to address impunity should be included in the joint strategy, says the committee, which calls for Africa’s legal and judicial systems to be strengthened, in accordance with human rights, to enable them to try perpetrators of serious crimes against humanity in Africa itself.
EPAs
MEPs acknowledge that the Economic Partnership Agreements (EPAs) can "become an important tool for African trade and regional integration, but only on condition that their substance fully accords with development policy objectives", by providing exemptions and long transition periods where necessary to enable domestic producers and industries to adapt to new market situations and to allow regional integration to proceed at its own pace.
2007-10-02 Committee on Development In the chair Josep Borrell Fontelles PES ES
Procedure: own-initiative
Plenary: October II, Strasbourg
20071003IPR11139
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
