Adrian Severin: "We want evolution - not revolution in Ukraine"
External relations
2007-09-28 - 09:33
Adrian Severin
Romanian Socialist Adrian Severin is leading a 14-member election observation team from the European Parliament to Ukraine from 27 September to 1 October. The Chairman of the Delegation to the EU-Ukraine Parliamentary Cooperation Committee spoke to us about the main concerns of the election observation mission as well as the way he sees the long-term EU-Ukraine relationship.
What can an EP election observation mission such as yours achieve?
As the political controversies in Ukraine are very hot, the solution chosen was to hold early elections. I believe that these early elections per se cannot solve the major political problems of the country. If the elections are not free and fair and if they are not able to produce a Parliament which reflects society in terms of aspirations and political orientations, then this might complicate the already difficult situation. We hope that the presence of international neutral and unbiased observers will ensure the fairness and the freedom of these elections. Ukraine some years ago experienced very problematic elections - that were annulled - and we hope that this will not be repeated this time.
How important are these elections for Ukraine and for the EU?
These elections could pave the way to a strong and representative government supported by a legitimate Parliament and for internal reforms in the economic and social fields. The new political context could allow the country to adopt the necessary constitutional reforms so as to build up an appropriate system of checks and balances.
Ukraine is the most immediate strategic neighbour of the EU, so we cannot be indifferent to the political life in that country. In 2004, what many have called Orange Revolution took place. This is a very nice word, but real revolutions happen quite seldom. We would like to have more evolution than revolution.
What will be the main focus of your attention in carrying out the observation mission?
One is the list of people allowed to vote. If these lists are not accurate, there are possibilities for fraud as same people might be voting several times in different places. Thus, people voting from home should be allowed to do so only if they have good reason. It’s the same with people who do not vote at their constituency, but are travelling and ask to vote far from their homes.
Another possibility to watch for is that some of the ballot papers are annulled, for example by putting a second stamp, very quickly in the confusion that accompanies the opening of the ballot boxes, when people are trying to put the ballot papers in order. We have to be sure that the process is done in an appropriate way.
There are also quite sensitive moments, when the results of the count are transmitted from an electoral bureau to the central election committee. During this process, it is possible that papers are lost, that figures are changed. Moreover, because some less objective observers may be present, in addition to neutral observers, we must be sure that they do not disturb, influence or pressure voters.
What will be the key factors determining the EU-Ukraine relationship in the future?
I would start with an objective factor: the strategic position of Ukraine but also its resources, which are extremely important, and recommend a strong relationship between the EU and Ukraine. And if the desire, very often heard, of Ukrainians to one day be full members of the EU is true, then certainly we have to take it seriously and see what should be done in order to reach that target in the most profitable way for all sides. This depends on whether this potentially attractive integration of Ukraine into the EU is supported by efforts to modernise the country and develop democracy and a market economy, at a political level but also at a societal level. I am optimistic, but on the other hand I think that the road will be long, we should not let ourselves be led by wishful thinking.
20070921STO10556 Portrait of MEP Adrian Severin Election observation Delegation to Ukraine: Elections in Ukraine: orange or blue?
EN
1
PHOTO
20070925PHT10730.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/members/expert/searchForm/view.do?partNumber=1&name=Severin&id=33990&language=EN
EN
3
LINK
/parliament/expert/staticDisplay.do?id=61&language=EN
EN
4
LINK
/activities/expert/delegations/presentation.do?delegation=1264&language=EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070921STO10555 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
