Transport Committee favours single EC quality mark for tourist accommodation
Tourism
2007-10-09 - 16:52
A three-star label does not always guarantee the same hotel quality standards in Amsterdam as in Athens. Plans for an EU-wide classification of tourist accommodation, an EC quality mark, and visa, labelling, health tourism, accessibility and promotion measures to boost the European tourism market, are set out in an own-initiative report adopted by the EP Transport Committee on Tuesday 9 October.
The difficulty of developing a consistent cross-policy approach to tourism at EU level has resulted in various drawbacks that have hampered growth in tourism and increase the risk that Europe could lose market share. To remedy these drawbacks, measures are needed in the following fields, says the report, which was drafted by chair Paolo Costa (ALDE, IT), and approved with 33 votes in favour, 1 against and no abstentions.
Visa policy
MEPs called on the Schengen Member States to establish common consular desks for granting visas to non-EU applicants, and highlighted the need to simplify and reduce the cost of visa application procedures. These desks should apply the same visa criteria and improve the welcome offered to visa applicants. Procedures should also be simplified for tourists issued with visas for non-Schengen EU countries, within the limits of security rules required to combat illegal immigration, terrorism and cross-border crime, they added.
Labels
Members took the view that the EU's multiplicity of local labels needs to be consolidated, for better international recognition. They therefore called on the Commission, in co-operation with the European catering trade organisation, HOTREC to promote common tourist accommodation labelling processes in the different Member States and to promote quality models that had proved effective elsewhere (for example the Qualmark in New Zealand), in order to improve visibility.
Health tourism
The committee also said that to combat a decline in health tourism, there was a need for a specific Community directive to define the recognition and use of hydro-thermal resorts and the role of health tourism and thermal cures in connection with tourist facilities. This is a sector in which additional resources could help to create a significant amount of new direct and indirect employment, it added.
Accessible tourism
Member States and the Commission were called on to initialize an "Access for all" EC label that would guarantee the accessibility of facilities to people with reduced mobility. This label would cover facilities such as accommodation, restaurants, leisure and natural sites, monuments and museums.
Promoting EU destinations
MEPs welcomed the implementation of a selection process for a yearly "European destination of excellence" as Parliament had proposed in September 2005.
Cyclists and the Iron Curtain
Finally, the Committee urged the Commission to promote the cross-border memorial cycle route along the former Iron Curtain, as an example of "gentle mobility in tourism" and as a symbol of the reunification of Europe.
2007-10-08 Committee on Transport and Tourism In the chair Paolo COSTA ALDE IT
Procedure: own-initiative --
Plenary vote: November 2007, Strasbourg
20071008IPR11330
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
