Opening of the Brussels plenary session - in the presence of the freed Bulgarian medics
Institutions
2007-10-10 - 16:08
The House paid tribute to Fausto CORREIA who died on Monday night. Mr Fausto CORREIA was a Portuguese Member of the European Parliament from 2004. The House also paid tribute to former French MEP Christian de La Malène who died on 26 September.
Selected highlights of the Brussels plenary session 10-11 October 2007 include: Wednesday 10 October 2007 The freed Bulgarian nurses held in Libya will be present for the Brussels plenary session at the invitation of EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering.
The European Parliament President Hans-Gert Pöttering will open the session with a statement on the World/European Day against the Death Penalty (10 October) . In the resolution adopted at the last plenary, MEPs gave their "full support to EU institutions and Members States to declare, together with the Council of Europe, a European Day against the Death Penalty on 10 October each year". Parliament regrets "the lack of unanimity in the Council on this issue and calls on the future Polish Government to fully support this initiative that reflects the basic values of the European Union." Just eight days before the crucial summit in Lisbon, MEPs will debate the preparation of the informal summit of heads of state and government . The current Intergovernmental Conference is due to complete its work as quickly as possible, and in any case before the end of 2007, so as to allow for sufficient time to ratify the resulting Treaty before the European Parliament elections in June 2009 . The House will then debate a key report on the future composition and number of seats per Member State in the European Parliament . The allocation of seats approved in committee follows the rules established by the June 2007 European Council, which invited the European Parliament to present a proposal by October this year. The draft Reform Treaty lays down that the new EP composition will be decided by the European Council acting by unanimity, on the basis of Parliament's proposal and after obtaining its consent. The Nice Treaty and the Accession Treaties for Romania and Bulgaria allocated 72 MEPs for the UK for the 2009 European elections. In the EP report, the UK has 73 MEPs. For Ireland, there is no change with both Nice and the EP report allocating 12 MEPs to Ireland for the 2009 European elections. MEPs will then debate on a resolution on the humanitarian situation in Gaza after hearing statements from the Commission and the Council. On 27 September, the Conference of Presidents made a statement saying that it "deplored the humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip." The Conference was informed about serious declines in health indicators, such as increased rates of malnutrition and chronic diseases. The vote takes place on Thursday. The financing of the Common Agriculture Policy comes under the spotlight with the Agriculture Committee saying it would like all national lists of recipients of EU direct farm aid to be published on the Internet and for links to be created from the Commission's website to websites of the paying agencies in the Member States. Currently thirteen Member States have set up on-line registers accessible to the public via the Europa website. On the sidelines of the plenary, at 5pm , there will be a seminar on the Sakharov Prize for freedom of thought . The three nominees are Russian journalist Anna Politkovskaya, Sudanese lawyer Salih Mahmoud Osman and Chinese dissidents Zeng Jinyan and Hu Jia. The leaders of Parliament's Political Groups will choose a winner in October The prize will be awarded in plenary in December. Thursday 11 October 2007 The House debates and votes on two transport reports on Thursday. First, the Transport Committee recommends that the Parliament should give the green light to the EU-US aviation agreement which was signed at the EU-US summit of 30 April 2007 and which the Council endorsed and decided to apply provisionally as from 30 March 2008. Second, the Transport Committee is calling for a "master plan" for enhanced airport capacity in order to promote and better coordinate any national and cross-border initiative for building new airport capacities and to make better use of existing capacities.
20071008IPR11350 Brussels plenary session - 10-11 October 2007 Agenda of the part-session - Corrigendum - 10-11 October 2007
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/agenda.do?language=EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070927BRI10862 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
