Plenary Session 24-27 September - Burma, Equality, Dangerous Toys
Institutions
2007-10-01 - 16:48
Burma, energy, equality featured in 2nd September plenary
MEPs covered a wide range of topics during the second September plenary sitting in Strasbourg, ranging from a debate on the unrest in Burma to discussion of racial and gender equality, concerns about toys manufactured in China and the third railway package. Outside the plenary the shortlist for the 2007 Sakharov Prize for freedom of thought was announced. The nominees are Russian journalist Anna Politkovskaya, Sudanese lawyer Salih Mahmoud Osman and Chinese dissidents Zeng Jinyan and Hu Jia.
Burma featured heavily with comments from parliament's president Hans-Gert Pöttering at the opening, a debate and an EP resolution backing the demonstrators, condemning the brutal reaction of the authorities and callinng for the international community to prepare "targeted economic sanctions" against the regime should it fail to respond.
The third railway package deals with the opening up of the rail market, a European licence for train drivers and the rights of rail passengers.
MEPs also discussed and adopted two reports on energy - the first calling on the European Commission to present, by the end of 2007 at the latest, a proposal for a renewable energy legislative framework. The second says the Energy Charter Treaty should be the cornerstone of a common European foreign policy on energy and advocates creating a post for a "High Official of Foreign Energy Policy" to co-ordinate EU activities in the field.
20070927FCS10894
Monday in plenary: energy, transport feature
3rd railway package gets the green light The second September plenary began with a report on energy and three on railways. Before the debates, President Hans-Gert Pöttering expressed Parliament's "solidarity and sympathy" with the people of Burma, who are demonstrating against the military government there. Outside the sitting, the shortlist of three finalists for the 2007 Sakharov Prize for freedom of thought was announced.
Mr Pöttering opened the session by commemorating former British MEP (1979-2003) and human rights campaigner Lord (Nicolas) Bethell who died recently. The President asked for a minute of silence for Lord Bethell, who played a leading part in creating the Sakharov Prize, and for two Spanish soldiers killed in Afghanistan on Monday. The House agreed to debate the situation in Burma on Wednesday. "Strong political will needed" The first debate was on a report on renewable energy that calls on the Commission to present a proposal for a renewable energy legislative framework before the end of the year. During the March 2007 European summit, member states set a binding target to produce 20% of all the energy consumed in EU from renewable sources by 2020. The rapporteur, Danish Socialist Britta Thomsen, underlined the need for a common energy policy. "We must achieve security of supply, a reduction of CO2 emissions and the creation of new jobs by means of green energy." Zbigniew Kuźmiuk (PL, UEN) criticized the EU for "not having a common energy policy." Ms Thomsen also said "we need to see biofuels as part of renewable energy. The EP must provide a signal to Member States that it is serious about this type of energy." Willem Schuth (DE, ALDE) said "Bio energy is likely to have a primary role in the energy discussion but should not lead to distortion of competition. Biofuels from third countries if imported must follow stringent criteria." However, David Hammerstein (ES, Greens) was concerned that biofuel use could lead to negative consequences for poor countries: "Our desire for biofuels could endanger world food supplies. We have to ask ourselves: should we eat or should we drive ? " Pilar Ayuso (ES, EPP-ED) said "Our group agrees new investments in the sector are needed in order to make new energy compatible with old forms of energy." These goals should be reached at national level, "we call upon Member States to achieve this by investing in and the better use off renewable energies." Third Railway Package MEPs then turned their attention to three agreements about the development of the Community's railways: opening up the market, a European licence for train drivers and the rights of rail passengers. EU Transport Commissioner Jacques Barrot said Monday in Paris that there will be efforts next year to develop railways for the transport of goods in order to fight global warning. Sakharov Shortlist The three finalists for this year's Sakharov Prize for freedom of thought are: Sudanese human rights attorney Salih Mahmoud Osman, deceased Russian journalist and human rights activist Anna Politkovskaya and Chinese human rights defenders Zeng Jinyan and Hu Jia. The political group leaders will pick the winner on October 25. The award ceremony will take place in Strasbourg on 11 December. The shortlist was announced during a joint meeting of the Foreign Affairs and Development Committee. Post briefing
Tuesday in plenary; Toy safety, foreign energy policy, sugar
Dangerous toys continue to raise concerns From among the many interesting topics on Tuesday's plenary agenda, take a look at MEP reactions to dangerous toys from China, the main benefits of a common EU foreign energy policy and the reform of the sugar market.
Discussing toy safety , in the context of recent worries about Chinese manufactured toys, MEPs urged clear standards and information. British Conservative Malcolm Harbour said, "Consumers are entitled to more and better information," while Dutch ALDE member Toine Manders said "If we do not reach 100% safety, then at least we must reach 100% accountability." Toy safety is currently covered by the Toy Directive, which leaves it to makers and importers to ensure that products are safe and the authorities informed if there is a problem. Enforcement is at a national level. German Socialist Evelyne Gebhardt said, "Our goal is to reach the highest standards...we need to do a lot in the EU to have safe products just 3 months before Christmas and we are angry it has taken the Commission so long to reform the Toy Directive.” Non-attached British MEP, Jim Allister approached the issue from another angle. “If we had not decimated our own manufacturing industry by punitive regulation, then maybe now we would not be so dependent on China." Read more details of the debate via the link below Should the EU have a common foreign energy policy? The own-initiative report by Polish conservative Jacek Saryusz-Wolski looks at ways to face challenges to energy security. It advocates a common foreign policy for energy based on the principles of diversification, unity in defending EU's interests ,solidarity and strengthening cooperation between partners; transit and consumer countries based on reciprocity. "The EU has to be determined, active and united" he said. EP wants sweetners to help stop sugar production The European Commission wants the EU sugar industry to cut production by 6 million tonnees by 2010. If the industry can't make the cuts, then the Commission plans to impose "linear quotas". While the Parliament backs the reform, it suggested increasing compensation to producers and regions to encourage them to cutback rather than having to impose quotas. The latest reform follows failed 2006 plans to cut prices and production. EU ministers have the final say over sugar reform and are expected to reach a common position later this week.
Wednesday in plenary: MEPs focus on Burma, Immigration, illegal renditions
Blue card for immigrants? On Wednesday, MEPs turned their attention to the escalating crisis in Burma, as well as holding a keynote debate on legal and illegal immigration, during which the idea of a European "blue card" for skilled immigrants (similar to the US green card system) was considered. Also on the agenda: the follow up of the EP report on alleged CIA secret detention and "rendition" operations involving EU member states, and so-called "dys" conditions.
Speakers from across the House condemned what Geoffrey Van Orden, speaking for the EPP-ED group, described as the "odious" Burmese regime. Noting that a "desperate situation has now turned to tragedy", he underlined the need for strong action, notably tougher sanctions, and called in particular for China to use its leverage in Burma to improve the situation. For the Socialist Group, Barbara Weiler noted that the protests begun by Buddhist monks enjoyed the support of the broad population. She ended on a positive note, expressing confidence that "in this region it is possible to build democratic systems", calling on the UN, EU and other countries in the region to work together to this end. There was cross-party support for a joint motion calling for coordinated international action to deter the Burmese regime from violence against its own people and to encourage a move to genuine pluralist democracy. The EP also once again called for the release of opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi, a past winner of the European Parliament's Sakharov Prize for freedom of thought, and the integration of her National League for Democracy organisation in the national political process. "Blue card" for Europe MEPs debated reports about immigration and illegal immigration, relating to a policy plan for legal migration and the priorities in the fight against illegal immigration. The door is now open to the possibility of establishing an EU work permit for highly skilled workers (the so-called blue card). They said that illegal immigration cannot be countered unless means and channels of legal immigration are established at the same time. On the issue of mass regularisation of illegal immigrants, MEPs said it "should be a one-off event since such a measure does not resolve the real underlying problem." The principle of respect of human dignity was underlined throughout the debate. After all, as one MEP said, "the only crime of these people is to have been born in poor countries". Illegal renditions back in Parliament Secret detentions, unlawful inter-state transfers and supposed illegal CIA operations involving EU member states were back on the agenda Wednesday. Most MEPs criticized the lack of co-operation from the EU Council of Ministers. Italian Socialist Claudio Fava said, “We have asked the Council to put pressure on governments to give information. We’re not satisfied! Public opinion is worried: the silence of the EU Council and the governments are a lost occasion for Europe”. However, Jas Gawronski (IT, EPP-ED) recalled his group didn’t support Fava’s report and said evidence was insufficient. “Let’s stop arguing about this subject on which nothing new has been discovered, let’s leave the investigations to magistrates and let’s concentrate on political proposals.” Franco Frattini said the Commission will present a report on the efficiency of anti-terrorist measures. He said he is still expecting answers from the Polish and Romanian governments about their investigations. A representative for the Council of Ministers underlined that the EU doesn’t have competences on secret services surveillance, and that national investigations are ongoing. In the fight against terrorism, “our strongest weapons are our values and principles,” he said. "Dys" problems Late Wednesday EU strategy on "dys" problems (dysphasia, dyspraxia, dyslexia, dyscalculia or attention deficit disorder, etc), which concern more than 10% of children, were under debate.
Thursday in plenary: Burma vote, racial and ethnic discrimination, gender equality
Gender equality gaps remain Thursday saw MEPs follow up their earlier debate on Burma with a joint resolution condemning the reaction of the Burmese authorities to recent demonstrations. MEPs also discussed and adopted two reports on equality of treatment; the first one on racial and ethnic discrimination and the second on equality between women and men in the EU.
With hourly news coming in of deaths, injuries and arrests of protesters in Burma, MEPs adopted a cross-party resolution backing the "courageous action" of demonstrators, condemning the "brutal response" of the authorities, calling for the convocation of a "fully representative National Convention" and for concerted international action, including sanctions, to push for a transition to democracy in Burma.
MEPs urge full implementation of racial equality directive
Kathalijne Maria Buitenweg's (Greens/EFA, NL) own-initiative report on racial and ethnic discrimination was adopted by a large majority in Thursday's plenary. During the debate most MEPs welcomed the report urging EU countries to fully implement the Racial Equality Directive. Mr Buitenweg pointed out that "fewer than half of the Member States have implemented the directive properly". It was due to be implemented in July 2003. Commissioner Louis Michel told MEPs that the Commission has launched infringement proceedings against 14 Member States.
The directive was revolutionary at the time of its adoption as it did not limit protection against discrimination to the area of employment, but also social security, education and access to housing.
The debate covered a lot of ground. For Patrick Gaubert, (EPP-ED, FR), concrete action is key, while Hungarian socialist Magda Kósáné Kovács pointed to ethnic divisions new to the EU's agenda . British Socialist Neena Gill and others referred to insensitivity to ethnic customs and religious practices : "Since 2004 there are a number of Sikh boys who have been expelled from schools in France for not removing their turban...At Brussels airport Sikh men are regularly asked to remove their turbans, which is considered a major insult." Latvian green Tatjana Ždanoka spoke about discrimination against linguistic minorities, while Roberta Angelilli an Italian member of the UEN group focused on educational opportunities and access health care.
Equality between women and men in the European Union - 2007
MEPs denounced a lack of progress on eliminating persistent gaps between men and women in pay, employment conditions, access to statutory entitlements, pensions and social security schemes in the Member States. They called on EU countries to support the Commission in monitoring the implementation of national measures in order to assess the effectiveness of policies and respect for the principle of equality.
EN
1
PHOTO
20071001PHT11045.jpg
EN
2
PHOTO
20070925PHT10659.jpg
EN
4
PHOTO
20070925PHT10728.jpg
EN
5
PHOTO
20070927PHT10856.jpg
EN
6
PHOTO
20070927PHT10852.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
