Post-Briefing - 24-27 September 2007 - Strasbourg plenary session
2007-10-01 - 15:38
NB: An audio summary of 24-27 September Strasbourg plenary session is available and can be accessed via the link at the end of this publication.
Opening of the session: tribute to Lord Bethell, new debate and vote on situation in Burma
Parliament's President, Hans-Gert Pöttering, paid tribute to former MEP Lord Nicholas Bethell, who died on 8 September this year. Lord Bethell was an appointed Member of the European Parliament from 1975 to 1979 and an elected Member from 1979 to 2003. A vice-chairman of the Political Affairs Committee, "he fought against oppression around the world, notably in the former Soviet bloc." Lord Bethell was also the driving force behind the creation in 1988 of the EP's Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought (the finalists for this year's prize were chosen on Monday 24 September, at a meeting of the EP Foreign Affairs and Development Committees).
In addition, President Pöttering referred to the situation in Myanmar/Burma, calling on the authorities there to allow their citizens to demonstrate freely and reiterating the EP's hope that Aung San Suu Kyi would be allowed to come to Parliament to receive the Sakharov Prize awarded to her in 1990. Lastly, he announced that two Spanish soldiers had died in an explosion in Afghanistan. The House observed a moment's silence in memory of Lord Bethell and the victims of terrorism.
Third rail package approved - opening up the rail market and European licenses for train drivers
The House adopted three conciliation agreements on the third railway package. The agreements, dealing with the opening up of the rail market, a European licence for train drivers and the rights of rail passengers, were reached in June this year after the Council accepted the EP's final demand for a review every five years of any exemptions Member States grant their domestic railway networks from the rules on passenger rights.
Burma: prepare targeted economic sanctions, say MEPs
The European Parliament has added its voice to the protests mounting worldwide against the Burmese security forces' violent repression of anti-government demonstrations. In a resolution adopted by 563 votes to 3 with 4 abstentions, MEPs backed the demonstrators, condemned the brutal reaction of the authorities and called for the international community to prepare "targeted economic sanctions" against the regime should it fail to respond.
MEPs demand that toys meet EU standards
In adopting a joint resolution on the safety of products, particularly toys, MEPs call on the Commission and the Member States to take all necessary legislative and administrative action to ensure that consumer goods that are marketed within the EU not only comply fully with existing EU standards but also do not put the health and safety of consumers at risk.
EP urges Council to present a resolution on the moratorium on the death penalty to the UN
In a resolution passed by 504 votes in favour, 45 against with 14 abstentions, MEPs called on the Council to present a resolution on the moratorium on the death penalty to the 62nd UN General Assembly in order to have it adopted before the end of this year. The House also reiterated its full support for the establishment of a European Day against the death penalty on 10 October, calling on the future Polish government to fully support this initiative.
Priorities on legal and illegal immigration policies
MEPs debated and voted on two own-initiative reports relating to a policy plan for legal migration and the priorities in the fight against illegal immigration. The House opened the door to the possibility of establishing an EU work permit for highly skilled workers (the so-called blue card) and stated that illegal immigration cannot be countered unless means and channels of legal immigration are established at the same time.
MEPs adopt written declaration on the need for a comprehensive strategy to control cancer
Parliament adopted a written declaration on the need for a comprehensive strategy to control cancer which says "that if cancer is addressed by means of a comprehensive strategy it will soon no longer be the leading cause of death in Europe." The declaration has been signed by more than half of all MEPs, (419 so far) the required number for a declaration to be adopted.
Making it easier for EU citizens living abroad to stand or vote in EP elections
MEPs adopted a report on a Commission proposal that would make it easier for EU citizens to stand or vote in European Parliament elections while living in Member States other than their own. The report was drafted by Andrew Duff MEP. The consultation report also inserts two new provisions to improve the portability of electoral rights within the EU: one on multiple candidatures and the other on deprivation of electoral rights.
No let up in fight against racial discrimination
Parliament adopted an own-initiative report on the application of the Racial Equality Directive of 2000 with 500 votes in favour, 46 against and 24 abstentions. MEPs believe more needs to be done to implement the directive in full, notably on issues such as legal redress, the burden of proof in racial discrimination cases, awareness-raising, data collection and the independence of anti-discrimination bodies.
Male-female equality in Europe
Parliament adopted a report on equality between women and men in the EU in 2007 which takes as its starting point the fourth annual Commission report on gender equality and gender mainstreaming in policy areas. Two major initiatives in 2006 had a bearing on gender equality in the EU: the Commission's adoption of the Roadmap for equality between women and men for 2006-2010, and the adoption of the Pact for Gender Equality.
EP calls for "High Official of Foreign Energy Policy"
The Energy Charter Treaty should be the cornerstone of the common European foreign policy on energy," says a report adopted by a large majority in Parliament. The own-initiative report, by Foreign Affairs committee Chairman Jacek Saryusz-Wolski (EPP-ED, PL), also advocates creating a post for a "High Official of Foreign Energy Policy" to co-ordinate the EU's activities in the field, and recommends diversification and increased energy efficiency to improve the EU's energy security."
EP sets out conditions for its support to the ESDP mission in Chad and the Central African Republic
Parliament gave its approval to a planned European Security and Defence Policy (ESDP) mission to Chad and the Central African Republic (CAR), but listed several conditions which needed to be met for this operation to enjoy parliamentary support. The mission, which is meant to address the insecurity in the two countries resulting from the crisis in the neighbouring Darfur region of Sudan, could possibly be deployed by early November.
A European Institute of Innovation and Technology
Parliament backs the Commission's proposal to set up a European Institute of Technology in its first-reading report adopted by a large majority. However, MEPs want the EIT's name to include "innovation" and say it should be established only after a pilot phase in which two or three "Knowledge and Innovation Communities" run projects, to test its feasibility. MEPs also want the Council to negotiate the EIT's funding with Parliament.
MEPs call for the harmonisation of law on the obligations of service providers
Parliament adopted an own initiative report on the obligation of cross-border service providers drafted by Lasse LEHTINEN (PES, FI) with 526 votes in favour, 38 against with 13 abstentions. MEPs note that the Services Directive (to be transposed into national law by 28 December 2009) creates a new overarching legal framework of the cross-border provision of services but "'does not address the substantive obligations of service providers" nor the remedies of the customer.
Direct support schemes and support schemes for farmers set aside for 2008 and 2009
Parliament adopted a report relating to the direct support schemes and support schemes for farmers relating to the set aside for 2008 and 2009. The European Commission has proposed to set at 0% the obligatory set-aside rate for autumn 2007 and spring 2008 sowings, in response to the increasingly tight situation on the cereals market. Neil PARISH (EPP-ED, UK, South West Conservative) and Chair of the EP Agriculture Committee spoke in favour of the report.
Sugar: more compensation for restructuring, say MEPs
In a consultative vote on the European Commission's plans for speeding up reform of the sugar sector, the European Parliament called for improvements to the way the restructured sugar regime will operate, to avoid arbitrarily reducing quotas and thereby penalising the European sugar industry.
Europe's cultural heritage only a click away?
MEPs backed a Commission plan to set up a European digital library as a direct access point to the European cultural heritage and stresses the importance of multilingual access to the databases. The report was adopted with 481 votes in favour, 26 against and 3 abstentions.
A roadmap for renewable energy in Europe
Parliament adopted an own-initiative report on a roadmap for renewable energy in Europe which calls on the Commission to present, by the end of 2007 at the latest, a proposal for a renewable energy legislative framework. The report also urges the Commission to propose a sectoral approach within the legislative framework, setting clear and realistic binding targets for the electricity, transport and heating and cooling sectors.
Parliament adopts a written declaration condemning illegal construction of a skyscraper and its impact on Catholic Church in Bucharest
Parliament adopted a written declaration firmly condemning the illegal construction of a skyscraper with four basement levels and 20 storeys, which is endangering two buildings belonging to the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Bucharest: St Joseph's Cathedral and the Roman Catholic Metropolitan Palace, both of which figure on the list of historic architectural monuments in Romania.
Adopted texts from the Strasbourg plenary session 24-27 September 2007 can be found here : The draft agenda for the Brussels plenary - 10 and 11 October 2007 is available here : 20070823BRI09775
EN
1
A
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
2
A
/sides/indexPartSession.do?language=EN&reference=2007-09-2
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Opening of the session: tribute to Lord Bethell, new debate on Burma
2007-10-01 - 15:38
At the opening September II Strasbourg plenary session, Parliament's President, Hans-Gert Pöttering, paid tribute to former MEP Lord Nicholas Bethell, who died on 8 September this year. Lord Bethell was an appointed Member of the European Parliament from 1975 to 1979 and an elected Member from 1979 to 2003. A vice-chairman of the Political Affairs Committee, "he fought against oppression around the world, notably in the former Soviet bloc", Mr Pöttering reminded the House. Lord Bethell was also the driving force behind the creation in 1988 of the EP's Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought (the finalists for this year's prize are to be chosen tonight, 24 September, at a meeting of the EP foreign affairs and development committees).
In addition, President Pöttering referred to the situation in Myanmar/Burma, calling on the authorities there to allow their citizens to demonstrate freely and reiterating the EP's hope that Aung San Suu Kyi would be allowed to come to Parliament to receive the Sakharov Prize awarded to her in 1990. Lastly, he announced that two Spanish soldiers had died in an explosion in Afghanistan. The House observed a moment's silence in memory of Lord Bethell and the victims of terrorism.
Agenda changes: addition of debate and vote on Burma
Following up on President Pöttering's statement, MEPs voted to add to the agenda a debate on Burma with the Council and Commission. This was held on Wednesday afternoon, with a vote on a resolution on Thursday.
One change to the Brussels plenary session of 10-11 October was adopted: the joint debate on Community statistics (Bowles and Van den Burg reports) is postponed to the Strasbourg plenary session in late October (22-25 October) to allow time to reach a first-reading agreement.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Transport
Third rail package approved - opening up the rail market and European licenses for train drivers
2007-10-01 - 15:38
The House adopted three conciliation agreements on the third railway package. The agreements, dealing with the opening up of the rail market, a European licence for train drivers and the rights of rail passengers, were reached in June this year after the Council accepted the EP's final demand for a review every five years of any exemptions Member States grant their domestic railway networks from the rules on passenger rights. The vote brings to an end a legislative process on passenger rail services which was launched in 2004 and follows on from earlier rail packages dealing with freight traffic.
Liberalising the rail market: international routes first
International passenger rail services within the EU will be opened up to competition from 1 January 2010. However, the Commission must make an assessment of the situation no more than two years after the directive enters into force, to see if further liberalisation, to include domestic services, should be envisaged. Parliament's rapporteur on this directive was Georg Jarzembowski (EPP-ED, DE). This conciliation agreement was approved with 541 votes in favour, 66 against and 20 abstentions.
He said: "We hope that the railway undertakings will take the opportunity to present their passengers consumer-friendly offers that will be competitive to air carriers. This would lead to a revival of the Community's cross-border railway transport and to a better environment". Mr Jarzembowski regretted that no required parliamentary majority was reached at second reading for the opening of national railway services to competition. But he referred to the agreement reached in conciliation on a report on the application of the directive to be tabled by the Commission in 2012. "This report will propose further measures to the opening up of the passenger market. I hope that the Commission will keep its commitment to assess these market developments".
A European licence for train drivers … and one day for other staff?
Under this directive, which will apply from 2009, train drivers must hold a certificate stating that they meet minimum requirements relating to medical fitness, basic education and general professional skills.
The European Railway Agency will draw up a report 18 months after the directive enters into force, to identify any other train staff performing safety-critical tasks who should be subject to a similar system of licences. Following pressure from Parliament, whose rapporteur was Gilles Savary (PES, FR), no more than 12 months after this the Commission must present a report accompanied, if appropriate, by a proposal for a new law.
Gilles Savary said he was satisfied that by 2012 crew members other than train drivers performing safety-critical tasks may be included within the scope of the directive; one of Parliament's wishes in the negotiations with Council. He could accept the proposal that the European Railway Agency will table a report, 18 months after the directive enters into force, identifying this staff and that the Commission, no more than 12 months thereafter, is to table a report accompanied by a proposal for a new law. "The agreement is an example of good social dialogue at European level and of social interoperability also for others than train drivers".
Basic rights for all passengers
The regulation on the rights and obligations of rail passengers was originally intended to apply only to passengers on international journeys but MEPs successfully fought to include passengers on domestic journeys.
Under the deal reached between the two institutions, when the law enters into force in 2009 all rail passengers will enjoy a set of basic rights (e.g. regarding rail companies' liability for passengers and their luggage, and the right to transport of people with reduced mobility).
Member States may exempt long-distance domestic rail services from the provisions of the regulation on non-basic rights (e.g. the right to take a bicycle on the train), for an initial period of five years, which may subsequently be extended for two further periods of up to five years. Urban, suburban and regional services can be granted an indefinite exemption from those same provisions.
When the law enters into force, compensation in the event of delays on cross-border services will be 25% of the fare for a delay of 60 minutes or more and 50% for a delay of 120 minutes or more, but only if the operator can be held responsible for the delay. And eventually these arrangements will apply to all long-distance services.
Parliament's rapporteur Dirk Sterckx (ALDE, BE) said: "The agreement was a "honourable compromise" and a result of arduous negotiations. It had been very difficult to convince all Member States that a range of basic rights for passengers should be introduced. "The proposals were originally intended to apply only to international journeys, but thanks to this agreement we have succeeded in extending it to include passengers on domestic journeys".
He admitted that the exemptions for railway undertakings up to 15 years were not what Parliament had wished, but said that the agreement as such was important step forward.
The chair of Parliament's negotiating team, Vice-President Alejo Vidal-Quadras (EPP-ED, ES) said: "This is a genuinely European law. It gets away from old-fashioned obsessions with national borders and gives basic rights to passengers on all railway journeys (not just to those on international services, as the Council wanted). In particular, passengers on all long-distance journeys will be treated the same, whether or not their journey crosses national borders."
European Commission - new proposals
Commissioner Jacques Barrot welcomed the conciliation agreement as a fair compromise. He announced that the Commission will come forward with reports on the railway staff other than train drivers as well on the liberalisation of the national railway market.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Human rights
Burma: prepare targeted economic sanctions, say MEPs
2007-10-01 - 15:38
The European Parliament has added its voice to the protests mounting worldwide against the Burmese security forces' violent repression of anti-government demonstrations. In a resolution adopted by 563 votes to 3 with 4 abstentions, MEPs backed the demonstrators, condemned the brutal reaction of the authorities and called for the international community to prepare "targeted economic sanctions" against the regime should it fail to respond. With fresh news arriving by the hour of the deaths, injuries and arrests of monks and ordinary civilians in Burma as they protest against the military government, the European Parliament approved a brief but far-reaching list of demands, some directed at the Burmese government but others aimed at the international community, including China, which many MEPs believe has failed to do enough in the past.
Burmese regime condemned
The resolution adopted today "applauds the courageous action of the Burmese monks and tens of thousands of other peaceful demonstrators in confronting the anti-democratic and repressive regime in Burma and utterly condemns the brutal response by the Burmese authorities". The EP "expresses its horror at the killing of peaceful protestors, insists that the Security Forces return to barracks and calls for recognition of the legitimacy of the demands" being made as well as for the release of arrested demonstrators and other political prisoners, including Aung San Suu Kyi.
MEPs also decry the regime's "current illegitimate constitutional process" and call instead for "a fully representative fully representative National Convention".
China and Russia urged to back a UN statement on the regime
With a visiting parliamentary delegation from China looking on from the gallery of the Chamber, Parliament chose to send a pointed message regarding their government's role in the situation. The resolution calls on China - and also Russia - to fully support a UN Security Council statement condemning the regime's use of brutal force.
Parliament also calls on the Security Council itself "to empower the UN Secretary-General to take action in order to facilitate national reconciliation and a transition to democracy in Burma, and for the UN General Assembly to take appropriate action".
EU to take lead in pushing for targeted economic sanctions
In a key demand, MEPs press "the EU Council as a matter of urgency, to liaise with the United States, ASEAN and other members of the international community in order to prepare a co-ordinated series of additional measures, including targeted economic sanctions, that might be taken against the Burmese regime if it resorts to violence and does not respond to the call for a return to democracy".
Lastly, the resolution asks the European Commission to provide funding via the European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights "to actively support the pro-democracy movement and NGOs that works for the restitution of good governance in Burma".
Parliament has sought to draw attention to the situation in Burma in numerous resolutions over the years, including one earlier this month. EU measures currently in place include a travel ban on Burma's leaders, an arms embargo and a ban on military cooperation - but no economic sanctions. The EU and the USA yesterday issued a joint declaration, which, among other things, calls on the Security Council to "consider further steps including sanctions". (See links below.)
Debate on Wednesday, 26 September 2007
In Wednesday's debate prior to the vote, Mr Lobo Antunes, Council President-in-Office, said Burma was "at a crossroads". The EU's 27 Member States had issued a declaration urging the Burmese government to respect the right to peaceful demonstration, while foreign policy high representative Javier Solana had called on the government to exercise restraint. The EU had also threatened tougher sanctions.
Commissioner Louis Michel said the international community must try to persuade the government to promote national reconciliation and that in particular China, India, Japan, South Korea and ASEAN must be convinced to play their part. The imminent visit to the country of the UN Special Envoy would be very important. If the Burmese regime was willing to set out a roadmap leading to dialogue and elections, it could count on the EU's support.
Among the EP political group speakers, Geoffrey Van Orden (UK) for the EPP-ED said "the EU prides itself on its attention to human rights and yet seems incapable of acting effectively against tyrannical regimes", but now "it is high time we stopped wringing our hands and got serious". Nevertheless, the key to change lay with Burma's neighbours, notably China. Mr Van Orden had spoken to the leader of a Chinese delegation at the EP today who, while stressing China's policy of non-interference in other countries' internal policies, did say that China would "urge flexibility" on the Burmese regime. Mr Van Orden added that the EU must adopt tougher sanctions - and stick to them. He also criticised Total Oil for "helping to prop up the military junta". Lastly, he said it was a pity the Council and the Commission had not listened to Parliament more closely on this issue in the past.
Barbara Weiler (DE) voiced the indignation of the Socialist group about the events in Burma and said the UN Security Council must take steps to tackle the situation, particularly by urging China to use its influence. It was no longer an option for the regime "to batten down the hatches". She called on Burma to press ahead with its long-awaited constitution and hold democratic elections.
Annemie Neyts-Uyttebroeck (ALDE, NL), on behalf of her group, said that the EU must protest, "not just with words but with deeds", though like other speakers she stressed the key role of Burma's neighbouring countries. The oppression in the country was not just political - there was poverty too, despite its rich natural resources. The regime must understand that Aung San Suu Kyi was not alone and should free her now, along with the people taken prisoner today.
For the UEN group, Brian Crowley (IE) wondered if people had to be "gunned down in the streets and it to appear on television cameras before the international community will respond". He added "We can no longer remain silent" and said "let us act to condemn the violence against peaceful protest but let us also ensure that we can give support to those protesters".
Raul Romeva (ES), for the Greens/EFA group, said Burma was facing a situation of no-return and that the demonstrators had sent a clear message to the junta and the world. He added his voice to the calls to free members of the opposition, including Aung San Suu Kyi.
Bastiaan Belder (IND-DEM, NL) told the House that, after decades of misrule, Burma had degenerated almost into a province of China, and that China bore a heavy burden of responsibility for the situation.
Luca Romagnoli, a non-aligned Member, who said the Burmese regime was based on drug-smuggling, drew particular attention to the plight of the country's Karen minority.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Human rights
EP urges Council to present a resolution on the moratorium on the death penalty to the UN
2007-10-01 - 15:38
MEPs called on the Council to present a resolution on the moratorium on the death penalty to the 62nd UN General Assembly, in order to adopt it before the end of the year. In a resolution passed by 504 votes in favour, 45 against with 14 abstentions, the House also reiterates its full support for the establishment of a European Day against the death penalty on 10 October, calling on the future Polish government to fully support this initiative. The Council has been unable to reach a decision on the European Day against the death penalty, because the Polish government has been blocking it. It argues that any such day should also condemn abortion and euthanasia. Legislative elections are taking place there on 21 October, and the Parliament called on the future Polish government to back the project of a European Day against the death penalty by "fully support[ing] this initiative that reflects basic values of the European Union."
Worldwide moratorium on the death penalty
The House urged the Presidency to "present a resolution on the moratorium at the opening of the 62nd United Nations General Assembly, [...] in order to adopt it before the end of this year." During the debate yesterday afternoon, the Presidency stated that it would table a resolution "by early- to mid-October." The UN's Third Committee (social, humanitarian and cultural affairs) could vote on the draft resolution in October of this year, allowing for a vote in the General Assembly in December.
Debate 25 September 2007
The proposed Council decision on a moratorium on the death penalty was debated by MEPs and Council representatives on Tuesday afternoon. The two key topics were the status of the resolution to be submitted to the UN General Assembly on a universal moratorium against the death penalty, and the Polish opposition in the Council to establishing a European Day against the death penalty.
Political group speakers
Speaking for the EPP-ED, Laima Liucija ANDRIKIENĖ (LT) said that the EU should stand together on the UN resolution, despite its differences on other issues, such as the European Day against the death penalty.
For the Socialists, Martin SCHULZ (PES, DE) cited an interview with Polish President Lech Kaczynski, in which the latter expressed his support for the death penalty, but noted that the political climate in Europe did not favour its reintroduction. "The European Parliament must ensure that the political climate in Europe stays hostile towards any efforts to reintroduce the death penalty," Mr Schulz said. He asked the Council Presidency how long it would tolerate in silence the fact that an EU Member State has paralyzed the Council on this issue.
Marco PANNELLA (ALDE, IT) argued that the universal moratorium could have been achieved as long ago as 1994, but that successive Council presidencies have refused to take responsibility and push for its adoption in the UN.
Konrad SZYMAŃSKI (UEN, PL) asked how the EU, from its comfort in Brussels, could tell third countries that they should abolish the death penalty. He said politics touches the question of life and death in other areas too, such as abortion, euthanasia and biomedics, and that all of these subjects needed to be considered.
Monica FRASSONI (Greens/EFA, IT) asked why the Council decided that it needed unanimity on the question of the European day against the death penalty. "You could have forced a vote on this issue," she said, calling the failure to take a decision a "missed opportunity".
Luisa MORGANTINI (GUE/NGL, IT) said it was "saddening to know that the Europe we have always defended has come to include such views" as those expressed by Mr Szymanski. "We need to isolate voices who still argue against" the abolition of the death penalty, she said.
Jean-Claude MARTINEZ (ITS, FR) said the support for the death penalty was a "prehistoric aberration," while Irena BELOHORSKÁ (NI, SK) urged the five EU countries who have not yet ratified Article 13 of the European Convention on Human Rights to do so.
Individual speakers
Hélène FLAUTRE (Greens/EFA, FR) asked how a country could possibly instrumentalise the subject of the death penalty, and told the Council that it should not tolerate such positions. Józef PINIOR (PES, PL) said that Mr Szymanski's remarks reminded him of Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad's speech in New York. "As far as I'm concerned, your government has left my country, and gone towards the positions of Iran and Belarus," he told Mr Szymanski. Genowefa GRABOWSKA (PSE, PL) said the Polish government's decision was due solely to internal political considerations to do with the upcoming elections.
Council Presidency response
The Council Presidency represented by Secretary of State for European Affairs Manuel LOBO ANTUNES replied that it plans to table a resolution to the UN in early to mid-October. Responding to more insistent questions by Ms Frassoni about which articles required unanimity in Council to set up a European Day against the death penalty, he replied that Council had decided that decisions of this nature require unanimity.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Consumers
MEPs demand that toys meet EU standards
2007-10-01 - 15:38
In adopting a joint resolution on the safety of products, particularly toys, MEPs call on the Commission and the Member States to take all necessary legislative and administrative action to ensure that consumer goods that are marketed within the EU not only comply fully with existing EU standards but also do not put the health and safety of consumers at risk. The resolution was adopted with 660 votes in favour, 18 against and 7 abstentions. The House calls on the Commission to present the planned revision of the Toys directive 88/378//EC (see link below) by the end of this year, making sure it includes efficient and effective requirements for product safety; as public health and consumer protection considerations play an important part in the Toys Directive, much clearer provisions are needed to ensure the safety of products and to provide consumers with trust in their safe use.
In 2006, 48% of detected unsafe products originated from China and 17% were of unidentified origin. MEPs point out that 24% of all detected unsafe products are children’s toys and that a very high proportion of the toys marketed in the EU are sourced from China. MEPs also say that recalls of unsafe toys are fully justified, but are merely a means of last resort that does not provide effective consumer protection because, apart from the fact that they often come late, the average return rate for toy recalls is very low, meaning that the vast majority of unsafe toys normally remain with consumers.
David MARTIN (PES, UK) said: "I believe we need three courses of action. Firstly, we have to push manufacturers to take a greater interest in their supply chain and, if necessary, apply penalties to those who do not take that interest. Secondly, we need the Commission to bring together the Member States to ensure tougher inspections in Europe, to ensure adequate customs control and to ensure the application of the existing European Union laws."
Robert STURDY (EPP-ED, UK) said: "We live in a global market, and the last thing I want is to see legislation that is trade defensive. We have to accept the fact that products are going to come in from the rest of the world, but they must be of the same standard. I want to ensure the safety of my constituents – the children, the grandchildren of the people that have elected me – when they go to buy their Christmas toys to ensure and guarantee that they are not going to die from some lead paint."
Revision of the Toys Directive
The House calls on the Commission to improve the enforcement measures of the directive, including effective sanctions for non-compliance. The House calls on the Commission to present the planned revision of the Toys directive 88/378//EC by the end of this year, making sure it includes efficient and effective requirements for product safety; as public health and consumer protection considerations play an important part in the Toys Directive, much clearer provisions are needed to ensure the safety of products and to provide consumers with trust in their safe use.
Control of CE and other markings
MEPs call on the Commission to ensure that the CE marking is a guarantee of compliance with EU technical legislation, and stresses that the CE marking, given its self-regulatory character, was never intended to be an EU-wide safety mark.
The House urges the Commission to assess the added value of creating a common European Consumer Safety Label, complementary to the CE marking, for all economic operators, thus helping the consumer to make an informed choice between products. Parliament underlines that this European Consumer Safety Label must be voluntary and, when adopted by a producer, should replace all national safety labels.
The European Parliament calls on the Commission to clarify the liability of producers and importers in the event of misuse of the CE mark and considers that adequate penalties for misuse should be instituted. Parliament calls for misuse of other voluntary marks to be made subject to penalties as well.
Ban on imports of dangerous consumer goods
MEPs call on the Commission to clarify the procedure on import bans on a case-by-case basis when safety standards are regularly not met. The House also urges the Commission to use its powers to ban consumer goods from the EU market if they are found to be unsafe.
Role of Member States
The House calls on the Member States to ensure strict enforcement of product laws, particularly toy safety laws, and to step up efforts to improve market surveillance and especially national inspections. MEPs also call on the Member States to make available sufficient resources to be able to undertake comprehensive and effective controls.
Finally, the House calls on the Member States, in compliance with Community law, to make full use of all the possible ways legally available to them of ensuring that non-compliant or unsafe toys are prevented from being placed on the market or are withdrawn or recalled from the market.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Immigration
Parliament adopts priorities on legal and illegal immigration policies
2007-10-01 - 15:38
MEPs debated and voted on two own-initiative reports relating to a policy plan for legal migration and the priorities in the fight against illegal immigration. The Chamber opened the door to the possibility of establishing an EU work permit for highly skilled workers (the so-called blue card) and defended that illegal immigration cannot be countered unless means and channels of legal immigration are established at the same time. The own-initiative report, aimed to elaborate a plan on legal migration, "supports the creation of an EU work permit" -Known as the blue card, similar idea to the current US green card- "to facilitate the free movement of 'brains' within Europe and the transfer of personnel within multinational companies". MEPs also ask to bring forward a study on the possible implementation of the blue-card system but reminded that defining the specific needs and quotas for economic migrants remains a Member State competence. EC Vice-president Franco Frattini will present Commission's legislative proposal on the blue-card system next 23 October.
Europe needs economic migrants, stressed MEPs. "the reality of ageing and demographic changes necessitate rethinking immigration policies since the current and future situations of the EU labour markets can be broadly described as in demand of well-managed legal immigration". The text adopted supports the intention of the Commission to define the conditions of entry and stay for other selected categories of economic immigrants, including unskilled or low-skilled workers.
MEPs also emphasise the particular responsibility of the media (in particular European public radio and television broadcasters) in the dissemination of an accurate image of immigration and in countering stereotypes. "Spreading the belief that immigration is uncontrolled is wrong", said MEPs and Europe should avoid the danger of exploiting the debate on migration "for demagogic and populist purposes".
The report, drafted by Lilli Gruber (PES, IT), finally states that the number of third-country nationals legally resident in the 27 EU Member States is approximately 18.5 million (whilst nearly 9 million EU citizens are resident in a Member State other than their own), according to Eurostat.
Fight against illegal immigration
Javier Moreno Sánchez (PES, ES) presented the second own initiative report on policy priorities in the fight against illegal immigration. The report adopted today stresses that irregular migrants must not be treated like criminals and reiterates its firm opposition to the idea of setting up reception or holding centres for illegal immigrants or asylum seekers outside the Union's borders and in immigrants' regions of origin.
The regularisation issue
The report recalls that numerous Member States have carried out regularisations or said they will do so, and that these decisions are, in the present state of law, a matter for the discretion of the Member States "but quite often a signal of lack of appropriate measures in place". MEPs believe that en masse regularisation of illegal immigrants "should be a one-off event since such a measure does not resolve the real underlying problem"
Frontex
The report deeply regrets the fact that some Member States have failed to honour their undertakings to provide logistic and human support for its operations. MEPs consider that, in the face of the migratory flow from the African continent towards Europe, Southern Member States on the external frontiers of the Union, notably smaller Member States, such as Malta and Cyprus, are currently shouldered with a disproportionate burden which calls for the strengthening of measures for the joint management of the Union’s external borders.
The number of third-country nationals in an irregular situation in the EU appears to be, according to somewhat conflicting estimates, between 4.5 m and 8 m. Parliament will adopt in the coming months two important directive proposals: a first one to give common rules for the return of illegal immigrants and a second one to impose sanctions on employers of illegal immigrants, stepping up workplace inspections.
Debate - 26 September 2007
Parliament debated the EU's policies on immigration, with MEPs voting on two reports on legal migration and illegal immigration. The principle of respect of human dignity was underlined throughout the debate. Many speakers recalled the tragic images of migrants being drowned in the Mediterranean, with others calling for the EU's external border force, Frontex, to be strengthened. The idea of an EU blue-card similar to the US green-card needed to be further developed, said MEPs.
Speaking for the Council Presidency, Manuel LOBO ANTUNES stressed that the Council has been adapting the "global approach" on legal and illegal migration adopted in December 2006 to keep pace with developments, including events on the EU's southern maritime borders. For example, at the June 2007 Council this approach was expanded to strengthen relations with neighbouring and third countries in order to fight illegal migration, and to develop opportunities for legal migration.
Frontex is working
Mr Lobo Antunes reiterated the importance of the Frontex border security agency, and stressed that new work done in line with Malta's suggestions since June includes urgent measures to strengthen existing arrangements, such as bilateral support for Member States under exceptional migration pressure and co-operation with third countries, to include return measures. But third countries must also "shoulder their own responsibilities for search and rescue" and "building an effective framework for return" of illegal migrants, he said.
Since October 2006 Frontex has developed measures to police the EU's external borders better, including establishing a European coastal patrols network and various joint operations in the Atlantic and the Mediterranean. It is now implementing the regulation on temporary aid to Member States under exceptional pressure (which entered into force on 20 August), but, stressed Mr Lobo Antunes, the availability of technical equipment from the "CRATE" list is crucial to this aid.
Illegal employment
The Council services are now analysing a proposed directive, tabled by the Commission in May 2007, to combat illegal employment of migrants, he said.
Legal migration
The Council is also considering a proposed single residence permit for legal migrants, and also, as a follow-up to the action plan on legal migration, at a specific work permit to facilitate the free movement of highly-skilled workers, he added.
External relations
Finally, the Council is looking at ways to build balanced partnerships with third countries, so as to facilitate temporary "circular" migration, he said.
Commission Vice-President Franco FRATTINI who is responsible for justice, freedom and security, stressed that a global approach was needed to migration, above all because of the underlying causes such as poverty that pushed people to emigrate. "A security-driven approach", with patrolling of the high seas, could only be part of the solution.
Speaking about legal immigration, he said the EU needed migrants, not just because of its falling population but to make its economy more competitive. He added that free migration within the EU itself was not yet a reality but, on the demographic issue, believed more should be done to encourage people to have children.
Among practical measures, Mr Frattini spoke of the proposed blue card for migrants, which would encourage "circular migration". This could be an answer to Europe's need for highly-skilled workers while not exacerbating the brain drain from poorer countries. Legislation on common rights for economic migrants, with a single work and residence permit in one document, was another measure on the table. In addition, in 2008 the Commission would put forward proposals on seasonal workers and making cross-border movement easier for migrants working in a company with branches in different EU countries.
Lastly, while stressing that illegal migration must not be tolerated, the Commissioner lauded the role of Frontex in saving 1200 people from the sea over the summer but concluded by warning that Europe would need to work on immigration issues for many years to come.
Rapporteur - legal migration
Lilli GRUBER (PES, IT) told the House that immigration must not be seen as an "emergency", that it had causes, such as war and poverty, and that the EU must come up with the right policies to deal with it. At all events "our economies would not work" without immigrants. She welcomed the directive on the rights and obligations of migrants but wanted it to come under the co-decision procedure (giving Parliament a greater say), without a veto in Council.
She stressed the need for reliable statistics on migration and urged greater responsibility in this area on the part of politicians and the media. She also expressed cautious interest in the mooted blue card for skilled migrants but pointed out that the majority of immigrants were unskilled and said a directive was needed on this category too.
Rapporteur - illegal immigration
Javier MORENO SÁNCHEZ (PES, ES) argued that, while immigration was necessary, illegal immigration must be firmly combated. Secure frontiers were important but he stressed that Frontex was proving effective, although the Member States must ensure it had adequate resources.
A standard European policy on returning migrants was needed, involving readmission agreements with third countries. The question of political will was crucial to dealing with employers of illegal migrant labour and he called for zero tolerance of illegal employment. Lastly, Mr Moreno Sánchez underlined the link between migration and development, saying that migrants must not be regarded as criminals.
Political group speakers
Speaking for the EPP-ED group, Joseph DAUL (FR) said that immigration was a special topic. "We all think of the people that have lost our lives off the coast of Europe", he said. The safeguarding of life, the respect for human dignity, and a solid legal framework should be the principles underlying immigration policy. On illegal immigration, Mr Daul said that Frontex rapid reaction teams needed to be boosted with extra financial resources, but ultimately the Member States were the guardians of the EU's borders. There were, he said, approximately 10-15 million illegal immigrants in the EU and they needed to be addressed with the principle of the respect of human dignity. Mass regularisation however was not the answer as this only led to support for mafia and people traffickers.
Claudio FAVA (PES, IT) recalled the images of forty migrants clinging to a fishing net in the Mediterranean trying to reach Europe which underlined the need for a global approach to immigration and the powerful pull of Europe. Mr Fava said that Europe's fisherman were most interested in saving the fish than the people. The easiest way to step illegal immigration, he said, was to open up channels for legal migration. Mr Fava also underlined the importance of sharing and solidarity between the Member States. He also stressed the importance of respecting human rights and dignity.
Graham WATSON (ALDE, UK) said: "With every human tragedy, during a desperate do nothing decade, liberals and democrats have asked one simple question: how many people must perish before governments see that lifting the drawbridge of fortress Europe serves nobody’s interests? Managing migration is as much in our interests as in the interests of those seeking our shores or prepared to die trying. While populism has propelled a policy forged in the furnace of fear, let us face the facts.
Of course we must patrol Europe’s borders. The report by Javier MORENO SÁNCHEZ (PES, ES) [on illegal immigration] is right to demand that Frontex be given the budget, the staff and the equipment needed to do its job – although suspending Gibraltar from Frontex, equivalent to leaving a hole in the wire, frankly beggars belief. Longer term, however, only a comprehensive EU policy, which punishes the people-smugglers, provides legal routes in and creates hope where there is despair, can counter prevailing trends. Migration will not go away: it is driven by the heady cocktail of despair and hope; it follows the law of supply and demand, but it has the capacity if properly managed to enrich and energise Europe."
In the context of illegal immigration, Cristiana MUSCARDINI (UEN, IT) referred to the 'urgent need for a common policy'. She did accept that Frontex already existed but pointed out that 'you cannot have Frontex on a shoestring' - financial resources were necessary. Mrs Muscardini emphasised that the work of Frontex should not just be about border posts, but also about human trafficking and the defence of human dignity. She concluded by calling for common rules on asylum.
Jean LAMBERT (Greens/EFA, UK) began by stating that "we know that immigration is a fact of life". She pointed out that EU nationals themselves follow paths where they want to "yearn for" and "earn" a better life. She called for 'greater honesty from Member States about the need for migrant workers' in their current economies and urged Members 'not to shed crocodile tears' for immigrants while voting for trade policies that do not allow for potential improvement in the situation. Mrs Lambert stated that EQUAL has given us 'some fantastic examples' of ways of dealing with the questions of employment and equality for all. She concluded by pointing out that it is "not just a question of free movement but also a question of tackling racism and xenophobia".
Giusto CATANIA (GUE/NGL, IT) commented on EU policies to date, referring to 'pushing people back' and criminalising migration. He pointed out that 'we should agree that the policy for illegal immigration should be to stop people being attracted by our economies' and to 'stop the Mediterranean turning into a graveyard'. Mr Catania referred to the need to 'deal with the demographic challenge', in particular based on recent statistics that EU Member States will need 20m migrants by 2030. He called for an assessment of 'what these return policies actually mean', referring to people being held for several months. He concluded by stating that 'I don't think we can say that we are happy with [Frontex's] policies'.
Roger KNAPMAN (UK) speaking for the Independence/Democracy Group, contrasted the EU's tendency to "centralise" immigration policy with Switzerland's tendency to devolve it down to the cantons. The Swiss federal government and the cantons together decide an immigration quota each year, but have rejected the idea of a central agency. Switzerland focuses on integrating migrants (every canton has an integration office) and dispersing them across its territory. This system works because it meets local needs, said Mr Knapman, whereas in the UK, "immigration policy is moving away from the fount of local knowledge".
Figures from the EURODAC database on asylum-seekers suggested that illegal border crossings had grown by over 60% since 2005, said Marine LE PEN (ITS, FR). Mass "regularisation" is "neither an end in itself, nor a panacea", she continued, a lesson that Spain, Belgium and France had learned by trying it, and thus turning themselves into "magnets" for immigration. Instead, the EU should "re-establish border controls", as Frontex is a mere "gadget", and the Schengen agreement is "criminal", she concluded.
Removing illegal immigration is the only viable way to ensure safety of life and limb, said Alessandro BATTILOCCHIO (IT), for the non-attached members. The priorities should be decent reception centres, to inform incomers of their rights, the social integration of migrants, and cracking down on smugglers. Frontex has a modest budget, but sets an example that brings solace to Member States under pressure, he concluded.
British speakers
Jim ALLISTER (NI, UK) said that the ability of a nation state to control its own borders and change its immigration policy as required is a tangible demonstration of sovereignty.
Continuing he stated that "the fact that the United Kingdom cannot now rectify the grave miscalculation which it made in 2004, with its open-door policy to Eastern Europe, is a telling indication of just how much sovereignty we in the United Kingdom have conceded to belong to this club. I say ‘grave miscalculation’ because, instead of the 13,000 predicted immigrant workers, we have had 750,000, with the related massive drain on our welfare system of millions per annum in child benefit and tax credits for children who do not even live in the United Kingdom but qualify because their fathers work there. Because of the rules of the EU, we are powerless to do anything about it, and yet some would have us concede even more powers to Brussels. How foolish we would be to do so."
Philip BRADBOURN (EPP-ED, UK) stated that the topic under discussion is undoubtedly one of the utmost importance to Europe and one where each Member State faces different challenges. For this very reason, he said, whether we are dealing with illegal or legal migration, we must not go down the path of a one-size-fits-all approach. Migration matters must remain a sovereign right of each Member State.
However, Mr Bradbourn stated that he is in favour of greater cooperation between Member States where common ground can be identified and where it can work for the benefit of all. And, like other speakers, he would particularly like to focus the House’s attention on the Frontex system, where recently a further €12m was released to this organisation.
From the outset, Mr Bradbourn stated that the system has suffered as a result of Member States who have pledged resources but who are not honouring their commitments. If this project is going to be a success, he said, we must ensure that these promised resources are made available to the operation as and when needed.
Continuing, he stated that this is only one tool in the struggle to stop illegal immigration. "We must look at new and innovative solutions at the very source where migrants start their journey. We need to look at targeted campaigns in the states of origin, making it clear that Europe is not an open door. Most of all, we must also target people traffickers. The other side of this coin means our Member States having effective repatriation policies to deter those who both seek and organise illegal migration."
Concluding, Mr Bradbourn stated that cooperation, not regulation, is needed between Member States. "A one-size-fits-all approach cannot solve the problems of immigration and we must not fall into the trap of thinking that more Europe is the solution."
Response to the debate from the Council
Summing up for the Council Presidency, Mr Lobo Antunes stressed that the EU's immigration strategy is on the "right track". It combines humanity and solidarity: humanity, because it is directed to people seeking a place in our societies, and solidarity, because immigration is not an issue for one, two or three Member States - it needs a response from all.
Frontex is clearly useful, and we need to provide it with the necessary tools, he continued. Dialogue with third countries should also be stepped up, because immigration problems will be solved only by addressing their causes. It is to be hoped that the coming EU-Africa summit will produce progress here, he concluded.
Response by Commissioner Frattini
Replying to the debate, Commissioner Frattini agreed with MEPs who had emphasised the importance of aid and trade policy with Africa as an integral part of the EU's approach to migration. On the protection of external frontiers, he said Frontex must be supported - it had not just saved lives but also arrested around 400 people traffickers - and he urged Parliament to resist proposed cuts to Frontex's funding when it votes on the 2008 budget.
On the question of Member States's rights, he said that even with the proposed EU work permit each Member State would remain free to decide how many non-EU workers it wished to admit. By contrast, he believed EU-wide rules were needed to combat illegal migration.
Lastly, the Commissioner spoke about integration. Each side must respect the culture of the other, and this would include, for example, a rejection of polygamy and forced marriage in Europe and a requirement for immigrants to learn the language of their host country. He wished to see a balance between rights and duties, recognised by parties that were equal.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Women's rights/Equal opportunities
No let up in fight against racial discrimination
2007-10-01 - 15:38
The European Parliament adopted an own-initiative report on the application of the Racial Equality Directive of 2000 with 500 votes in favour, 46 against and 24 abstentions. MEPs believe more needs to be done to implement the directive in full, notably on issues such as legal redress, the burden of proof in racial discrimination cases, awareness-raising, data collection and the independence of anti-discrimination bodies. Directive 2000/43/EC (see link below), known as the Racial Equality Directive, was due to be implemented by all Member States by 19 July 2003. The directive was revolutionary at the time of its adoption because it did not limit protection against discrimination to the area of employment but also covers social security, education and access to housing.
However, according to the draft report of the Civil Liberties Committee, authored by Kathalijne Buitenweg (Greens/EFA, NL), questions remain as to the directive's real impact.
Not all Member States have fully implemented it in their national law. Not many cases are brought to court, which the rapporteur believes may be due to the length and complexity of the procedures. Proving discrimination is notoriously difficult, and the directive's rules on the burden of proof have not been properly applied in some Member States.
Data on race and ethnicity - a useful tool, despite concerns
The collecting of sensitive data, which could be needed to establish indirect discrimination or to assess the extent of discrimination in society, continues to raise concerns and fears in many Member States. The committee "underlines that additional guarantees should be provided for data on race and ethnicity, as these data could be diverted and used for other purposes in the justice and home affairs field" but it does believe such data - for example, statistics on racist crime and on employment - are needed as a tool to combat discrimination.
Moreover, the report urges the EU institutions "to continue to use the situation of ethnic minorities, particularly women and minors, in applicant countries as a criterion for the purpose of assessing preparedness for accession to the European Union".
Independence and funding of equality bodies
Although nearly all Member States now have bodies responsible for equality issues, the report questions whether all such bodies will be able to carry out their functions independently as required by the directive, and whether these bodies have sufficient funding to operate effectively. MEPs believe the Commission can play a role in monitoring the independence of these bodies.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Women's rights/Equal opportunities
Male-female equality in Europe
2007-10-01 - 15:38
The European Parliament adopted a report on equality between women and men in the EU in 2007 which takes as its starting point the fourth annual Commission report on gender equality and gender mainstreaming in policy areas. Two major initiatives in 2006 had a bearing on gender equality in the EU: the Commission's adoption of the Roadmap for equality between women and men for 2006-2010, and the adoption of the Pact for Gender Equality. While welcoming these initiatives, the report drafted by Piia-Noora Kauppi (EPP-ED, FI), makes numerous proposals for promoting gender equality further.
Mrs Kauppi said in the debate: "Although much has been achieved in the past decades, important challenges remain. The focus of the Commission report is on employment issues. For example, gender pay gap, insecurity in the job market and reconciliation of professional family life are issues that have a bearing in the lives of millions of women every single day. They also have a clear link to the demographic challenge facing Europe. As the Commission reports indicates, 6 million of the 8 million jobs created in the EU since 2000 have been taken up by women. Most of these 6 million new jobs for women come from the services sector. 11.7 million new jobs created by the services sector are mostly occupied by women. That is why the services sector, its growth and the internal market is such a key issue for many women in Europe. However, the majority of new jobs for women are part-time jobs, some of them being unsafe and insecure with low salaries."
Employment and pensions: women still disadvantaged
MEPs call on the Commission to propose awareness-raising campaigns, the exchange of best practice, dialogues with citizens and public-private partnership initiatives. They also say the Commission should monitor compliance by Member States with existing Community policy on male-female equality, particularly employment policy. A study on how Member States implement Community legislation is recommended, along with "appropriate action in the event of non-transposition or infringement".
The House advocates gender analysis of the impact of pension reforms on women's lives in the EU as well as the dissemination of best practice on the working environment policies that allow for an effective work-life balance.
Female immigrants and "multiple discrimination "
Women immigrants and those from ethnic minorities can suffer "multiple discrimination", both racial and gender-based, stress MEPs. At the same time the committee argues that immigrants entering the EU must be made aware of the values and existing laws and social conventions on gender equality in the host countries' societies.
Trade agreements and gender issues
Noting that one effect of increased globalisation is the feminisation of poverty, MEPs call on the Commission to ensure that all future trade agreements, for example those within the framework of the WTO, are also scrutinised in the light of gender issues.
Gender equality targets needed
Member States are called upon to develop specific gender equality objectives and targets within the EU Social Inclusion Strategy in order to combat poverty and social exclusion, including a set of policy actions to support non-traditional and one-parent families.
Mainstreaming gender issues into regional development
Lastly, the report argues that EU regional development strategies should take more account of gender equality. The European Social Fund should support measures to improve women's access to the labour market. And regional funds should have a gender budget line for promoting gender equality and for surveys assessing the impact of policies relating to the situation of women.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Public health
MEPs adopt written declaration on the need for a comprehensive strategy to control cancer
2007-10-01 - 15:38
The European Parliament adopted a written declaration on the need for a comprehensive strategy to control cancer which says "that if cancer is addressed by means of a comprehensive strategy it will soon no longer be the leading cause of death in Europe." The declaration has been signed by more than half of all MEPs, (419 so far) the required number for a declaration to be adopted. The declaration calls on the Commission to:
- encourage research and innovation in the area of primary prevention and early detection of cancer
- promote relevant information campaigns for the general public and for all healthcare providers
- ensure that Community legislation contains incentives for industry and researchers alike in order to secure ongoing research and guarantee new generations of medicines and new treatments to combat and control cancer
- secure through networks the dissemination of best practices in order to ensure that citizens have access to the best available treatment.
MEPs call on the Council and Commission to formulate a comprehensive strategy addressing the four basic cancer control factors:
a. prevention
b. early detection
c. diagnosis, treatment and follow-up
d. palliative care;
Lastly, the declaration calls on the Commission to review the relevant Community legislation and measures, upgrading and modifying them in keeping with new scientific advances.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External relations
EP calls for "High Official of Foreign Energy Policy"
2007-10-01 - 15:38
The Energy Charter Treaty should be the cornerstone of the common European foreign policy on energy," says a report adopted by a large majority in Parliament today. The own-initiative report, by Foreign Affairs committee Chairman Jacek Saryusz-Wolski (EPP-ED, PL), also advocates creating a post for a "High Official of Foreign Energy Policy" to co-ordinate the EU's activities in the field, and recommends diversification and increased energy efficiency to improve the EU's energy security." The report, adopted by 553 in favour to 103 against with 27 abstentions calls on the Council and Member States to "create a solidarity mechanism" to deal with crises arising from disruptions of supply, infrastructure damage, or any other emergency. It also proposes appointing, "with the approval of the Council and the Commission, a "double-hatted" "High Official of Foreign Energy Policy", who would be "responsible for co-ordinating all policies under the scope of the common European foreign policy on energy, thereby contributing to the EU's ability to protect its energy security interests in negotiating with the EU's external partners."
Diversification and energy efficiency
The report prescribes various ways to reduce Europe's dependence on foreign sources of energy. It regards it as "vital for the EU to continue to lead the global fight against climate change" and to promote energy-saving technologies in all external relations. To this end, MEPs emphasised the need to create a "common European foreign policy on energy, covering security of supply, transit and investment related to energy security, and the promotion of energy efficiency and energy savings."
Members also called on the Commission and the Member States to pursue "active policies at the highest political level so as to enable the Community to diversify its natural gas sources," and noted that in all priority initiatives aimed at diversification, "special priority should be given to environmentally safe and renewable energy sources."
Foreign suppliers and investors
The House gave its support to "all efforts aimed at overcoming the existing dependencies of Member States on [...] energy imports from countries that systematically violate the letter and spirit of the UN Charter," and stressed that a comprehensive European foreign policy on energy must "contribute to the promotion and implementation of the values and interests of the European Union and the main aims of its foreign policy." Parliament also supported the Commission's intention to "take appropriate measures to prevent uncontrolled investment of state-owned foreign companies in the EU's energy sector, in particular, the gas and electricity transmission networks."
On the subject of Russia, in particular, MEPs said that "the energy partnership between the EU and Russia can only be based on the non-discrimination and fair treatment principle and on equal market access conditions." Finally, the report says that "in addition to the need for Russia to ratify the Charter, the EU should negotiate a formal framework document on energy relations with Russia in the context of the new Partnership and Cooperation Agreement."
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External relations
EP sets out conditions for its support to the ESDP mission in Chad and the Central African Republic
2007-10-01 - 15:38
The European Parliament gave its approval to a planned European Security and Defence Policy (ESDP) mission to Chad and the Central African Republic (CAR), but listed several conditions which needed to be met for this operation to enjoy parliamentary support. The mission, which is meant to address the insecurity in the two countries resulting from the crisis in the neighbouring Darfur region of Sudan, could possibly be deployed by early November. In a resolution adopted by (453 votes in favour 104 against and 15 abstentions), the House "gives its approval for the launch of an ESDP operation in the eastern part of Chad and the northern part of CAR, which will last for one year, but makes its final approval conditional on the fulfilment of the following points:"
EUFOR must :
-have a diverse composition
-not get involved in fights between government authorities and rebel groups
-not get involved in the tasks performed by NGOs in the region
-have a robust mandate, according to Chapter 7 of the UN Charter
-have the necessary number of troops and must be equipped appropriately
-have a clear exit strategy, which foresees its replacement by a UN, AU, or hybrid force
-establish effective coordination with UNAMID (the joint UN and African Union (AU) hybrid operation in Darfur)
-have as its mission to create a secure environment for: the work of the UN police force, the return of internally displaced persons, the delivery of humanitarian aid, the free movement of humanitarian staff and the continuation of political dialogue
Background
The Council decided on 23 July of this year to set up an ESDP operation to eastern Chad and northern CAR. The operation would aim to stabilise the region, which has experienced a large influx of displaced persons from the neighbouring Darfur region of Sudan. The operation could involve up to 4000 troops, supporting the UN mission MINURCAT (French for: UN mission in the Central African Republic and Chad). Both the EU mission and MINURCAT have already received a one-year mandate from the UN Security Council this Tuesday, based on Chapter 7 of the UN Charter (which allows the use of force). The Council is set to approve a joint action on Friday of this week, allowing for a deployment by mid- to late-October. France, with a substantial presence in Chad already, is expected to provide the bulk of the troops for the operation.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Free movement of services
MEPs call for the harmonisation of law on the obligations of service providers
2007-10-01 - 15:38
The European Parliament's adopted an own initiative report on the obligation of cross-border service providers drafted by Lasse LEHTINEN (PES, FI) with 526 votes in favour, 38 against with 13 abstentions. MEPs note that the Services Directive (to be transposed into national law by 28 December 2009) creates a new overarching legal framework of the cross-border provision of services but "'does not address the substantive obligations of service providers" nor the remedies of the customer. Community law does not provide any general regulation of the legal relationship between providers of services and customers through provisions of secondary law. Relevant rules within the laws of EU Member States vary considerably. This places the additional burden upon the provider and the customer to inform themselves of the diverging legal conditions in other Member States. This concerns the cases in which the service provider does not perform a service or performs it badly, as well as the additional cases in which the safety of the customer in connection with the service is compromised.
MEPs propose to harmonise the laws relating to the obligations of service providers. The purpose is to enable small and medium sized businesses to appreciate their obligations and associated risks and chances in cross-border transactions and, at the same time, to enhance confidence of the consumer to avail himself of cross-border services. They are convinced that these kinds of general measure will dynamise the cross-border provision of services within the internal market.
In the opinion of MEPs, the EU, before setting up any new rule, should "examine the impact of existing and upcoming legislation in the internal market to the field of obligations of cross-border services providers and the need for a possible broad horizontal instrument". They call on the European Commission to "submit, within 12 months, a work programme for an appropriate assessment".
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Agriculture
Direct support schemes and support schemes for farmers set aside for 2008 and 2009
2007-10-01 - 15:38
Parliament adopted a report relating to the direct support schemes and support schemes for farmers relating to the set aside for 2008 and 2009. The debate preceding the vote took place on Tuesday 25 September. The European Commission has proposed to set at 0% the obligatory set-aside rate for autumn 2007 and spring 2008 sowings, in response to the increasingly tight situation on the cereals market. Neil PARISH (EPP-ED, UK, South West Conservative) and Chair of the EP Agriculture Committee spoke in favour of the report. He said: "I think there is a moral argument here as well. When the world has plenty of food, then perhaps Europe does not need altogether to do its share of production, but when the world is short of food and the prices go up, then Europe is morally obliged to produce food. Europe is never going to starve, whatever the price of food is, because we basically have money to pay for it, but many parts of the world will. All of a sudden we are in a different world and one that we must face up to. The Commission is proposing a set-aside of zero for 2008 and at the beginning of the marketing year 2008, like I said the market is characteristically high in price."
In the EU-27, a lower than expected harvest in 2006 (265.5 million tonnes) led to tightening supplies at the end of marketing year 2006/2007 and to historically high prices. Intervention stocks have shrunk from 14 million tonnes at the beginning of 2006/2007 to around 1 million tonnes now in September, mainly composed of maize held in Hungary. Reducing the set-aside rate from 10% to 0% is expected to increase output by at least 10 million tonnes.
Set-aside was introduced to limit production of cereals in the EU and applied on a voluntary basis from 1988/89. After the 1992 reform, it became obligatory i.e. producers under the general scheme were required to set-aside a defined percentage of their declared areas in order to be eligible to direct payments. With the 2003 reform, they received set-aside entitlements, which give the right to a payment if they are accompanied by eligible land put into set-aside.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Agriculture
Sugar: more compensation for restructuring, say MEPs
2007-10-01 - 15:38
In a consultative vote on the European Commission's plans for speeding up reform of the sugar sector, the European Parliament today called for improvements to the way the restructured sugar regime will operate, to avoid arbitrarily reducing quotas and thereby penalising the European sugar industry. The reform launched in 2006, which was meant to restore the balance to the European sugar market by cutting prices and production, has not produced all the desired effects. The restructuring regime, intended to give financial incentives to the less competitive producers to leave this sector, has only led to the withdrawal of 2.2 million tonnes (Mt) from the market in the first two years. The target is a reduction of 6 Mt by 2010.
In May 2007, the Commission unveiled a package of proposals seeking to make this regime more attractive to encourage producers to give up around 3.8 Mt in quotas. If this goal is not reached in 2010, it wishes to apply a linear reduction to the Member States' quotas.
While supporting the Commission's goals, Parliament adopted a number of amendments designed chiefly to increase the compensation to producers and to the regions. MEPs were voting on two reports by Katerina Batzeli (PES, EL) under the consultation procedure.
Optimising the restructuring regime
To encourage greater abandonment of quotas, MEPs call for firms to have the option of restructuring in two stages: those which have already renounced quotas should be able - once the forecasts for 2008/2009 have been published - to increase their applications for renunciation by 30 April 2008.
To encourage producers to withdraw from production more quickly, MEPs suggest increasing the restructuring aid introduced in 2006 to €625 instead of €218.75 for 2008/09. To encourage producers to withdraw from production more quickly, MEPs suggest that restructuring aid granted to firms which renounce part of their quotas or do not use their production facilities should be increased to €401.50 for 2006/2007 and 2007/2008, €343.75 in 2008/2009 and €286 in 2009/2010.
Parliament also stresses the need for undertakings to devise business development plans to diversify revenue and employment. It adds that restructuring plans must be prepared in consultation with growers and that the growers must be informed about their future before the sowing period.
In addition, MEPs want there to be an option for the restructuring fund to continue operating for one extra year if necessary.
Support for small growers and bioethano l
Under the Commission proposal, beet growers will be able to take the initiative to renounce up to 10% of an undertaking's quota. MEPs believe that in this context priority must be given to small-scale growers so that they can renounce, on favourable terms, the right to transport beet.
Parliament also calls for 100% compensation in the case of firms which partially dismantle their production facilities provided they shift towards bioethanol production. Until now, the aid granted for partial dismantling was 35%.
Boosting aid for producers and regions
MEPs call for producers to receive 25 % of aid for restructuring. The Commission, in its latest proposal, seeks to set the figure at 10%. In the first two years of the reform this same could vary from Member State to Member State provided it is not less than 10%.
Parliament wants to increase from €237.5 to €260 euros per tonne of quota renounced the additional aid to beet growers - which the Commission proposes to grant for 2008/09 and retroactively for growers who have already abandoned production over the two years of the reform. And MEPs want the option to be retained of continuing this aid until 2009/2010.
MEPs also call for aid for diversification paid to the regions affected by restructuring to be kept at the current level of €109.5 per tonne of quota for sugar renounced up to 2009/10 (the regulation adopted in 2006 provides for this aid to fall to €93.80 in 2008/09 and €78 in 2009/10).
Linear reduction of quotas in two stages
If a linear reduction of national quotas is needed in 2010, Parliament believes this too should be carried out in two stages. The first stage should concern only Member States or undertakings which, for 2008/09, would not have made a voluntary renunciation or would have renounced less than 13.5% of their quota. In a second stage, the formula proposed by the Commission would be used.
MEPs also propose taking into account any renunciations made by Member States and undertakings when calculating the final reduction.
Withdrawal from the market
Given the full implementation and entry into force from 2010 of the 'Everything But Arms' initiative (which will allow developing countries to export sugar duty-free to the EU), MEPs believe it is essential to extend up to 2015 the application of the scheme allowing preventive withdrawal of a part of production if there is a surplus on the European market.
In addition, the EP wants the Commission to take any decision on withdrawals for 2008/09 by 4 February 2008 (instead of 16 March, as in other years) so that beet growers can act accordingly before the sowing season.
With Parliament now having voted, the Council of Ministers, which has the final say, is expected to adopts its common position tomorrow or the day after.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Culture
Europe's cultural heritage only a click away?
2007-10-01 - 15:38
Access to Europe's cultural heritage should be made much easier though the creation of the European digital library, the European Parliament says in a non binding report. MEPs are backing a Commission plan to set up a European digital library as a direct access point to the European cultural heritage and stresses the importance of multilingual access to the databases. The report was adopted with 481 votes in favour, 26 against and 3 abstentions. For a large number of people, particularly young people, the Internet has become one of the principal means of access to knowledge. Therefore, says the committee, it is important to make use of the digital technology to promote, safeguard and disseminate the wealth and diversity of the European cultural heritage as widely as possible.
In the own-initiative report by Marie-Hélène DESCAMPS (EPP-ED, FR) MEPs back the setting up of a digital library in as a single, direct and multilingual access point to the European cultural heritage. The long term aim of the initiative should be to establish a tool that covers all categories of cultural material - not only books, but also audiovisual material. In the initial phase however focus should be put on text material free of copyright.
The European Parliament stresses the importance of having a multilingual interface that gives direct access to the content in all EU languages. It should also be possible to conduct the searches in all languages.
MEPs say that existing initiatives in Europe that connect libraries and give access to national European library collections should contribute to the creation of the European digital library. As for funding, the committee says new methods of financing must be developed - including partnerships with the private sector.
The European Commission's proposals were outlined in a paper put forward in September 2005, after six Heads of State and their respective Governments called in April that year for the creation of a virtual European library.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Energy
A roadmap for renewable energy in Europe
2007-10-01 - 15:38
Parliament adopted an own-initiative report on a roadmap for renewable energy in Europe which calls on the Commission to present, by the end of 2007 at the latest, a proposal for a renewable energy legislative framework. The report also urges the Commission to propose a sectoral approach within the legislative framework, setting clear and realistic binding targets for the electricity, transport and heating and cooling sectors. Boosting renewables
The House emphasises the importance of creating and implementing Renewables Action Plans (RAPs) at Community and national levels and stresses that these should serve to contribute to a real Common European Energy Policy. Parliament calls on the Commission to ensure that the forthcoming legislative proposal concerning renewable energies contains strong measures for the promotion of renewable electricity, with the aim of increasing its share in the EU from the present level to at least double that amount by 2020.
The report regrets both that regional and local authorities in the EU continue to show too little interest in harnessing and using renewable energy sources. MEPs deplore the fact that the EU target of a 12 % renewable energy contribution to the EU energy mix by 2010 will, in all likelihood, not be met.
"Enormous development potential of offshore wind energy"
The report stresses the enormous development potential of offshore wind energy and the significant contribution it could make to Europe's independence from energy imports and to climate protection, while pointing out that enormous efforts are still needed to fully develop this potential. The House therefore calls on the Commission to draw up an offshore wind energy action plan, embodying an efficient European approach to offshore technology and promoting stronger interconnections.
Heating and cooling - double the amount by 2020
On heating and cooling, MEPs call on the Commission to ensure that any proposal for a framework directive for renewables contains strong measures for the promotion of renewable heating and cooling with the aim of increasing its share in the EU from the present level of approximately 10% to at least double that amount by 2020.
Transport and biofuels
The report welcomes the Commission’s proposal for promoting biofuels and other renewable energies for transport by means of imposing a binding target of 10%, provided that it can be proved that such fuels are produced in a sustainable way. The European Parliament stresses that the sustainable use of biofuels would reduce oil dependency and CO2 emissions in the transport sector, however the committee finds that a fair balance between food and energy production should be sought.
Finally, MEPs welcome the European Parliament's switch to renewables for its electricity uses and urges the other EU institutions to do the same.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Fundamental rights
Parliament adopts a written declaration condemning skyscraper and impact on Catholic Church in Bucharest
2007-10-01 - 15:38
The European Parliament adopted a written declaration firmly condemning the illegal construction of a skyscraper with four basement levels and 20 storeys, which is endangering two buildings belonging to the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Bucharest: St Joseph's Cathedral and the Roman Catholic Metropolitan Palace, both of which figure on the list of historic architectural monuments in Romania. The Declaration calls on the Commission and Council to firmly condemn the attitude of the Romanian authorities and initiate the necessary legal proceedings in order to persuade the relevant authorities to fulfil their Community obligations under Article 151 of the Treaty establishing the European Community as regards conserving and protecting the cultural and architectural heritage.
Written Declaration no 54/2007 was initiated in May 2007 by MEPs Adrian Severin (PSE), Daciana Octavia Sârbu (PSE), Radu Podgorean (PSE) and Corina Creţu (PSE), also by MEP Silvia Ciornei (ALDE). The competent authorities in Romania are systematically refusing to apply either the provisions of national law on protecting historic monuments, or the provisions of Community law on protecting the cultural and architectural heritage in this case, say MEPs.
On Tuesday 25 September, 395 MEPs had signed the declaration. For a written declaration to be adopted by the Parliament, 393 signatures are needed (half plus one from the total number of European Members of Parliament - 785)
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Constitutional affairs
Making it easier for EU citizens living abroad to stand or vote in EP elections
2007-10-01 - 15:38
MEPs adopted a report on a Commission proposal that would make it easier for EU citizens to stand or vote in European Parliament elections while living in Member States other than their own. The report was drafted by Andrew Duff MEP. The consultation report also inserts two new provisions to improve the portability of electoral rights within the EU: one on multiple candidatures and the other on deprivation of electoral rights. First, the House proposes abolishing the current prohibition on standing for election in more than one Member State, provided that the country of residence permits multiple candidatures. Second, it seeks to ensure that the country of residence is not automatically obliged to prevent a citizen from voting if he or she has been deprived of his or her electoral rights in another Member State. MEPs feel that in both cases, it should be up to the Member States concerned to decide, case by case, so as to prevent discrimination.
Boosting turnout
Rapporteur Andrew Duff (ALDE, UK, East of England, Liberal Democrat) believes that the present system discourages people from exercising their electoral rights as EU citizens, and notes that the turnout in European Parliamentary elections fell from 63% in 1979 to 46% in 2004. The Parliament hopes that by amending the proposal, it can boost the number of people choosing to exercise their electoral rights to the full.
Andrew Duff said: "Parliament supports the proposals to simplify and to promote the arrangements whereby EU citizens can vote and stand for the European elections in countries other than their own.
"However, the original Council directive was too restrictive in seeking to ban dual candidacies. It is high time that the EU encouraged cross-border democracy."
No discrimination
The European Parliament report aims to "make sure that all Member States respect equal opportunities for all EU citizens", noted Mr Duff. EU citizenship, which confers certain electoral rights, was established by the Maastricht Treaty of 1993. This stipulates that any citizen has the right to stand and vote in European Parliament elections in the Member State where he or she resides, under the same conditions as nationals of that state.
Information exchange isn't working
The Commission's proposal aims to ease the administrative obstacles that an EU citizen faces when voting or standing for the European Parliament election in a Member State other than his own. In particular, it proposes abolishing the information exchange system currently used by Member States' electoral authorities, on the grounds that it has proven too cumbersome to work properly.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Research and innovation
A European Institute of Innovation and Technology
2007-10-01 - 15:38
The European Parliament backs the Commission's proposal to set up a European Institute of Technology in its first-reading report adopted by large majority. However, MEPs want the EIT's name to include "innovation" and say it should be established only after a pilot phase in which two or three "Knowledge and Innovation Communities" run projects, to test its feasibility. MEPs also want the Council to negotiate the EIT's funding with Parliament. The European Parliament decided to rename the EIT "European institute of Innovation and Technology" so as to reflect its primary focus on innovation. The seat of its governing body should be "located near existing centres of European excellence and academic reputation in order to best benefit from existing infrastructure", say MEPs.
Networks of universities, research organisations and businesses
The EIT will have a two-tier structure: a Governing Board selects higher education institutions, research organisations, companies and other stakeholders to form partnerships called "Knowledge and Innovation Communities" (KICs). In contrast to the Commission's plans, MEPs want KICs to be "legally autonomous from the EIT".
Although KICs will have "substantial overall autonomy" to define their internal organisation and working methods, MEPs do lay down some basic rules for their composition: Every KIC should consist of at least three partner organisations, situated in at least two different participating states and including at least one higher education institution and one private company.
Solve budgetary problems
The institute's overall budget of an estimated €2.4 billion for the first six years is to be funded from a combination of private and public sources. The EP agrees with the Commission that €308.7 million should come from the Community budget.
On 19 September 2007 the Commission put forward a proposal to revise the Multi-Annual Financial Framework 2007-2013 in order to ensure the funding for Galileo and the EIT. This proposal is now the basis for further negotiations between Parliament and Council (the Budgetary Authority).
Additionally, the Commission suggests financing the EIT partly through existing Community instruments such as the Framework Programme for Research, the Competitiveness and Innovation Programme or the Lifelong Learning Programme. MEPs, however, stress that applications from KICs should in no way be privileged over other applications. Furthermore, funds stemming from those programmes should not finance establishment and administration costs directly associated with the EIT or the KICs but rather the mobility of researchers or research programmes.
Pilot phase with two or three KICs
MEPs also introduce the idea of a "pilot phase" into the text. At the latest two years after the entry into force of the regulation establishing the EIT, the Governing Board would select two or three KICs "in areas that help the EU to face today's and tomorrow's challenges, such as climate change, sustainable mobility, energy efficiency or the next generation of ICT".
The EIT could select additional KICs after the adoption of its first "Strategic Innovation Agenda" (SIA), a concept also incorporated in the text by the EP. This SIA should identify the EIT's long-term strategic areas "in fields of key potential economic and societal interest which are likely to generate the greatest innovation added value". The EIT would have to draw up an SIA by the end of 2011 at the latest and thereafter every seven years. Acting on a proposal from the Commission, Parliament and Council shall then adopt this agenda
EIT label on qualifications
MEPs reject the Commission's proposal for the EIT itself to award degrees and diplomas. Instead they ask for an EIT mark to be added to qualifications awarded through the higher education institutions within the KICs.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
An audio summary of the Strasbourg plenary session 24-27 September
2007-10-01 - 15:38
The audio summary can be accessed via the link hereunder. This will also be available on the EP Live section of the European Parliament website. EN, 02:56
EN
1
MULTIMEDIA
20071001MLT11036.mp3
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Text adopted during September II Plenary
2007-10-01 - 15:38
Text adopted by the EP can be accessed via the link hereunder. Adopted text during 24-27 September 2007. Texts adopted 24-27 September 2007
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN&LEG_ID=6&YEAR=2007&MONTH=10#
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Agenda for October I - Brussels Plenary
2007-10-01 - 15:38
The draft agenda for October I - 10-11 October in Brussels can be accessed via the link hereunder. Draft Agenda - 10-11 October 2007 10-11 October 2007 - Brussels Plenary
EN
1
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?language=EN&reference=2007-09-2
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-FULL DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-FULL DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823BRI09775 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
