MEPs told "no rewind" button on climate change ahead of post Kyoto talks
Environment
2007-10-08 - 12:49
Greenland's Ilulissat Glacier melts - Oct 2006
With the Kyoto limits on greenhouse gases due to expire in 2012, the debate on what should replace them came to Parliament's Climate Change Committee on Thursday 4 October. A panel of experts from the UN's Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change as well as representatives from the US, China and Japan set out their views on how to deal with the problem. The UN experts told MEPs that to avert catastrophic climate change temperature increases must not rise by more than 2 degrees.
The debate was ahead of a UN meeting in Bali in December on a post-Kyoto future. According to the UN panel, achieving this would mean halting increases of emissions by 2015. The barrier of a 2 degree increase would also mean reducing levels of emissions between 50% (globally) and 85% (for industrialised countries) below the 1990 level by 2050.
A central theme stressed by the main UN speakers was the need to see climate change as a current rather than a future problem. John Ashton, a keynote speaker from the UK Foreign Office told the meeting that "we don't have a rewind button. We have to get it right the first time". He went on to say that "it's today's problem, not tomorrow's”. He went on to warn that "the deadlines are conditioned by the earth’s response to human activity, not by humans".
On 3 December the island of Bali in Indonesia will see a meeting of the current signatories of the protocol. It will mark an important first step in negotiating the post Kyoto international framework on emissions.
Lack of will not wisdom a problem
Mr Ashton said that "any discussion on post-2012 has to be fixated on the outcome. What we are talking about is an effort to build a world economy in energy which, by the end of the century, should be zero-carbon." The key problem "is not a lack of wisdom...but a lack of political will...to build the appropriate policies" necessary to tackle climate change.
Pointing to the $20 trillion needed for investments in global low-carbon energy infrastructure over the next 30 years, Ashton noted that, in as much as governments may set emission targets, many of the most important decisions are in fact "those made in the board-room" – i.e., by industry. "This is largely about the direction of the flow of private capital," he said and stressed that in order to invest the private sector needs confidence in government action.
Views from Washington, Beijing, Tokyo
The US ambassador to the EU - Boyden Gray - said that "economic growth, energy security, and climate change must be pursued in an integrated way". He focused on possible technical solutions such as the development of carbon capture and storage (CCS) whilst also highlighting US spending in clean energy technology: "we're not doing as badly as projected," he told MEPs. He called for the international community to get the emissions trading scheme "right" with a need to "accelerate" the UN process.
Japanese EU ambassador Takekazu Kawamura outlined his country’s vision for a post-Kyoto agreement. The Japanese post-2012 model would be grounded on three principles:
all major emitters should participate in the agreed framework.
solutions "must be flexible and diverse"
reconcile "climate protection and economic growth".
The ambassador said that the "Cool Earth 50" project which aims at the development and dissemination of innovative technologies as well as cutting emissions 50% by 2050 are to be the core of Japan's response to global warming.
Ronglai Zhong of the Chinese mission to the EU spoke of the need to develop "common but differentiated" responsibilities at the global level. In particular he noted the need for a mechanism for technology-transfer to allow developing countries access to environmentally friendly technologies.
Having already reached "great results" in tackling climate change, Beijing would further restructure its economy to promote green technologies, reduce CO2 emissions, and to increase share of renewable energy to "10 % by 2010 and 16 % by 2020" he said.
Yvo de Boer, Executive Secretary of the UN Convention on Climate Change said the US is taking a somewhat different attitude than other industrialised powers. Unlike the EU, the US is advocating "a voluntary approach, consisting of national commitments written into national legislation. Mr De Boer noted that companies are often more vocal than governments in driving forward climate change agenda. "In order to invest, you need to give 'long, loud and legal' policy guidelines."
Europe should "practice what we preach"
Nick Campbell of the International Chamber of Commerce Climate Change Task Force stressed that "the EU must take a flexible approach in order to encourage other countries to go along with it." The point was echoed by several speakers who urged Europe to show leadership. This would be also in the interest of the European project, with citizens expecting it to deliver on climate and energy security, was pointed out.
Satu Hassi the Finnish Green MEP who is vice-chair of the Environment Committee said that "the best way for Europe to encourage other countries in international negotiations is to practice what we preach".
The week also included a joint parliamentary meeting with MEPs and national deputies on climate change and a hearing on desertification by Parliament's Development committee.
20071008STO11292 Climate change committee looks to post-Kyoto future 4.10. Thematic session "Climate protection challenge post-2012 Parliamentary meeting calls for internationally-binding targets to reduce CO2 emissions 2.10. A new industrial revolution: MEPs debate EU responses to climate change 1.10. Climate change committee More articles on energy and the environment
EN
1
PHOTO
20071005PHT11284.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/comparl/tempcom/clim/sessions/default_en.htm
EN
6
LINK
/activities/expert/committees/presentation.do;jsessionid=A5BF409E3C5824547467A7E54EDA2AF6.node2?committee=2489&language=en
EN
7
LINK
/news/public/documents_par_theme/911/default_fi.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071002IPR11085 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071001IPR10995 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071001IPR11004 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
