Joint Parliamentary Meeting calls for internationally-binding targets to reduce CO2 emissions
Environment
2007-10-02 - 16:11
Internationally-binding targets to reduce CO2 emissions, the EU and national measures needed to "rise to the challenge of climate change", fair international burden-sharing and how Europe can help make the UN climate change Conference in Bali a success were among the issues debated by national MPs and MEPs at the first Joint Parliamentary Meeting on Climate Change in Brussels on Monday and Tuesday.
"In the name of the European Parliament I do not want to leave any doubt that we need to set binding targets at international level within the United Nations" to reduce CO2 emissions, said EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering, adding that this is an area in which the EU could "assume peaceful leadership in the world".
The fight against climate change should be on the agenda when MEPs meet African parliamentarians in Lisbon before the EU-Africa Summit in December, he continued, also reminding participants that "We need the new Reform Treaty in order that the EU becomes more capable of acting and is able to take the lead in the world, also in the field of climate protection".
"We have to keep in mind that the earth is our only home", said Jaime Gama, President of the Portuguese Assembleia da República, who called for "global governance" and "compulsory rules and limits within the international community".
30% cut in greenhouse gases by 2020 is possible, says Portuguese Presidency
"The EU is able to fulfil the Kyoto goals in the period from 2008 to 2012", said Francisco Nunes Correia, Portuguese Minister for Environment, Spatial Planning and Regional Development for the EU's Portuguese Presidency, "but what will happen after 2012?". The minister underlined the necessity to take a long-term view, so that eco-systems can adapt to climate change and future food supply is secured.
Although Member States have already made a "firm commitment" to cut greenhouse gas emissions by 20 % by 2020, "it is possible to go further than that", he said. Mr Nunes Correira stressed that the developed countries should take the lead and set themselves joint guidelines to reduce emissions by 30 % by 2020. By 2050, these emissions could even be cut by 60 to 80 %. Developing countries, too, should - where possible - take more responsibility and contribute more. The EU's goal for the Bali climate change conference in December should be to reach "a global and broad agreement for 2009", said the minister. "This gives us the opportunity to raise our profile around the world and to increase our credibility", he concluded.
Commission to present proposals for fight against climate change in December
"A positive outcome of the Bali conference is by no means certain", said European Commission President José Manuel Barroso, but "it would be necessary to negotiate an international agreement for the post-Kyoto period until the end of 2009 to ensure continuity with our current system", he stressed.
Mr Barroso announced that in early December the Commission will propose a "comprehensive package" of measures, to include aviation in the Emission Trading Scheme (ETS), create a low-carbon market, and promote energy efficiency and the use of renewable energies. "We must act urgently and transform our high-carbon societies (...) into low-carbon societies of the future", he said.
"Fair approach" on technology transfer and burden sharing
"We have little time because other continents and highly-motivated people will outrun us as concerns technology", said Karl-Heinz Florenz (EPP-ED, DE), rapporteur of the EP's Temporary Committee on Climate Change. Mr Florenz called for "a fair approach on technology transfer" to developing countries which encourages them to introduce climate-friendly policies rather than punishes them. Mr Florenz also called on EU Member States to fully implement EU legislation in order to avoid any distortion of the competition.
"The Slovenian Presidency will continue with the efforts of the German and the Portuguese Presidencies to fight climate change globally and on a national level", said Pavel Gantar, Vice-Chair of the Environment Committee of the Slovenian Parliament. Following the Commission's proposal in December, negotiations on burden sharing within the ETS will fall under the Slovenian Presidency, which "will do everything possible to reach an agreement on the reduction of emissions".
More co-ordination of EU and national measures
"The dramatic events of this summer have made this subject the more pressing", said José Eduardo Martins of the Assembleia da República, rapporteur for the Joint Parliamentary Meeting's working group on national concepts for adapting to climate change . This group concluded that better water supply systems must be developed to combat droughts. German and Slovak MPs underlined that flood management needs to be improved at EU level as problems along the Rhine and Danube do not stop at national borders. Other participants also called for worldwide implementation of the Kyoto Protocol, a common European soil policy, a revision of the Common Agricultural Policy and a clearer focus on public health.
"We have to move from electricity to smart energy", said Lena Ek (ALDE, SV), rapporteur for the working group on European and national strategies for renewable energies. The working group fully supported the EU goals of reducing CO2 emissions by 20 % by 2020 and increasing the use of renewable energies by 20 % by 2020, she added. Participants emphasised that more needs to be invested in energy efficiency and said that WTO rules should encompass environmental impact. Renewable energies need to be produced sustainably, and existing legislation needs to be better implemented, concluded Ms Ek.
"About 40 % of energy consumption goes to houses and buildings", said Glória Araújo (Assembleia da República) for the working group on the reduction of emissions through the modernisation of public and private housing, adding that "citizens need to be aware that better buildings are the way forward". The group said that Member States should step up research on energy efficiency, and implement the EU's 2002 directive on energy efficiency in full. "We need to change people's attitudes if we are to have real changes", concluded Ms Araújo.
Co-Chairs: Hans-Gert PÖTTERING, President of the European Parliament and Jaime GAMA, President of the Assembleia da República
20071001IPR10995
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
