Indian guru Satguru Baba Ji, EP President discuss spiritual side of politics
Culture
2007-10-05 - 11:48
Indian guru brings enlightment
The European Parliament has received its fair share of religious leaders and on 26 September it was the turn of Indian spiritual leader Satguru Baba Hardev Ji. He leads the Sant Nirankari Mission, a spiritual movement dedicated to human welfare and promoting the idea of universal brotherhood. The mission has over 2000 centres worldwide and millions of followers.
Satguru Baba Ji was invited by the chair of the India Delegation, Neena Gill and met with EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering in the context of next year's European Year of Intercultural Dialogue.
Following the meeting, Mr Pöttering said, "I am convinced that religious leaders dedicated to peaceful and tolerant co-existence can make an enormous contribution to our societies. I particularly welcome the initiative of Satguru Baba Ji's movement in promoting interfaith dialogue in South Asia. His method of bringing leaders of different religions together to discuss the role of spirituality in promoting universal human values is something which we have mirrored within the EU."
"The spiritual side of politics"
We talked with Satguru Baba Hardev Ji in Strasbourg about knowledge, spirituality and the peaceful coexistence of people and cultures:
Your Holiness, you have just met Hans-Gert Pöttering. What value is there in meetings between spiritual leaders and political leaders? What message did you wish to convey to him?
Principally we were discussing the principles and values of the Nirankari Mission. We focus on human beings, whether they live in Europe or in India. And so we are bringing about awareness, that as mankind we have to peacefully coexist.
Since politicians run governments and institutions, they have a very big role to play. Their role is not just managing the affairs of countries, but also incorporating a human touch. We were discussing the spiritual side of politics and ways to bring about harmony between human beings.
Next year is the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue. Looking at today's Europe, and drawing on your experience, how can our different ethnic, cultural and religious groups live harmoniously together?
It is love and compassion that brings us closer...you are using 23 languages in the European Parliament...There are differences and that is diversity. Like you, we say that there is "unity in diversity". The right thing is to work on it. When different cultures meet they should flourish together. In a garden, a rose does not tell a tulip: "you do not exist".
Many say that there is a crisis of spirituality in Europe, associated with a decline in attendance at traditional churches. In your view, does this make it harder or easier to achieve a peaceful multicultural society?
It makes things a bit more difficult. People give more importance to materialistic achievements. They visit traditional places of worship less. But religion in its true sense is the religion of humanity, love and compassion. A poet in India once wrote: "One does not need religious places as such, because one can worship God by loving mankind."
We have to ask ourselves: do we love and have compassion for others, are we humble, are we able to help others not out of greed or selfishness but out of love and selflessness?
You teach that to gain knowledge, people must ask for it. In the EU we often talk about life-long learning. What should people do to stay open to knowledge?
Learning...should be an ongoing process that continues until the last breath. True knowledge is beneficial to oneself and to mankind. It allows the establishment of a good and harmonious environment.
People in Europe should remain open-minded and open-hearted. That was the basis for past developments. Although there are so many countries in Europe now they are joined together and have the European Parliament. And this humane touch is important for ordinary people. We are one family. Brothers can argue over property but finally we have to adopt this brother-brother relationship.
20070927STO10904 Indian delegation
EN
1
PHOTO
20071005PHT11266.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/delegations/presentation.do?delegation=2470&rewritten&language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
