IGC 2007: Parliament's achievements and concerns
Future of Europe/European integration
2007-10-15 - 15:36
European Parliament President Hans-Gert Pöttering is to take part in the informal European Council in Lisbon on 18-19 October, which should conclude the EU's Intergovernmental Conference (IGC) on treaty reform. Parliament has been fully involved since the IGC began work in June, and the three MEPs, who represented Parliament in the ministerial-level meetings, Elmar Brok (EPP-ED, DE), Enrique Baron Crespo (PES, ES) and Andrew Duff (ALDE, UK), will also be in Lisbon.
Throughout the talks, Messrs Brok, Barón Crespo and Andrew Duff stressed the importance of the Charter of Fundamental Rights and EU citizenship, and asked for clarifications on certain Common Foreign and Security Policy provisions and on the UK position on freedom, justice and security. Besides the ministerial meetings, they also voiced Parliament's concerns in individual meetings with government representatives and the Commission, and with representatives of national parliaments.
Thanks to Parliament's input, substantial progress has been made, but some crucial points remain to be clarified, say the three representatives.
20071015BKG11729
Progress on fundamental rights and opt-outs
The concept of citizenship, which Member States had moved to the Treaty on the functioning of the Union, has regained its place and now appears in art 8 of the Treaty on the Union. Moreover, the Charter of Fundamental Rights, which merely took the form of a declaration in the mandate on the reform, will be solemnly proclaimed at a plenary session of the Parliament in November 2007 by the Presidents of the Parliament, Council and Commission and published in the Official Journal. According to the three MEPs, this proclamation will properly reflect the Charter's specific nature and enhance its visibility.
Although the EP representatives continue to deplore the use of opt-outs, they consider the compromise so far agreed on Schengen and home affairs acceptable. This agreement states that the UK and Ireland may exercise their right to opt out only within the first 3 months of the start of a legislative procedure, thus ensuring that new legislation is negotiated only amongst participants.
Issues still to be clarified
The EP representatives still have concerns about voting procedures in the Council, personal data protection, the appointment of the High Representative for foreign affairs and security policy and the British opt-out from the Charter.
Parliament's representatives welcome the introduction of the new double majority voting system, but regret the decision to postpone it until 2014/17. Above all, given the importance of efficient decision-making, the representatives oppose the transposition of the Ioannina clause (which would enable the Council, in the event of a very narrow qualified majority, to postpone a decision and try to work out a more widely-acceptable compromise), into the treaty. The representatives are concerned that this would slow down the decision-making process and thus reduce the Union's capacity to act.
On the issue of personal data protection in the Common Foreign and Security Policy, the EP representatives are concerned about the role of the Court of Justice and Parliament. They oppose the current phrasing of article 24 of the Treaty on the EU. Messrs Brok, Baron Crespo and Duff believe that, in such a sensitive area, both parliamentary and judicial oversight is essential, and ask that the relevant articles to be modified accordingly.
The legal effect and political purpose of UK opt-out from the Charter and the non-uniform application of EU law in the field of fundamental rights are causes of grave concern. The three representatives propose that, at the very least, a mechanism be established to enable a Member State to drop the opt-out unilaterally, i.e. without having to convene another IGC and go through the ratification procedure. This same clause could be built into other opt-out protocols, such as that on Schengen.
Finally, Parliament asks to be fully involved in the appointment of the High Representative of the Union for foreign affairs and security policy, who is also a Vice-President of the Commission, a body subjected to Parliament's vote of consent.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
