MEPs express "deepest concern" about the humanitarian crisis in Gaza
Humanitarian aid
2007-10-11 - 13:11
In adopting a joint resolution on the humanitarian situation in Gaza, MEPs express their deepest concern about the humanitarian crisis in the Gaza Strip and its possible grave consequences. Parliament stresses that human rights and international humanitarian law must be fully respected in the area. The European Parliament reiterates its call on all sides to renounce violence.
The House calls on Israel to fulfil its international obligations under the Geneva Conventions to guarantee the flow of humanitarian aid, humanitarian assistance and essential services, such as electricity and fuel, to the Gaza Strip.
International Peace Conference - secure and recognised borders
Parliament expresses its wish that the efforts to convene an international peace conference should contribute to achieving a just and lasting peace between Israelis and Palestinians, based on the relevant United Nations Security Council resolutions, the right of the State of Israel to live within secure and recognised borders, and the right to a viable state for Palestinians.
The European Parliament calls for the lifting of the blockade of the Gaza Strip and calls on Israel to ensure the movement of people and goods at Rafah, in compliance with the Agreement on Movement and Access and the EU Border Assistance Mission, as well as the movement of goods at Karni.
MEPs call on the Council, the High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy and the Commission to face up to their full responsibility on the implementation of this Agreement.
Parliament calls on Israel to guarantee the flow of financial assets to the Gaza Strip, which has been suspended since 25 September 2007, and considers that the lack of access to any financial assets has a serious impact on the economic, social and daily life of the Palestinian people.
Parliament calls on the Palestinian Authority and Hamas to facilitate, despite the political deadlock, the functioning of the public institutions providing essential services and the operations of international humanitarian offices, agencies and organisations seeking to improve the living conditions of all Palestinians living in the area.
MEPs call on the Council and the Commission to continue to guarantee, together with the international community, essential humanitarian aid for the Palestinian population, with special regard to the specific needs of particularly vulnerable groups.
Finally, the House urges the Council and the Commission to ensure, in compliance with the Association Agreements with Israel and with the Palestinian National Authority, that international humanitarian law and human rights are fully respected in the area, including by non-state actors, in order to preserve the necessary humanitarian space.
20071008IPR11354 Motion for a resolution on the humanitarian situation in Gaza Text, as adopted by the EP on 11 October, will shortly be available here
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//TEXT MOTION B6-2007-0375 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
