MEPs call for' master plan' for enhanced airport capacity
Transport
2007-10-11 - 11:51
Within the EU, air traffic is growing at a rate of 5.2 % per annum. Thus, by the year 2025, the demand for flights will be 2.5 times higher than that of 2003. More than 60 airports would then be unable to handle the typical busy hourly demand without generating delays or unaccommodated demand (3.7 million flights a year would then be unaccommodated).
The European Parliament therefore calls for a "master plan" for enhanced airport capacity in order to promote and better coordinate any national and cross-border initiative for building new airport capacities as well as making better use of existing capacities.
MEPs stress that adequate airport capacity and efficient ground handling and use of capacity are vital to the European economy and must be ensured. The shortage of capacity and the increase in demand for flights will probably lead to demand for new major airports (up to 10 according to a Eurocontrol study) and medium-sized airports (up to 15 according to Eurocontrol).
Although the planning of new infrastructure remains within the competence of the Member States, the House calls on the Commission to present before 2009 a master plan for enhanced airport capacity in Europe, in order to promote and better coordinate any national and cross-border initiative for building new airport capacities dedicated to international traffic and to make better use of existing capacities. Members took the view that only the cohabitation of various airport models according to national specificities (major hubs or regional airports through point-to point travels) will enable the EU to fulfil its need in this field.
Promoting environmentally-friendly growth
Despite progress as regards the environmental performance of aviation, MEPs argue that the growth in air traffic has resulted in a "sharp increase" in the total volume of greenhouse gas emissions produced by this sector (+100 % compared to 1990), and that airport congestion is contributing significantly to this. A more efficient use of airport capacity is therefore vital. Also, the growth of air transport will have to be accompanied by technical and regulatory schemes limiting the external costs of this mode, such as the European Union Emissions Trading Scheme (EU ETS). However, Parliament points out that that the efficiency of measures designed to reduce the environmental impact of air transport also depends on the policies pursued by countries at global level and, that programmes with third countries are needed.
20071008IPR11359 Airport capacity and ground handling: towards a more efficient policy Text, as adopted by the EP on 11 October, will shortly be available here
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5479492
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
