EU action to tackle murders of women in Central America and Mexico
Women's rights/Equal opportunities
2007-10-11 - 13:11
MEPs adopted an own-initiative report on the murders of women in Central America and Mexico. The report is part of a global strategy for the eradication and prevention of feminicide and proposes EU actions in the framework of partnerships agreements. The report was adopted with 560 votes in favour, 4 against and 6 abstentions.
The report drafted by Raül Romeva i Rueda (Greens/EFA, ES) is the outcome of a hearing held at the European Parliament in April 2006 on the subject of feminicide in Mexico and Central America, organised by the Committee on Women's Rights and Gender Equality and the Subcommittee on Human Rights.
Feminicides: a global issue
According to the definition laid down in the report, the world "feminicide" should be understood as "any act or conduct, based on gender, which causes death or physical, sexual or psychological harm or sexual harm or suffering to women, whether in the public or the private sphere".
Central America and Mexico have witnessed a sharp increase in violent killings in recent years. The cases of two European women murdered in Mexico, Hester Van Nierop in 1998 and Brenda Susana Margaret Searle in 2001, have symbolic value.
However, violence against women has a global dimension and concerns all countries, Europe included, and this report, MEPs stress, should be considered as part of a global strategy for the eradication and prevention of violent deaths of women. The report urges the countries to take all necessary steps for the effective combating of violence towards women and to take measures to ensure full respect for human rights. However, the aim of the European Parliament's resolution is to "issue an invitation to take concrete steps to improve what it sees as unsatisfactory state of affairs in states" and does not constitute "any kind of accusation or charge sheet against states which are sovereign and considered as equal partners in the field of international politics".
Action at European level
In the report, MEPs ask the national governments in the framework of their bilateral relations with the countries of Latin America, and European Institutions within their strategic partnership, to support the prevention and protection policies relating to violence. They also insist that the European members of the EU-Mexico Joint Parliamentary Committee, as well as Parliament's delegation for relations with the countries of Central America, include systematically the issue of feminicide and impunity in the programmes for their visits to the region.
The report also stresses the need for the European Union to give priority to the restructuring and reinforcement of judicial and prison systems. Such actions should be conducted in partnership with the International Labour Organization and with the OECD's National Contact Point of Mexico in order to devise programmes aimed at ensuring safety, decent working conditions and equal pay for women.
The European Commission should, MEPs believe, coordinate the different European initiatives and submit such initiatives to Parliament's Committee on Women's Rights and Gender Equality. They also propose that EU representations and Member States' embassies organise a round table on feminicide and impunity and that a joint hearing be organised by the Committee on Women's Rights and Gender Equality, the Subcommittee on Human Rights and the delegations concerned, before the EU/Latin America summit in Lima in May 2008, with a view to evaluating the measures in place.
20071008IPR11355 Report: Murder of women (femincide) in Mexico and Central America and the role of the EU in fighting the phenomenon Background Paper: Joint Public Hearing - Feminicide - The case of Mexico and Guatemala Text, as adopted by the EP on 11 October, will shortly be available here Audio, 19:39 - Press conference (EN) 11/10/2007, Rapporteur Raul Romeva I Rueda (Greens/EFA, ES) and Chair of the FEMM Committee Anna Zaborska (EPP-ED, SK)
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5443962
EN
2
LINK
/meetdocs/2004_2009/documents/fd/droi20060419_h_backgroundnote_/droi20060419_h_backgroundnote_en.pdf
EN
3
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
4
MULTIMEDIA
20071011MLT11585.asf
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
