The Week Ahead 15-21 October 2007
Institutions
2007-10-15 - 10:31
Political Groups Week - Brussels
Lisbon summit. EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering will take part in the informal European Council in Lisbon, which should conclude the Intergovernmental Conference on the Reform Treaty. The three MEPs who represented Parliament in ministerial level meetings of the IGC - Elmar Brok, Enrique Baron Crespo and Andrew Duff - will also be in Lisbon. (Thursday-Friday)
EP-Romania. President Pöttering will make an official visit to Romania to launch the European election campaign there. He will meet the President, Traian Băsescu, the Prime Minister, Călin Popescu Tăriceanu, before addressing the Romanian Parliament, and meeting the speakers of the two chambers, Bogdan Olteanu and Nicolae Văcăroiu. (Monday-Tuesday)
EP-Russia. Mikhail Kasyanov, former Russian Prime Minister and chair of the People's Democratic Union, will meet President Pöttering in Brussels. (Wednesday)
Cultural diversity and European Cinema. A week before the award for the EP’s Lux Prize for European Cinema, MEPs hold a conference on cultural diversity and cinema. Participants include Isabel Pires de Lima, Portuguese Minister of Culture, Commissioner Viviane Reding, and film director Cédric Klapisch. (Tuesday-Thursday)
Preparing for the plenary. Parliament's political groups will devote most of the week to preparations for the Strasbourg plenary session of 22-25 October. The main points on the plenary agenda include: debate on the outcome of the Lisbon summit, debates and votes on the first reading vote on the EU budget for 2008, on new rules on pesticides and on Turkey's progress towards EU membership. The winner of this year's Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought will be announced during the week.
Pre-session press briefing. Any changes to the plenary agenda adopted by the Conference of Presidents will be announced at the regular pre-session briefing at 11am on Friday (room PHS 0A050). The EP press service and representatives of the main political groups will be on hand to comment on the agenda.
20071012IPR11598 For full details of all the week's events, see The Agenda
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20074200AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
