Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the EC and Mozambique
Fisheries
2007-10-25 - 13:29
The European Parliament approved today a consultative report on the conclusion of a new Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the EC and Mozambique. The agreement has been signed for a period of five years (renewable) from its entry into force and it grants fishing opportunities to vessels from Spain, France, Italy, Portugal and the United Kingdom. (The report was adopted by 407 votes in favour to 73 against and 76 abstentions).
MEPs have approved some amendments to improve the information forwarded to the European Parliament. They also call for the Commission to submit a report on the application of the agreement to the EP and the Council during the final year of the protocol's validity and before another agreement is concluded on its renewal.
As regards the fishing opportunities granted to Community vessels, 44 purse seine vessels and 45 surface longliners are allowed to fish:
Fishing category
Type of vessel
Member State
Licences
Tuna fishing
Purse seine vessels (44)
Spain
23
France
20
Italy
1
Tuna fishing
Longliners (45)
Spain
21
France
15
Portugal
7
United Kingdom
2
The rapporteur, Emanuel Jardim FERNANDES (PES, PT), acknowledges the urgency of concluding the agreement and considers the proposal "to be positive in some respects", in that it can contribute to and support Mozambican sectoral policy on fisheries. Nevertheless, whilst bearing in mind that it is not feasible to amend it, this being the responsibility of the Council and Commission, the rapporteur expresses, in the explanatory statement, "his clearest possible disagreement with regard to the distribution of fishing licences under the regulation on the conclusion of the Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the European Community and the Republic of Mozambique", since "it fails to respect the principle of relative stability which has always been followed in previous agreements, even though other criteria have also been used".
The rapporteur also regrets that, owing to possible legal considerations, it has been impossible to table legislative amendments to the articles of the agreement aimed at, firstly, the improved analysis and management of future fisheries agreements, above all through strengthening Mozambican civil society with the active participation of fishermen, and secondly, the optimisation of international rules as regards the occupational categories concerned, particularly in relation to the setting of minimum wage rules for ACP seamen, "a situation which substantially restricts the European Parliament's political mandate resulting from its democratic legitimacy", he says.
The protocol fixes a reference tonnage of 10.000 tonnes of tuna per year. The financial contribution is fixed at EUR 900.000 to be paid annually by the Community during the period of application of the protocol. The payment will be made no later than 31 October 2007 for the first year and no later than 15 January 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011 for the following years. 100% of the financial contribution will be used to support the implementation of the sectoral fisheries policy drawn up by the Mozambican Government.
Fishing licences are valid for a maximum of one year (renewable), from 1 January to 31 December of each year. The fee has been set at EUR 35 per tonne caught within Mozambique's fishing zone.
Shipowners undertake to employ, for the tuna-fishing season in Mozambique's fishing zone, at least 20% of seamen of ACP origin, of which, if possible, at least 40% Mozambican. The International Labour Organisation (ILO) Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work will apply as of right to seamen signed on by Community vessels.
The new agreement granting fishing opportunities to Community fishermen in the Mozambique fishing zone has been initialled on 21 December 2006. Accompanied by a protocol and an annex, the agreement has been signed for a period of five years (renewable) from its entry into force.
20071024IPR12340 EC-Mozambique Fisheries Partnership Agreement Text, as adopted by the EP on 25 October, will shortly be available here
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5519832
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
