MEPs concerned about rising feed and food prices
Consumers
2007-10-25 - 13:29
In adopting a joint resolution on food prices, MEPs call on the Commission and Member States to analyse the discrepancies between farmgate prices and the prices charged by the major retailers. Parliament points out, in particular, that the Commission should investigate the effects of concentration in the retail sector, mainly to the disadvantage of small producers, small enterprises and consumers, and employ all the legal means available to it should abuses of market power be identified.
MEPs urge the Commission to authorise advance direct payments to livestock farmers, especially to those affected by disease outbreaks (e.g. bluetongue), as they may face serious cash-flow problems as a result of increased feed prices. The resolution was adopted with 460 votes in favour, 30 against and 44 abstentions.
Biofuels
The House emphasises that only a very small proportion of EU cereal production is currently being used for biofuel production and that meeting the EU’s biofuel targets in 2020 would still require the use of only 15% of the EU’s arable land.
MEPs also emphasise that biofuels are at present the only substitute for fossil fuels which is available on the market on a large scale and, unlike fossil fuels, is renewable and can produce significant reductions in greenhouse-gas emissions.
Parliament calls on the Commission and Member States, nevertheless, to do more to promote the use and production of second-generation bioenergy, which involves processing of manure and agricultural waste materials rather than primary agricultural products.
The House calls on the Commission to carry out an environmental and food-security impact assessment which takes account of existing competition for land and resources between food and plant-based fuel production, including the impact of climate change and possible measures to avoid further depletion of food-production resources.
Imports and exports
MEPs reject any moves to impose export quotas and tariffs on EU agricultural production. The House demands that third-country operators be subjected to the same stringent controls as EU producers.
MEPs call on the Commission to undertake a stocktaking exercise of possible supply management and food security measures which could avoid further extreme volatility of feed and food prices and unsustainable competition between food and fuel production.
Global food insecurity
The House calls on the Commission to analyse carefully the effects of supply shortages of cereals and oil seeds on the most vulnerable food producers and consumers in the EU and third countries, including proposals for instruments and measures to prevent disruptions of food supply and the inflationary effects of further price increases.
Finally, the European Parliament calls on the Commission to undertake an in-depth analysis of world market trends, including the increased demand for food in developing countries, in order to consider, as part of the CAP Health Check, the creation of permanent mechanisms to guarantee an adequate market supply in future.
20071024IPR12330 Motions for resolutions - Rise in food prices Text, as adopted by the EP on 25 October, will shortly be available here
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//TEXT MOTION P6-RC-2007-0400 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
