Two new bodies aiming for better quality EU statistics
Economic and monetary affairs
2007-10-24 - 13:32
Parliament has approved the creation of two bodies aimed at improving and monitoring the European statistical system. Following a first reading compromise with the Council, legislation setting up the European Statistical Governance Advisory Board and the European Advisory Committee on Community Statistical Information Policy should enter force at this, first reading, stage.
The first of these bodies, the European Statistical Governance Advisory Board, is intended to give independent oversight to the implementation of the European Statistics Code of Practice and thereby enhance the independent, integrity and accountability of Eurostat, the Commission’s statistical arm, and the European Statistical System more generally.
The second body, the European Advisory Committee on Community Statistical Information Policy, will replace an existing committee which has a narrower remit. Its aim is to act as a channel for advice from users, respondents and producers of statistical information on the objectives of the Community’s statistical information policy. To this end, it will be consulted by the Commission during the drawing up of the Community statistical programme. It can also provide other suggestions on statistical policy to the Commission, and give opinions to other EU institutions.
In reports adopted by the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee in September, MEPs put forward a series of amendments to enhance the independence and effectiveness of these two bodies. In informal discussions between the rapporteurs, Sharon Bowles (ALDE, UK) for the Board and Ieke van den Burg (PES, NL) for the Committee, the Commission and the Council Presidency, compromise texts were agreed which took on board the substance of many of MEPs’ proposed amendments. These compromise texts were adopted by Parliament on Tuesday and should shortly also be given formal approval by the Council.
20071019IPR11931 European Statistical Governance Advisory Board European Statistical Advisory Council Text, as adopted by the EP on 23 October, will shortly be available here
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5400852
EN
2
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5406392
EN
3
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
