How can tax systems help improve economic performance?
Economic and monetary affairs
2007-10-24 - 15:15
In adopting a report by 323 votes in favour to 214 against and 120 abstentions, on how taxation and customs policies can support the aim of making the European economy more competitive, MEPs gave their backing, among other things, to fiscal incentives for investment in R&amp;D and environmental projects, healthy tax competition, lower rates of VAT for labour intensive services and a common consolidated corporate tax base.
The report sets out ideas on the contribution of taxation policy to the Lisbon Strategy, the EU’s plan for improving competitiveness, boosting growth and creating more jobs.
MEPs say that fiscal incentives to businesses are “the main instrument for developing and increasing the number of jobs, but also for increasing R&D investment and environmentally friendly technologies.” They point out that “the overall taxation level in Europe remains higher in comparison to that of the other OECD countries,” and argue for corporate tax arrangements which are favourable to companies, particularly small businesses.
MEPs support “healthy tax competition” and say competitive tax levels need not undermine government finances. They say “a radical change is needed in the way that fiscal services operate” if they are to be effective in combating tax fraud.
Parliament calls for greater fairness in the distribution of the fiscal burdens and burdens and through better structure and targeting of the expenditure side of the budget and criticises the upward trend of VAT rates. It also supports the idea of giving Member States flexibility to lower VAT on labour intensive services provided at a local level, which would not distort cross-border competition. MEPs also call for a further reduction in taxes on employment to help meet the Lisbon goal of a 70 per cent employment rate. On excise duties, Parliament argues for a new approach, replacing minimum rates with a generic code of conduct to encourage convergence of rates.
The report reiterates Parliament’s support for a common consolidated corporate tax base, which would not affect Member States’ right to set whatever rate of corporation tax they wished. MEPs welcome the Commission’s intention to launch this under the “enhanced cooperation” system (whereby a group of Member States can proceed with a project which not all 27 wish to join) even if this is a second best option.
This own initiative report was initially drawn up by Sahra Wagenknecht (GUE/NGL, DE), but following the amendments adopted at committee stage and in plenary, the final text does not represent her views. She asked for her name to be removed from the report and called for MEPs to vote against. However, they adopted the report with 323 votes in favour, 214 against and 120 abstentions.
British and Irish speakers in the debate on Tuesday, 23 October 2007
Derek Roland CLARK (IND/DEM, UK) stated that "even the British cannot get it right for all of our country. North is not the same as the south, Wales and Scotland are different to the south-east – and that was under Gordon Brown as Chancellor for 10 years. Surely you listened to him; after all, you did at Lisbon last week when, as Prime Minister, you let him keep the red lines, did you not? Or did you?"
Later in the report, Mr Clark remarked, it talks about ‘EU-wide coordination’ of ‘direct taxation’. In the UK, he said, we thought we had been promised that harmonised taxes, especially income tax, would never come. Now, here it is in a report. "
"So why do you not get Gordon Brown to tell the truth to the British people? Harmonise that message! Now, that is harmonisation I would go along with. But you dare not do that to the British people because, when they are told the plain unvarnished truth, they will vote with their feet, right out of the EU, taking their annual EU contributions of EUR 18 billion of their own taxpayers’ money with them. What price harmonised taxes then?"
Eoin RYAN (UEN, IE) said that the report on the table today demonstrates, once again, the relentless attack on Member States that operate low and successful corporate tax regimes. Mr Ryan did not accept that low corporation tax leads to unfair tax competition. His belief is that ensuring competitiveness is a vital element in the tax policy mix of a fully functioning single market.
Attempts, he said, by large Member States to giftwrap tax harmonisation in the flowery paper of CCCTB (common consolidated corporate tax base) will not be accepted by Ireland or other Member States. The fact of the matter is that it is not the right of Ireland, or any other Member State, to play a role in setting the tax rate of another Member State. The unity of Europe is not compromised by diversity in tax policies; rather, the EU’s competitiveness is undermined by the wrong tax policies. Mr Ryan said he firmly believes that the EU is best served by promoting tax competition, not tax harmonisation.
How is it that a country like Ireland, and other Member States, which changed radically their tax policies and became successful economies, are now under attack? What is the attractiveness of a country like Ireland, he asked the Commissioner, if you bring in this system and eventually bring in tax harmonisation? Because that is exactly what it is, and the only way tax will go is up. It has already been said, by people within the Commission, that they want to see a tax regime more or less in the middle of what it is at the moment, which is approximately in the low 20%. What would be the attractiveness of Ireland or other peripheral countries? There would be not attractiveness, just high unemployment."
Gay MITCHELL (EPP-ED, IE) said that the report rightly states that tax competition in the EU has led, and continues to lead, to EU-wide economic gains by way of a dynamic corporate environment.
The CCCTB, he said, could just as easily lead to a less competitive EU and, in his view, should not be supported. The EU, Mr Mitchell said, needs to be responsive to an ever-changing global economy. Modern competitive economies need to be flexible to meet the changing requirements of new products and services. The CCCTB will undermine this flexibility for a number of reasons. An EU-wide corporation tax base will be inflexible and hinder an individual country’s ability to decide its own legal fiscal strategy, based on its particular circumstances. The CCCTB’s proponents assert that each Member State will retain its autonomy to determine its national tax rate – but will they? Is the CCCTB not the thin end of the wedge, he questioned.
If the CCCTB is optional, it merely increases the number of bases available to companies and makes the system even more complex. Domestic tax law offers certainty to business. A system that is applied in a number of Member States may lead to differences over how the provisions are interpreted, bringing about uncertainty for business.
Taxation, Mr Mitchell said, is a matter of national sovereignty for each Member State. The right to choose the level of public spending and the funding of such expenditure is a basic function of national democratic process. It is necessary to protect the flexibility of tax policy in rewarding enterprise and the creation of jobs and growth in the economy. A single base would do away with flexibility. There is no evidence to suggest, he said, that a common consolidated corporate tax base will address issues such as competitiveness, compliance costs for companies, transfer pricing and so on. It would not simplify EU tax issues, as the so-called ‘optional system’ proposed would add another layer.
20071023IPR12115 Contribution of taxation and customs policies to the Lisbon strategy Text, as adopted by the EP on 24 October, 2007
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5480062
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
