Post-Briefing - 22-25 October 2007 - Strasbourg plenary session
2007-10-29 - 12:13
NB: An audio summary of 22-25 October Strasbourg plenary session is available and can be accessed via the link at the end of this publication.
Opening of the October plenary session: Pöttering welcomes new Reform Treaty and outcome of the Lisbon summit
Opening the October plenary session in Strasbourg, President Hans-Gert PÖTTERING said that the recent summit in Lisbon had been "very successful". The Reform Treaty gives the European Parliament more powers and makes co-decision the normal legislative decision making process. President Pöttering stated that he wished that the ratification processes would go smoothly so as they can be finished by 1 January 2009.
Debate on the new born Treaty of Lisbon with PM Sócrates
Debating the outcome of the Lisbon summit and the new Treaty of Lisbon which will be signed on 13 December, many MEPs (from the larger political groups) welcomed the new Treaty and the deal reached in Lisbon, while others criticised the lack of referenda for ratification and its similarity to the Constitutional Treaty. The House heard positive assessments from both PM Sócrates and Commission President Barroso on the outcome of summit.
Pesticides package - debate on first reading report
New EU legislation on pesticides was approved with amendments by the European Parliament at first reading on Tuesday, 23 October. MEPs voted to ban aerial spraying with pesticides and to prohibit the use of pesticides in buffer zones round water courses. They also approved plans to ban or at least restrict pesticides in parks and sports grounds. However, they threw out proposals to divide the EU into three zones for the purposes of approving new pesticide products.
Adoption of first reading of the 2008 draft budget
In adopting its first-reading of the 2008 EU budget, MEPs want the overall amount of payment appropriations to be higher than in the Commission's preliminary draft budget (0.97%) and the Council's draft budget (0,95%), while not exceeding 0.99% of the EU's gross national income (GNI). They propose restoring the level of expenditure entered in the preliminary draft budget and making full use of the margins envisaged under the financial perspectives in several headings.
Sakharov Prize 2007 awarded to Sudanese lawyer Salih Mahmoud Osman
Sudanese human rights lawyer Salih Mahmoud Osman is the winner of this year's Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought. Thursday's unanimous decision by the European Parliament's political group leaders was announced to Parliament's plenary sitting in Strasbourg by President Hans-Gert Pöttering. Mr Osman, who works with the Sudan Organisation Against Torture, has for over two decades provided free legal aid to victims of human rights abuses in his country. The prize will be formally awarded to Mr Osman in Strasbourg on 11 December, the day after the 59th anniversary of the UN Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The prize comes with a certificate and a cheque for €50 000.
MEPs back cuts in cars' CO2 emissions
About 19% of EU CO2 emissions are produced by passenger cars and light-commercial vehicles. The automotive industry's voluntary commitment to slash emissions has proven a "failure", however -- this, according to a report by the European Parliament, adopted today by a large majority, which calls for legislation to cap average emissions from all new passenger cars at 125g CO2/km as of 2015.
EP calls for EU-wide ban on smoking in the workplace
In its first response to a Commission consultation document, the European Parliament -- in an own-initiative report adopted -- called for wide-ranging measures to restrict smoking in public places and make it harder for underage people to buy cigarettes. The report was adopted with 561 votes in favour 63 against and 36 abstentions.
How can tax systems help improve economic performance?
In adopting a report by 323 votes in favour to 214 against and 120 abstentions, on how taxation and customs policies can support the aim of making the European economy more competitive, MEPs gave their backing, among other things, to fiscal incentives for investment in R&D and environmental projects, healthy tax competition, lower rates of VAT for labour intensive services and a common consolidated corporate tax base.
Two new bodies aiming for better quality EU statistics
Parliament has approved the creation of two bodies aimed at improving and monitoring the European statistical system. Following a first reading compromise with the Council, legislation setting up the European Statistical Governance Advisory Board and the European Advisory Committee on Community Statistical Information Policy should enter force at this, first reading, stage.
Business registers for statistical purposes
MEPs approved at second reading a proposal to update the regulation on statistics on the characteristics of businesses operating in the EU - their number, size, structure and so on. The only remaining point at issue with the Council has now been resolved, so the draft regulation should become law at this stage of the procedure.
EP praises Turkey's renewed commitment to reform, but notes remaining areas of concern
Parliament welcomed the recent elections in Turkey, especially the new government's renewed commitment to reforms, in a resolution adopted on Wednesday, 24 October in Strasbourg plenary. The resolution also indicated areas in which further progress was still necessary, especially concerning the content of upcoming constitutional reforms, while also expressing concern about possible Turkish military actions in Northern Iraq.
European Parliament debates EU-Russia relations ahead of summit
The House debated EU-Russia relations ahead of the forthcoming summit which take place in Mafra (Portugal) on Friday 26 October. The twice-yearly summits are hosted by Russia and by the country holding the rotating presidency of the European Union. MEPs voted by 321 for and 309 against, to postpone the vote on a resolution to a plenary after the summit. On the request of Christopher Beazley (EPP-ED, UK), the verbatim coverage of the debate will be handed to the Russian authorities at the summit.
Call to produce legal analgesics instead of illicit opium in Afghanistan
The European Parliament is urging the Council to put forward a plan to the Afghan government which would include the possibility of a pilot project to turn part of the illicit poppy crop into legal opium-based analgesics.
Political reforms welcome, but full ICTY cooperation needed from Serbia, say MEPs
Parliament welcomes recent political events in Serbia, such as a new constitution, the formation of a new government, and the signing of a visa facilitation agreement with the EU. Nevertheless, MEPs underline that full cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), and the arrest of the four remaining indicted war criminals, is a pre-condition for the signing of a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA).
European Parliament objects to special measure for Iraq
MEPs endorsed a resolution in plenary on the Akkas Gas Field in Western Iraq calling on the Commission "to withdraw or amend its draft decision establishing Special Measure for Iraq", and to submit a new draft decision. According to the EP, the special measures for the exploration of the Akkas Gas Field in Western Iraq in view of linking its output to the Syrian gas pipeline network are not in line with the Development Cooperation Instrument (DCI)'s main objective which is poverty alleviation.
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund: redundancies in the car production sector in France
Parliament adopted a report approving the use of the Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund for redundancies in the car production sector in France. In March 2007, France requested assistance in respect of two cases concerning redundancies in the automobile sector, specifically suppliers to Peugeot-Citroen and Renault.
EU will need conventional energy sources for sometime yet, says EP
On current trends, the EU will rely on imports to meet 65% of its energy needs by 2030. Yet gas and oil supplies are dogged by uncertainty due to geopolitical risks and growing demand elsewhere. The report, drafted by Herbert Reul (EPP-ED, DE), was adopted with 509 votes in favour, 153 against and 30 abstentions and says that nuclear energy is "indispensable if basic energy needs are to be met in Europe in the medium term."
LUX Prize for European cinema goes to… "Auf der anderen Seite" ("The Edge of Heaven")
The Turkish-German co production "On the Edge of Heaven" ("Auf der anderen Seite") won the first edition of the European Parliament LUX (light) Prize for European cinema. The German Actress Hanna Schygulla received the trophy from EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering in front of the Members of the European Parliament, and representatives from the other films in competition. MEPs voted for the winning film from a short-list of three. Hans Gert Pöttering said: "Today, we are experiencing a premiere: 50 years after signing the Treaty of Rome, the European Parliament is awarding for the first time the newly created cinema prize "LUX".
Job qualifications should be comparable EU wide by 2012
Job qualifications earned in any EU Member State should be comparable throughout the EU by 2012, but Member States should be given a year longer than planned to implement the proposed European Qualification Framework (EQF) and it should be accompanied by a system of vocational training credits, says the European Parliament. The EQF aims to ease cross-border mobility for workers and learners, and help meet labour market needs, by using a common language to describe qualifications.
TRIPS: MEPs give their assent to the modification of the agreement
The European Parliament has given its assent to the modification of the agreement on intellectual property rights relating to trade (TRIPS), allowing for a better access for developing countries to medicine for the fight against Malaria, HIV or Tuberculosis.
Human rights: Iran, Pakistan, Sudan
In three human rights resolutions adopted at the end of this week's plenary session, Parliament voiced concern at the worsening situation in Iran, called for democracy to be restored in Pakistan and condemned the killing of 10 African Union peacekeepers in Sudan.
'Towards a global treaty to ban all cluster munitions'
In adopting a joint resolution entitled "Towards a global treaty to ban all cluster munitions", MEPs reaffirm the need to strengthen international humanitarian law (IHL) as it applies to cluster munitions and speedily to adopt at international level a comprehensive ban on the use, production, transfer and stockpiling of cluster munitions, and therefore strongly supports the Oslo Process launched in February 2007.
EU strategy for Africa: European Parliament calls for stronger parliamentary dimension
The EU Strategy for Africa needs a stronger parliamentary dimension, says an own-initiative report, adopted by the European Parliament, that sets out priorities for the EU-Africa Strategy to be adopted at the second EU-Africa Summit in Lisbon in December. MEPs will meet African MPs in Lisbon prior to the Summit.
Sentencing across the EU
MEPs adopted a non-binding report on laying down the rules according to which one Member State is to supervise suspended sentences, or alternative sanctions, contained in a judgment given in another Member States.
Fisheries Partnership Agreements between the EC and Madagascar
The Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the EC and Madagascar is a tuna agreement which allocates fishing opportunities according to three categories of vessels from Spain, France, Italy, Portugal and the United Kingdom. It also introduces the possibility for an additional five vessels to carry out exploratory fishing for demersal species. The European Parliament approves the conclusion of this Agreement with some amendments.
Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the EC and Mozambique
The European Parliament also approved a consultative report on the conclusion of a new Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the EC and Mozambique. The agreement has been signed for a period of five years (renewable) from its entry into force and it grants fishing opportunities to vessels from Spain, France, Italy, Portugal and the United Kingdom. (The report was adopted by 407 votes in favour to 73 against and 76 abstentions).
MEPs welcome European Ombudsman annual report for 2006
MEPs adopted a report on the activities of the European Ombudsman in 2006 - Mr Nikoforos Diamandouros. The report says that the Ombudsman has continued to exercise his powers in a balanced and energetic way both with regard to examining and handling complaints, and conducting and concluding enquiries, and with regard to maintaining constructive relations with the European Union's institutions and encouraging citizens to avail themselves of their rights in relation to those institutions.
European Parliament adopts written declaration on origin marking
MEPs adopted a written declaration on origin marking which emphasises the right of European consumers to immediate access to information about their purchases; stresses that fake indications concerning product origin are, like any kind of fraud, unacceptable; believes that a level playing field with the EU's trading partners must be guaranteed, in line with a fair trade agenda.
MEPs concerned about rising feed and food prices
In adopting a joint resolution on food prices, MEPs call on the Commission and Member States to analyse the discrepancies between farmgate prices and the prices charged by the major retailers. Parliament points out, in particular, that the Commission should investigate the effects of concentration in the retail sector, mainly to the disadvantage of small producers, small enterprises and consumers, and employ all the legal means available to it should abuses of market power be identified.
Audiovisual record and translation of all debates in plenary
MEPs decided to ensure that all parliamentary proceedings are covered in all 23 official languages. MEPs also want to make the recordings of each sitting available for the public in all languages and via the Internet. By approving the report by Richard Corbett (PES, UK) by 586 in favours, 94 against and 17 abstentions, the Parliament amended its Rules of Procedure so that, after each plenary sitting, a verbatim report of the proceedings is made available in all official languages.
Adopted texts from the Strasbourg plenary session 22-25 October 2007 can be found here : The draft agenda for the Strasbourg plenary session 12-15 November 2007 is available here :
An audio summary of the Strasbourg plenary session 22-25 October 2007 can be found here : 20071019BRI11923
EN
1
A
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
2
A
/activities/public/plenSession.do?language=EN
EN
3
A
/eplive/expert/multimedia/20071029MLT12547/media_20071029MLT12547.mp3
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Opening of the October plenary session: Pöttering welcomes new Reform Treaty and outcome of the Lisbon summit
2007-10-29 - 12:13
Opening the October plenary session in Strasbourg, President Hans-Gert PÖTTERING said that the recent summit in Lisbon had been "very successful". The Reform Treaty gives the European Parliament more powers and makes co-decision the normal legislative decision making process. President Pöttering stated that he wished that the ratification processes would go smoothly so as they can be finished by 1 January 2009. The House debated the outcome of the summit on Tuesday morning with the Portuguese Prime Minister José Sócrates.
President Pöttering stated that the Reform Treaty would be signed in Lisbon on 13 December. On 12 December, he said, there would be a formal ceremony in Strasbourg for the signing of the Charter of Fundamental Rights as part of the Reform Treaty. He also congratulated the three MEP representatives at the Intergovernmental Conference - Enrique BARÓN CRESPO (PES, ES), Elmar BROK (EPP-ED, DE) and Andrew DUFF (ALDE, UK).
In response to a question from Daniel COHN-BENDIT (Greens/EFA, DE), President Pöttering underlined that the President of the European Parliament would have full voting rights.
Changes to the agenda
At the request of Daniel COHN-BENDIT (Greens/EFA, DE) and with the support of Graham WATSON (ALDE, UK), MEPs voted in favour of adding a vote on a resolution to the EU-Russia debate. The debate took place on Wednesday, 24 October. However, the vote on the resolution due to take place on Thursday was postponed to a plenary after the summit which will be held in held in Mafra (Portugal) on Friday 26 October 2007.
The House also voted in favour of replacing Uzebekistan with Pakistan for the debates and votes on human rights issues on Thursday afternoon. The situation in Uzebekistan will be taken at the next plenary session.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
MEPs debate the new born Treaty of Lisbon with PM Sócrates
2007-10-29 - 12:13
Meeting in Strasbourg, the European Parliament debated the outcome of the Lisbon summit and the new Treaty of Lisbon which will be signed on 13 December. Many MEPs (from the larger political groups) welcomed the new Treaty and the deal reached in Lisbon, while others criticised the lack of referenda for ratification and its similarity to the Constitutional Treaty. The House heard positive assessments from both PM Sócrates and Commission President Barroso on the outcome of summit. Portuguese Prime Minister José Sócrates started by paying tribute to the Portuguese MEP, Fausto Correia, who recently died at an early age. His death, he said, was a great loss to the European Parliament, and in particular to the Portuguese Socialist Party.
On the summit PM Sócrates said: "Europe needed a rapid agreement and that is what it got. Europe needed a sign of confidence and that is what it got. Europe needed to turn towards the future and that is what it has done."
Lisbon Summit
Prime Minister Sócrates said: "It is with great satisfaction that I have come here today to the European Parliament to present you the agreement reached by the Intergovernmental Conference on 18 October. The agreement that will give birth to the new Lisbon Treaty. The Treaty that will be signed on 13 December in the city whose name it will bear."
In Lisbon, agreement was reached on the following questions which allowed the final agreement on the Treaty to be sealed:
On the Ioannina clause, the solution involved two levels:
• a declaration on the decision making system in the Council by qualified majority that specifies the actual Ioannina safeguarding mechanism;
• which is complemented by a Protocol that requires consensus in the European Council on any attempt to modify or revoke this mechanism.
In so doing, PM Sócrates said "we provided guarantees on the Ioannina compromise without affecting the integrity of the decision making process by qualified majority."
In relation to Advocates General in the Court of Justice, PM Sócrates said that a solution also had to be found to the political question on the number to be appointed. Agreement was reached on a declaration stating that the Council would give its approval to any request from the Court of Justice for the number of Advocates General to be increased by three from eight to eleven. In this case, Poland would have a permanent Advocate General and would no longer participate in the rotation system, while the current rotation system would cover five Advocates General instead of three.
As for the appointment of the Union’s High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, PM Sócrates said that the agreed declaration foresees that the European Parliament can use suitable contacts to participate in the appointment process even in the very first phase in January 2009.
The Conference, he said, also approved a declaration clarifying the delimitation of competences between the Union and the Member States, foreseen in the Treaties.
And, lastly, on the issue of the composition of the European Parliament, an amendment was made to Article 9.- A of the Treaty of the European Union, defining that the number of members cannot exceed seven hundred and fifty (750), plus the President, maintaining the proportional degressivity of its representation.
Two declarations are added to this amendment:
• one defining that the additional seat in the European Parliament will be attributed to Italy; and
• the other guaranteeing that the European Council will give its political agreement on the composition of the European Parliament, on the basis of the proposal from Parliament itself.
The Council, therefore, PM Sócrates stated, accepted the criteria put forward by Parliament and went ahead with what it considered an acceptable adjustment, with a view to adapting the current framework during the 2009-2014 period.
We have a new Treaty, PM Sócrates said, a Treaty that resolves the crisis of the past and puts Europe in a position to set its eyes on the future. A Treaty with significant advances of which he highlighted the following:
This Treaty :
adopts, with no alteration, the enlargement of the European Parliament’s participation in the legislative process, as well as the innovations in the budgetary process, thereby enhancing the Union’s democratic legitimacy;
improves the decision making process, namely by the extension of the vote by qualified majority to the area of freedom, security and justice;
also on the area of freedom, security and justice, it upholds the legal foundations required for the development of more effective immigration and asylum policies, as well as police and judicial coordination against terrorism and organised crime thus strengthening the security of our citizens;
clearly lists the domains in which the Member States transfer powers to the Union;
strengthens the supervisory role of the national Parliaments;
But in the set of advances that this Treaty brings, there is one PM Sócrates found particularly gratifying to underline: the Charter of Fundamental Rights which will be proclaimed by the European Union’s three institutions on 12 December is explicitly made legally binding by the Treaty.
The Treaty of Lisbon now shows a Europe that is prepared, confident, sure of itself. What the Treaty of Lisbon brings is a new Europe fit for the times.
On behalf of the Portuguese Presidency, PM Sócrates thanked the European Parliament and President, Hans-Gert Pöttering and its representatives at the IGC – Elmar Brok (EPP-ED), Enrique Barón-Crespo (PSE) and Andrew Duff (ALDE) for their excellent collaboration, the constructive suggestion put forward and the dedication so that Europe could reach an agreement and do so quickly. He also extended his thanks to the European Commission and, in particular its President for the help they give throughout the negotiation process.
But, he stated, the job is not yet finished. "There is still much to be done. I want to assure you that the Presidency will continue to work with the same commitment and the same conviction as at the first hour for a stronger European in the service of a better world.".
EP President's right to vote
Holding his electronic voting card, President Pöttering said: "I want to underline again, that the EP President's right to vote was not discussed at the European Council. The President of the European Parliament will, when voting, use his right to vote. Nobody can deprive him/her of this right and the European Council did not do this. I want to make this clear 'very officially.'"
European Commission
European Commission President, José Manuel Barroso said that the European Summit was a summit of a united Europe of solidarity. The Treaty is the first treaty of an enlarged union, the first time states once divided by an iron curtain have together reached agreement on a common treaty. The success of Lisbon tells us that the EU is tougher than it looks and has a strong ability to recover from setbacks.
It has reinforced the democratic nature of the EU: giving a clear definition of citizenship; giving legal force to the Charter of Fundamental Rights; giving the European Parliament a greater role in the legislative process; and increasing the rights of national parliaments
Some are not happy with number of opt-outs, Mr Barroso stated. While we would have preferred to avoid these, he said, diversity is essential to the EU and needs compromises. Despite diversity, we remain united on fundamental goals and freedoms
"With the Reform Treaty Europe will have the chance to shape globalisation not hide from globalisation." When EU states cooperate we are able to solve most of the difficult problems, he said.
Concluding, Mr Barroso stated that what is now needed is delivery of results and to move to ratification before the 2009 European elections. Recent polls suggest, he said, the highest level of support for Europe since 1994.
Political group speakers
Joseph Daul (EPP-ED, FR) said "We now have the tools to allow Europe to work and meet the challenges of the 21st century. Most of us would have preferred an even more ambitious text but we welcome the text agreed in Lisbon."
Continuing he said that we now need to commit ourselves to explaining ourselves to our citizens; explaining better who the 751 MEPs will be and what we do; explaining citizens' initiatives and the role of national parliaments.
If the Treaty of Lisbon allows the EU to be more transparent, he said, and more efficient and better able to be heard on the world stage, we need also to explain that to citizens.
Europe can now be a world leader in the battle against climate change. We can work to protect the well-being and prosperity of our citizens who want to see more action from Europe.
Martin Schulz (PES, DE) said that Europe stands before great challenges: the gulf between rich and poor both within the EU and in the world at large. Climate change, where some of the world's islands know that if sea levels continue to rise, they will cease to exist. They are not new problems, but they do require the EU to act.
"The Portuguese Presidency is right to bring Africa into the limelight. We should have been doing this years ago, but since 2001 we have been dwelling on constitutional issues. The President of the USA has been talking of a potential World War 3 and we were talking of the voting rights of the President of the European Parliament: where is our sense of proportion?
Those who wail that it is the same old constitution (as I have seen in the British press) are wrong: it falls far short of the constitution, but it is progress compared to the Nice Treaty.
In terms of democracy and social standards it is better as it enables us to meet challenges ahead of us. It makes Europe more democratic, more efficient and with the institutions we wanted."
Graham Watson (ALDE, UK) said: "It is fitting that the Reform Treaty should be signed in the city which Caesar once named ‘Felicitas Julia’. Changes like normalising co-decision, ending the tyranny of the Council veto, placing energy, and justice and home affairs under democratic scrutiny. These changes give our Union the capacity to confront the challenges of globalisation.
It is a pity that the Treaty is not simpler to digest, but after being butchered by the ballpoint pens of civil servants from 27 Member States what would you expect? Your famous poet Fernando Pessoa once wrote: ‘No intelligent idea can gain general acceptance unless some stupidity is mixed in with it’. Well, in this case, the culprit was national interest which watered down or rendered indecipherable policies and practices which are in all of our interests.
The real tragedy is this: we saw not a single national leader return home, flying the flag for Europe. Instead, they crowed about the opt-outs and the derogations and the exclusions which disfigured the text before us today.
Nonetheless, again congratulations. I propose a toast, with my glass half full, two cheers for the Lisbon Treaty. Let us hope its advances move us forward faster, and convert cynicism into renewed belief."
Brian Crowley (UEN, IE) said: "Whilst others may say what happened at the Lisbon Summit was shocking, I am of the firm belief that the elected representatives that are the governments of the peoples of the Member States of the European Union are entitled to defend what they see as the rights of their people within that Union."
I think that when we look at the overall example that has been given with this Lisbon Summit, we can see positives from it: we can see movement being made forward and, most importantly of all, an opportunity for a new zone and a new area of the development of the European Union to come into play, in particular with those areas where now codecision reigns in issues of environment, globalisation, research, education and of the necessity of the response of the European institutions to an ever-increasing speed of change within the world.
Allow us, where we have to connect democratically with the people, to tell them exactly what is in this Treaty and, most importantly of all, let this be a welcome to small and medium-sized countries of what can be achieved by defending their interests and rights."
Monica Frassoni (Greens/EFA, IT) said that her group had been "firm advocates of the Constitutional Treaty." However, her group could not join the praise for the Reform Treaty. "It was a case of simple backsliding on what had been achieved in the Constitutional Treaty. The only good point was that the IGC was mercifully short." Mrs Frassoni blamed the President of the European Convention, those advocating that referenda were not needed, and the UK government "who have kowtowed to the Rupert Murdoch tabloids and as a result UK citizens would have less rights and less democracy."
Francis Wurtz (GUE/NGL, FR) criticised the EU's inflexibility when it comes to the issues that concern the citizens most. These issues, including the economic and social framework of the Union and military questions of the EU's external policy, would simply be declared as "red lines" by the Union's leaders: "It is the refusal to listen to criticism that is fuelling the crisis of confidence. We are forever explaining, we are never taking the people and their needs into account."
Nigel Farage (IND/DEM, UK) called for referenda to be held on the Reform Treaty: "You can not push on with this project without the support of the people. Let the people speak!" He claimed that national parliaments had already been usurped by the EU Institutions. "You loath democracy so much by now that you call it populism, you refuse to take no for an answer, you are Euro-nationalists", he said, directed primarily at the Commission and Council.
Jean-Marie Le Pen (ITS, FR) also criticised the fact that no referenda is planned in France and sees the Member States' sovereignty, independence and freedom at stake. He plans to launch a petition in France to propose a referendum. "This is a crime against democracy", he claimed.
Irena Belohorská (NI, SK) said the reform treaty would bring an improvement to the present situation. She lamented that there were countries that did not want to include the Charter of Fundamental Rights, which contained all of the fundamental values of the Member States.
Representative MEP at the IGC
Andrew Duff (ALDE, UK) one of the three MEPs at the Intergovernmental Conference said: "For 26 countries the Treaty is certainly a great step forward towards European unity and certainly rivals the Treaty of Maastricht in importance. The Treaty lacks the simplicity of its late lamented predecessor, but it preserves all the principal forms. Abroad and inside the Union people will soon see a more effective, efficient and democratic Union.
But in one country this is not so: the British still seem intimidated by the success of the EU and have sought at the IGC to reduce the scope and force of common policies in the area of fundamental rights, freedom, security and justice and in the common foreign security and defence policies. Why such a strategy of non-cooperation is thought to serve the interests of the British people is not clear and nor does Mr Farage or the Conservative Party provide a preferable or alternative solution. It is my desire and trust that this strange, idiosyncratic British policy will prove to be as short-lived as possible."
British speakers
Timothy Kirkhope (EPP-ED) expressed his gratitude to the Prime Minister for his statement this morning and, whilst he noted the decisions of the heads of government, the British people and the British Conservative Party have been consistent in their concerns about the Constitution and the very similar Reform Treaty.
"The Irish Prime Minister said at the weekend about possible referenda: ‘... why not let your people have a say. I think it’s a bit upsetting to see so many countries running away from giving their people an opportunity’.
Concluding, Mr Kirkhope said that we should remind ourselves of what the Laeken Declaration said. It said the Union needs to become more democratic, more transparent and more efficient, but it called also for us to engage the citizens more and not just to communicate our decisions to them. The question today is: does the Treaty respond to Laeken? Laeken asked the right questions. Have we given the right answers?
Ian Hudghton (Greens/EFA) accepted the need to reform the Treaties, to create more open, democratic, efficient and accountable governance. In principle he supported an extension of Qualified Majority Voting and codecision with the European Parliament, but the very diversity which Mr Barroso quite rightly referred to will always mean that national interests will be promoted. We should not lose touch, he said, with our local communities by trampling over their interests, or appearing so to do.
Richard Corbett (PES) welcomed this agreement, which despite a few oddities like the extra seat for Italy, he said, is a good package which deserves ratification and which will make the European Union not only function better, but also improve its democratic accountability.
"Tim Kirkhope asked just now whether we have answered the questions posed at Laeken about making this EU more democratically accountable and closer to its citizens. I would say that we have certainly moved in that direction. Let us remember one thing, that once this Treaty comes into force, no European legislation can be adopted without, firstly, prior examination by every national parliament, secondly, approval of the Council of Ministers composed of national ministers accountable to those very same national parliaments, and thirdly, approval by this European Parliament with its Members directly chosen by citizens, specifically to deal with European issues at European level."
That is a level of accountability that exists in no other international structure. We should be proud of what we are achieving in our democratic European Union, he concluded.
Response to the debate
Sócrates - "Europe can move to the offensive"
Portuguese Prime Minister José Sócrates said that "Europe is stronger with the new Treaty, the Lisbon Treaty boosts the European economy and creates the right conditions for Europe to play its role in the world. Europe needs more efficiency and efficacy. Europe is now stronger and better able to deal with the global challenges it faces. Europe can move from the defensive to the offensive." Prime Minister Sócrates also quoted Portuguese poet Fernando Pessoa: "I have nostalgia for the future". Europe can be confident again, he said.
PM Sócrates also clarified that "nobody ever dreamed of the European Parliament President losing his/her right to vote. It is clear there will be 751 MEPs all of them with the right to vote".
Barroso - "A future with renewed confidence"
José Manuel Barroso, President of the Commission said: "I believe it would be a mistake to slow down our delivery and it would be against the twin-track strategy central to the Commission, when we said that we should at the same time solve the political institutional matters and deliver concrete results to our citizens. On the contrary, this Commission, and I am sure also this Parliament, should be active – and we could be even more active together – in promoting a European citizen’s agenda.
"I believe that it is right in our communication, as Mr Corbett highlighted, to explain the new democratic dimension. We in the European Union are proud to have this kind of democratic system. We can always make it better, but there is no other place in the world where there is such democratic participation at transnational level. I think we should also in communication terms make it clear that our reinforced capacity to act on behalf of the citizens in areas relevant to their concerns, like climate protection, energy and migration. Those are concrete concerns for our citizens and we are addressing those concerns. In communicating terms, we should also highlight the reinforced capacity to act in the international scene."
"It is true that this is not a perfect Treaty. But sometimes people say we are giving up the values and the commitment of the founding fathers. This is not true. We are doing what Jean Monnet and many others have said, that we have to build pas à pas – step by step – this common project and we have to do it conceding now that we have to commit to our citizens, we have to fulfil concrete tasks, that we have to deliver concrete results. The Summit of Lisbon concentrating on the Treaty and institutions and on the second day showing the way for globalisation and the way we can together reinforce our capacity to act so that we can meet the challenge of globalisation is setting the agenda for the future of Europe. So it was a great success and I think that the Portuguese Presidency, the Member States, the European Parliament and the Commission should really commemorate this fact and look at the future with renewed confidence." October 2007 - Documents approved at the Intergovernmental Conference of 18 October 2007 in Lisbon
EN
1
LINK
http://www.consilium.europa.eu/cms3_fo/showPage.asp?id=1317&lang=en&mode=g
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Environment
European Parliament votes at first reading on pesticides package
2007-10-29 - 12:13
New EU legislation on pesticides was approved with amendments by the European Parliament at first reading on Tuesday. MEPs voted to ban aerial spraying with pesticides and to prohibit the use of pesticides in buffer zones round water courses. They also approved plans to ban or at least restrict pesticides in parks and sports grounds. However, they threw out proposals to divide the EU into three zones for the purposes of approving new pesticide products. In a report on a draft directive on the sustainable use of pesticides (drafted by Christa Klass (EPP-ED, DE) under co-decision first reading), Parliament backed a ban on aerial spraying (under which derogations would be allowed). MEPs rejected an amendment calling for farmers to be required to inform neighbours in advance if they plan to spray with pesticides.
While agreeing that there should be buffer zones around water courses such as rivers and lakes, they rejected the idea that such zones should be 10 metres wide or indeed any specific width, preferring to leave this decision to Member States.
Parliament agreed that pesticide use should be banned or restricted to a minimum in public areas such as parks and public gardens, and added further areas such as public healthcare facilities and substantial no-spray zones around these areas.
Member States will be required to set up National Action Plans for reducing pesticide use, but the Commission proposed leaving the details to each state. Parliament today rejected the precise EU-wide figures for pesticide reduction proposed by its Environment Committee, opting instead for reduction targets in some cases only, e.g. for substances of "very high concern".
Lastly, MEPs threw out the idea that Member States must fund their National Action Plans through taxes or levies or that a Community level tax should be introduced to discourage pesticide use.
Approval of new pesticides
Parliament also voted on a report on a draft regulation on the authorisation of new plant protection products (drafted by Hiltrud Breyer (Greens/EFA, DE) also under co-decision first reading.
Under the regulation, a positive list of active substances (the key ingredients of pesticides) will be drawn up at EU level. New plant protection products (i.e. pesticides) will then be authorised at national level on the basis of this list.
The Commission proposed that most new substances should be approved initially for 10 years, though low-risk ones would be approved for 15 years. Those which could be replaced by less toxic substances would be approved for only 7 years. In the latter case, the Parliament voted to cut the period to 5 years to encourage the use of non-chemical alternatives. The Commission proposed that all subsequent renewals should be for unlimited periods but Parliament took a more cautious line, voting today for approvals to be renewed "once or repeatedly for a period not exceeding 10 years".
MEPs voted against the Commission's idea of dividing the EU into three geographical zones for pesticide approvals, opting instead for a single EU-wide mutual recognition system, within which Member States would have a degree of flexibility.
Parliament backed the Commission's proposed ban on substances that are genotoxic, carcinogenic, reprotoxic or endocrine-disrupting, and it added substances with neurotoxic or immunotoxic effects to the banned category.
The proposed rules state that substances must not have harmful effects on human health, including vulnerable groups. Parliament added "residents, bystanders" to these categories.
In addition, it decided to tighten up the proposed rules on animal testing, saying this should only be used "as a last resort", and stressed that the combined effect of substances ("chemical cocktails") must also be evaluated.
Lastly, MEPs decided to accept the Commission's proposal that authorisations of products may include, in the "conditions of use", an obligation to warn any neighbours who could be exposed to spray drift before the product is used and who have requested to be informed. But they rejected a series of amendments which would have imposed tougher requirements, such as an obligation to warn residents at least 48 hours in advance.
Ambitious strategy on pesticides needed, says Parlia ment
Parliament voted on an own-initiative report by Irena Belohorská (NA, SK) on a proposed Thematic Strategy on the Sustainable Use of Pesticides, a set of policy guidelines which underpins the pesticides legislation on which Parliament voted yesterday.
In adopting this report, MEPs first acknowledged the need for a European legal framework on pesticide use, as existing legislation is not sufficient to prevent risks to health and the environment from pesticides. At the same time, they point out that the problem of pests is likely to increase due to global warming, which is expected to lead to increased pest populations.
The aim of a pesticides strategy, MEPs believe, should definitely be to reduce the use of pesticides. A key point of the report is a call for "quantitative use reduction targets" to prompt governments to lower the amount of pesticides used. Low pesticide-input farming needs to be promoted, giving priority to non-chemical methods and meaningful support to organic farming. Parliament also urges the Commission to ensure that biocides are included in the strategy.
Cooperation with the EU's neighbours on the use of pesticides is needed, says Parliament, and it urges a ban on imports into the European Union of food produced with pesticides whose use is not allowed in the EU.
MEPs welcome plans to create a system of training and education for professional pesticide users. In addition, they call on the Commission to involve pesticide manufacturers in efforts to reduce pesticides and insist on the need for public information campaigns about pesticide issues.
Lastly, the report calls for existing Community funding to be used for the safe disposal of obsolete pesticides, given that within the EU more than 200,000 tonnes of pesticides are still being stored in both underground dumps and open-air stockpiles. Texts adopted by the European Parliament
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Environment
MEPs back cuts in cars' CO2 emissions
2007-10-29 - 12:13
About 19% of EU CO2 emissions are produced by passenger cars and light-commercial vehicles. The automotive industry's voluntary commitment to slash emissions has proven a "failure", however -- this, according to a report by the European Parliament, adopted today by a large majority, which calls for legislation to cap average emissions from all new passenger cars at 125g CO2/km as of 2015. Despite the fact that "the technology is there to make a significant difference in a short period of time", notes rapporteur Chris Davies (ALDE, UK), "industry has stalled in reducing CO2 emissions". Welcoming the Commission's plan to propose binding legislation in this field -- which they see as "necessary [...] to help the EU meet its target of reducing emissions by at least 20% by 2020 compared to 1990 levels" -- MEPs proposed that binding annual emissions targets be set with effect from 2011.
During the debate in Strasbourg Chris Davies said: "Emission reductions must be made a priority for car makers, but they have to be achieved at the lowest possible expense. That means giving industry specific targets and sufficient time to make the changes. These improvements may increase the price of new cars, but then reduced emissions mean improved fuel economy.
The car industry is supposed to be drawing up a voluntary code of advertising conduct but we have had our fingers burnt through voluntary codes and any such measure should be regarded with suspicion. It is time that advertisements give consumers more details of the fuel economy and emission performance of the vehicles on sale. This information should be upfront and not buried away in the small print. We need to encourage car makers to compete on the basis that their cars are safe and stylish and environmentally-friendly."
Aligning themselves with the Commission's position, MEPs insist that "average emissions from all passenger cars placed on the EU market in 2015 do not exceed 125g CO2/km". (Taking account of the automobile industry's development and production cycles, MEPs decided to move away from an earlier proposal to introduce such a cap as of 1 January 2012). At the same time, the EP backed plans to compel car makers to meet these targets by "technical means alone" -- i.e., without relying on other CO2 saving measures, such as biofuels, special tires, or improvements in air-conditioning systems.
As of 2020, reads the report, such average emissions should not exceed 95g CO2/km. Long-term targets, urge MEPs, should be determined by no later than 2016: these targets "will possibly require further emissions reductions to 70g CO2/km or less by 2025".
Recognizing, however, the difficulties that some specialist manufacturers may have in reducing average emissions across the limited range of cars they produce, members "stress the importance of allowing particular vehicles to exceed emission limits to avoid excessive disruptions to the car market. To that end, they also propose that each manufacturer have the right "to exclude 500 identified vehicles annually from inclusion in the data used to determine average emissions".
Finally, the report proposes the introduction -- in 2011 -- of a "Carbon Allowance Reductions System (CARS)", a market mechanism through which carmakers would have to pay penalties for exceeding the emissions limits. Such penalties, notes the text, "may be offset by redeemable credits awarded to newly registered passenger cars" (of the same manufacturer) whose emissions fall below the limit values.
On the other hand, low emission cars -- such as hydrogen, fuel cell, and plug-in vehicles -- should benefit from a credit system, "which should allow each vehicle of this type introduced between now and the first year of implementation to be counted under the CO2 monitoring procedure as equivalent to, for example, forty conventional vehicles".
Lastly, Members recommend - for the purposes of comparison - to introduce requirements for the display of information "relating to the fuel economy (l/100 km) and CO2 emissions (g/km) of new cars" on vehicles and in advertising (whether TV, radio, Internet or other), all marketing and promotional literature, as well as showrooms. "A minimum of 20%" of the space devoted to such advertising, the report proposes, should provide information on fuel economy and CO2 emissions. Text adopted by the EP on Community Strategy to reduce CO 2 emissions from passenger cars and light-commercial vehicles
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0469 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Public health
EP calls for EU-wide ban on smoking in the workplace
2007-10-29 - 12:13
In its first response to a Commission consultation document, the European Parliament -- in an own-initiative report adopted today -- called for wide-ranging measures to restrict smoking in public places and make it harder for underage people to buy cigarettes. The report was adopted with 561 votes in favour 63 against and 36 abstentions. In a report drafted by Karl-Heinz Florenz (EPP-ED, DE) the EP points out that 650,000 people a year die from smoking, including 80,000 from passive smoking, with children and unborn babies being particularly vulnerable. While 70% of Europeans are non-smokers, 86% are in favour of a ban on smoking at work, 84% in other public places, 61% in bars and pubs and 77% in restaurants.
MEPs therefore welcome the Commission's Green Paper "Towards a Europe free from tobacco smoke: policy options at EU level" but regard it only as a starting point. They urge the Commission to designate environmental tobacco smoke a class 1 carcinogen and recommend that - within two years - Member States impose smoking bans in all enclosed workplaces, including catering establishments, as well as in all enclosed public buildings and transport. If these objectives are not attained, the Commission is urged to submit a proposal for rules on the protection of non-smokers in the field of employment protection by 2011. The Commission is also asked to produce a report on the cost incurred to national health systems and the EU economy as a result of smoking and tobacco smoke.
The EP believes Directive 2001/37/EC on tobacco products should be updated to toughen up the rules on tobacco additives, including those which are carcinogenic or addiction-enhancing. The report insists that the same directive include "a renewed library of larger, hard-hitting picture warnings", to be made mandatory "on all tobacco products sold in the European Union". MEPs also call on the Commission to urgently "investigate the health risks associated with consumption of snus and its impact on the consumption of cigarettes".
Finally, MEPs ask the Commission to examine measures such as introducing an EU-wide ban on the sale of tobacco products to people under 18 years of age, allowing cigarette machines to be placed only where they are inaccessible to minors, removing tobacco products from self-service displays in retail outlets and banning distance sales of tobacco products to young people (e.g. over the internet). In the same breath, the report calls on Member States to commit themselves "to reduce smoking among youth by at least 50% by 2025" and for the Commission to consider "an EU-wide high minimum level of taxation of tobacco products".
Directing their attention to their own workplace, MEPs call for the Parliament -- "in the light of its duty to set an example" -- to adopt a smoking ban "with no exemptions" in all areas of the House.
The report also condemns the disregard shown by some Members and staff of the European Parliament for the restrictions on smoking in the European Parliament, e.g. by smoking in staircases or in the open Members' bar in Strasbourg. Text adopted by the EP on Tobacco smoke: policy options at EU level
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0471 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Economic and monetary affairs
How can tax systems help improve economic performance?
2007-10-29 - 12:13
In adopting a report by 323 votes in favour to 214 against and 120 abstentions, on how taxation and customs policies can support the aim of making the European economy more competitive, MEPs gave their backing, among other things, to fiscal incentives for investment in R&amp;D and environmental projects, healthy tax competition, lower rates of VAT for labour intensive services and a common consolidated corporate tax base. The report sets out ideas on the contribution of taxation policy to the Lisbon Strategy, the EU’s plan for improving competitiveness, boosting growth and creating more jobs.
MEPs say that fiscal incentives to businesses are “the main instrument for developing and increasing the number of jobs, but also for increasing R&D investment and environmentally friendly technologies.” They point out that “the overall taxation level in Europe remains higher in comparison to that of the other OECD countries,” and argue for corporate tax arrangements which are favourable to companies, particularly small businesses.
MEPs support “healthy tax competition” and say competitive tax levels need not undermine government finances. They say “a radical change is needed in the way that fiscal services operate” if they are to be effective in combating tax fraud.
Parliament calls for greater fairness in the distribution of the fiscal burdens and burdens and through better structure and targeting of the expenditure side of the budget and criticises the upward trend of VAT rates. It also supports the idea of giving Member States flexibility to lower VAT on labour intensive services provided at a local level, which would not distort cross-border competition. MEPs also call for a further reduction in taxes on employment to help meet the Lisbon goal of a 70 per cent employment rate. On excise duties, Parliament argues for a new approach, replacing minimum rates with a generic code of conduct to encourage convergence of rates.
The report reiterates Parliament’s support for a common consolidated corporate tax base, which would not affect Member States’ right to set whatever rate of corporation tax they wished. MEPs welcome the Commission’s intention to launch this under the “enhanced cooperation” system (whereby a group of Member States can proceed with a project which not all 27 wish to join) even if this is a second best option.
This own initiative report was initially drawn up by Sahra Wagenknecht (GUE/NGL, DE), but following the amendments adopted at committee stage and in plenary, the final text does not represent her views. She asked for her name to be removed from the report and called for MEPs to vote against. However, they adopted the report with 323 votes in favour, 214 against and 120 abstentions.
British and Irish speakers in the debate on Tuesday, 23 October 2007
Derek Roland CLARK (IND/DEM, UK) stated that "even the British cannot get it right for all of our country. North is not the same as the south, Wales and Scotland are different to the south-east – and that was under Gordon Brown as Chancellor for 10 years. Surely you listened to him; after all, you did at Lisbon last week when, as Prime Minister, you let him keep the red lines, did you not? Or did you?"
Later in the report, Mr Clark remarked, it talks about ‘EU-wide coordination’ of ‘direct taxation’. In the UK, he said, we thought we had been promised that harmonised taxes, especially income tax, would never come. Now, here it is in a report. "
"So why do you not get Gordon Brown to tell the truth to the British people? Harmonise that message! Now, that is harmonisation I would go along with. But you dare not do that to the British people because, when they are told the plain unvarnished truth, they will vote with their feet, right out of the EU, taking their annual EU contributions of EUR 18 billion of their own taxpayers’ money with them. What price harmonised taxes then?"
Eoin RYAN (UEN, IE) said that the report on the table today demonstrates, once again, the relentless attack on Member States that operate low and successful corporate tax regimes. Mr Ryan did not accept that low corporation tax leads to unfair tax competition. His belief is that ensuring competitiveness is a vital element in the tax policy mix of a fully functioning single market.
Attempts, he said, by large Member States to giftwrap tax harmonisation in the flowery paper of CCCTB (common consolidated corporate tax base) will not be accepted by Ireland or other Member States. The fact of the matter is that it is not the right of Ireland, or any other Member State, to play a role in setting the tax rate of another Member State. The unity of Europe is not compromised by diversity in tax policies; rather, the EU’s competitiveness is undermined by the wrong tax policies. Mr Ryan said he firmly believes that the EU is best served by promoting tax competition, not tax harmonisation.
How is it that a country like Ireland, and other Member States, which changed radically their tax policies and became successful economies, are now under attack? What is the attractiveness of a country like Ireland, he asked the Commissioner, if you bring in this system and eventually bring in tax harmonisation? Because that is exactly what it is, and the only way tax will go is up. It has already been said, by people within the Commission, that they want to see a tax regime more or less in the middle of what it is at the moment, which is approximately in the low 20%. What would be the attractiveness of Ireland or other peripheral countries? There would be not attractiveness, just high unemployment."
Gay MITCHELL (EPP-ED, IE) said that the report rightly states that tax competition in the EU has led, and continues to lead, to EU-wide economic gains by way of a dynamic corporate environment.
The CCCTB, he said, could just as easily lead to a less competitive EU and, in his view, should not be supported. The EU, Mr Mitchell said, needs to be responsive to an ever-changing global economy. Modern competitive economies need to be flexible to meet the changing requirements of new products and services. The CCCTB will undermine this flexibility for a number of reasons. An EU-wide corporation tax base will be inflexible and hinder an individual country’s ability to decide its own legal fiscal strategy, based on its particular circumstances. The CCCTB’s proponents assert that each Member State will retain its autonomy to determine its national tax rate – but will they? Is the CCCTB not the thin end of the wedge, he questioned.
If the CCCTB is optional, it merely increases the number of bases available to companies and makes the system even more complex. Domestic tax law offers certainty to business. A system that is applied in a number of Member States may lead to differences over how the provisions are interpreted, bringing about uncertainty for business.
Taxation, Mr Mitchell said, is a matter of national sovereignty for each Member State. The right to choose the level of public spending and the funding of such expenditure is a basic function of national democratic process. It is necessary to protect the flexibility of tax policy in rewarding enterprise and the creation of jobs and growth in the economy. A single base would do away with flexibility. There is no evidence to suggest, he said, that a common consolidated corporate tax base will address issues such as competitiveness, compliance costs for companies, transfer pricing and so on. It would not simplify EU tax issues, as the so-called ‘optional system’ proposed would add another layer. Text adopted by the EP on Taxation and customs policies and the Lisbon Strategy
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0470 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Economic and monetary affairs
Two new bodies aiming for better quality EU statistics
2007-10-29 - 12:13
Parliament has approved the creation of two bodies aimed at improving and monitoring the European statistical system. Following a first reading compromise with the Council, legislation setting up the European Statistical Governance Advisory Board and the European Advisory Committee on Community Statistical Information Policy should enter force at this, first reading, stage. The first of these bodies, the European Statistical Governance Advisory Board, is intended to give independent oversight to the implementation of the European Statistics Code of Practice and thereby enhance the independent, integrity and accountability of Eurostat, the Commission’s statistical arm, and the European Statistical System more generally.
The second body, the European Advisory Committee on Community Statistical Information Policy, will replace an existing committee which has a narrower remit. Its aim is to act as a channel for advice from users, respondents and producers of statistical information on the objectives of the Community’s statistical information policy. To this end, it will be consulted by the Commission during the drawing up of the Community statistical programme. It can also provide other suggestions on statistical policy to the Commission, and give opinions to other EU institutions.
In reports adopted by the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee in September, MEPs put forward a series of amendments to enhance the independence and effectiveness of these two bodies. In informal discussions between the rapporteurs, Sharon Bowles (ALDE, UK) for the Board and Ieke van den Burg (PES, NL) for the Committee, the Commission and the Council Presidency, compromise texts were agreed which took on board the substance of many of MEPs’ proposed amendments. These compromise texts were adopted by Parliament on Tuesday and should shortly also be given formal approval by the Council. Text adopted by the EP on European Statistical Advisory Committee Text adopted by the EP on European Statistical Governance Advisory Board
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0462 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0461 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Economic and monetary affairs
Business registers for statistical purposes
2007-10-29 - 12:13
MEPs approved at second reading a proposal to update the regulation on statistics on the characteristics of businesses operating in the EU - their number, size, structure and so on. The only remaining point at issue with the Council has now been resolved, so the draft regulation should become law at this stage of the procedure. The update was needed to take account of changes in the business world in the light of ongoing globalisation and the further development of the internal market. At the first reading stage in June 2006, Parliament adopted a number of amendments, mostly aimed at reducing the administrative burden on businesses from the collection of data for statistics. All of these were accepted by the Council, but the reform of provisions to do with the Commission’s implementing powers under EU legislation (so-called “comitology”) led to a disagreement about the breadth of these powers in this case. The rapporteur, Hans-Peter Martin (NA, AT), and the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee proposed to remove the “purpose” and “scope” of the transmission of data from the area covered by the implementing powers since these are better left for primary legislation. The plenary session has now backed these amendments.
The Council has indicated it can accept this change, so the proposal should become law shortly. Text adopted by the EP on Business registers for statistical purposes
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0479 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External relations
EP praises Turkey's renewed commitment to reform, notes remaining areas of concern
2007-10-29 - 12:13
Parliament welcomes the recent elections in Turkey, especially the new government's renewed commitment to reforms, in a resolution adopted on Wednesday, 24 October in Strasbourg plenary. The resolution also indicated areas in which further progress was still necessary, especially concerning the content of upcoming constitutional reforms, while also expressing concern about possible Turkish military actions in Northern Iraq. The resolution on EU-Turkey relations, drafted by Ria Oomen-Ruijten (EPP-ED, NL), congratulates Turkey on its recent legislative elections, and "welcomes the election of the new President as a sign of strength of the Turkish democracy." The House also welcomes "the commitment of the new government to enhance the reform process in the coming months and years," as well as "the intention of the new Turkish government to adopt a new and civilian constitution which would protect fundamental human rights and freedoms."
Members supported the opening of negotiations on the energy chapter, and encouraged Turkey to join the European Energy Community, given the country's importance as a transit hub for gas supplies. They also noted that the accession negotiations opened two years ago were "the starting point for an open-ended process."
Political reforms
The Parliament strongly condemns the murders of Hrant Dink and Andrea Santoro, and "underlines the urgent need to efficiently combat all types of extremism and violence." The House expresses its concern about "the repeated interference of the Turkish Armed Forces in the political process, and stresses that further efforts are needed to ensure full and effective civilian control over the military," calling for parliamentary supervision of the secret services, gendarmerie, and police forces, as well. The resolution "deplores that a number of persons is still being prosecuted under Article 301 of the penal code" and regards the freedom of expression and the freedom of the press as "a number one priority of the government."
Turkey's neighbours
The House urges the Turkish government "to implement the provisions stemming from the Association Agreement and its Additional Protocol," noting specifically in relation to the Cyprus question that "the withdrawal of Turkish forces would facilitate the negotiation of a settlement." It also reiterates its call on the Turkish and Armenian Government to "start a process of reconciliation for the present and the past."
While strongly condemning the violence perpetrated by the PKK, and calling on it to declare an immediate and unconditional ceasefire, the resolution "urges the new government to launch a political initiative favouring a lasting settlement of the Kurdish issue." It points out the need for a "comprehensive strategy for the social-economic development of the South East of Turkey," and underlines the need to "pursue the fight against terrorism proportionate to the threat, and with full commitment towards international legal instruments and standards."
The Parliament "is deeply concerned about the consequences of a possible cross-border military action by Turkish troops in northern Iraq," and "appeals to Turkey to refrain from engaging in any disproportionate military operations violating Iraq's territory." It urges Turkey and Iraq "to step up military and police cooperation to effectively prevent terrorist activities from Northern Iraq in order to de-escalate the tense situation at the Turkish-Iraqi border."
European Commission's role
The resolution asks the Commission to provide "targeted support to civil society," with a particular attention to the South East of the country. MEPs also called on it to report specifically on the implementation and effectiveness of the financial support instrument to the Turkish Cypriot community. (Par. 24) Finally, the report calls on the Commission to publish the results of its monitoring of political criteria in its forthcoming progress report, including the following aspects: judiciary reforms, combating corruption, respect for fundamental rights and freedoms, implementation of the zero-tolerance-to-torture policy, and the protection of women and minority, religious, and cultural rights.
The Commission and the Council debated with MEPs this morning on the upcoming progress report and on EU-Turkish relations in general. Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn noted that the Commission condemns the PKK terrorist attacks, but also urged Turkey to seek a political solution to the Kurdish issue, in conjunction with Iraqi regional authorities. He noted that the Commission supports a call for a process of reconciliation between Turkey and Armenia, and that the reform of Article 301 was crucial to any coming to terms with the country's past. He ended by saying that the EU needs to stick to the accession perspective of Turkey, as it was laid out before negotiations started. The Commission's annual progress report on Turkey's accession is due to be published on 6 November.
Debate preceding the vote 24 October 2007
MEPs debated EU-Turkey relations ahead of its vote on a resolution which takes place at noon today. Many MEPs expressed concern about freedom of expression and the reform of Turkey's penal code. However, many groups supported the accession negotiations. The House expressed concern over terrorist incursions by the PKK into Turkey with Commissioner Olli Rehn recalling that the PKK is on the EU terrorist list. The European Commission will announce its latest progress report on 7 November.
Commissioner Olli Rehn told the House that Turkey had come though its constitutional crisis successfully, the elections had been held in accordance with democratic principles so he could say that "democracy had the last word". The new government's mandate should enable fresh momentum to be found.
The Commission supported the Turkish government's commitment to reform and to signing the Ankara Protocol but it needed to make progress on issues such as Article 301 of the Penal Code, adoption of the Law of Foundations (granting freedom of religion), military-civilian relations, women's rights and corruption.
Turning to current events, the Commissioner said Turkey faced constant cross-border attacks from the PKK. The EU condemned all terrorist attacks and understood Turkey's need to protect its citizens. At the same time, the EU was committed to the territorial integrity of Iraq and was keen for Turkey and Iraq to cooperate to solve this problem.
A "European perspective" for Turkey was crucial to the reform process within the country. The EU was making such reform a condition of progress in the accession negotiations but, he stressed, the EU must on its side stick to its own commitments: it must keep its word!
He looked forward to the opening of two chapters in the negotiations in the next few weeks - consumer affairs and trans-European networks. Lastly, he emphasised that Parliament's contribution would be taken into account in the Commission's progress report.
Political group speakers
This debate and resolution are directed to the Commission - as input to the progress report - but also to debate in the Council, said rapporteur Ria OOMEN-RUIJTEN (EPP-ED, NL) adding that the report describes progress on agreements, but also what not has been achieved.
"We expect the Turkish government to pursue reform", said the rapporteur, stressing that Parliament had sought to "broaden and deepen" debate with Turkey and noting that the need to safeguard freedom of expression features prominently in the report.
The new constitution "must not become a pretext" for avoiding necessary changes, such as reforming Article 301 of the penal code, she stressed.
Finally, the rapporteur noted that good relations with neighbours are vital. "If we do not recognise the past, there can be no future", she said, urging the Commission to support both Armenia and Turkey.
"Reform has to be stepped up a gear" to produce effective plurality and freedom of expression in Turkey, said Hannes SWOBODA (PES, AT).
A peaceful, political solution is needed to the Kurdish question, but this "cannot happen while terrorism continues", he said, adding that he hoped that the Kurds' political representatives would "heed this message", and that "offers must [also] be made to the Kurdish population of Turkey", as part of the solution.
This report is a good text, embodying a surprising level of consensus, and one which "sends a positive and constructive signal" to Turkey, said Alexander LAMBSDORFF (ALDE, DE).
"Turkey has a strong government with a clear mandate - and it should use to move forward on reforms, for the sake of its own economy and society", he said.
The Copenhagen criteria "must continue to be used as a litmus test" for determining whether Turkey should join the EU, he said, stressing the need to reform not only Article 301, but also 302, to remove restrictions on the freedom of speech. Further reforms are needed to protect fundamental rights, especially of women, and electoral rights, he added.
The PKK has "stepped up its terror campaign" said Mr Lambsdorff, offering his condolences to the families of Turkish soldiers killed in the fighting. But anti-terrorist measures must be "proportional, limited in time, and likely to bring about a peaceful resolution", he concluded, reiterating the need for EU dialogue with Turkey.
For the UEN group, Sebastiano (Nello) MUSUMECI (UEN, IT) said that one year on from the EP's last resolution on Turkey, some core questions remained. Turkey did not recognise Cyprus, an EU Member State, Article 301 of the constitution still needed reform and discussion of the Armenian genocide was still taboo. The government's muscular response to the PKK's attacks risked exacerbating the geopolitical crisis in the region. Progress had been made, he acknowledged, such as the increased presence of women in various walks of life. He concluded, however, by posing a question. Does Europe want to be a major political or cultural entity?
Joost LAGENDIJK (Greens/EFA, NL) said that unfortunately today's debate was being overshadowed by the terrorist acts in Turkey. What was Turkey to do? There was no easy answer, when 50 people had been killed but the military option was not the solution. In his view, the problem lay not in the Iraqi mountains but inside Turkey, where some people didn't want a political solution. He called for support for all those on both sides who sought a peaceful political settlement.
Kyriacos TRIANTAPHYLLIDES (GUE/NGL) conceded that progress had been made by Turkey, but that a lot remained to be done. Turkey would have to open up its ports to Cypriot aircraft and vessels, recognize it in all international institutions and withdraw all Turkish troops from the occupied part of Cyprus. "We believe that Turkey's path to enlargement must be expedited, we must encourage Turkey to implement the necessary reforms, but Turkey must acknowledge the genocide perpetrated against Armenians", he said.
Georgios GEORGIOU (IND/DEM) criticised Commissioner REHN, accusing him of suggesting that "anyone who fights for freedom is a terrorist. I wonder if we might not be acting in haste to view Turkey as being under attack. Let's face it, Turkey has troops deployed in a Member State of the European Union and Turkey is not in compliance with the demands of the EU."
Philip CLAEYS (ITS) stressed that his party is opposed to Turkish accession. "Barely any progress has been made by Turkey since the accession talks were launched, especially regarding human rights and the treatment of minorities." Mr Claeys criticised that Turkey was preparing a major military incursion into Iraq. He also said that Turkey "is not a European country and does not belong into Europe" and that a privileged partnership would be preferable to fully fledged membership.
Jim ALLISTER (NI) named his biggest concerns regarding Turkey, including honour crimes, gross human rights abuses, absence of religions freedom and attacks on Christians. "Genuine freedom of religion is often the touchstone of a country's binding commitment to human rights. In Turkey's case, it has much to do including the legal status of religious groups and property rights, but fundamentally the right to worship freely and the right to convert must be respected."
British speakers
Gerard BATTEN (IND/DEM, UK) said that the resolution emphasises that Turkey must fully comply with the Copenhagen criteria as a basis for accession to the EU. The report, he said, also urges the Turkish Government to bring its approach to freedom of religion in line with those principles as defined by the European Court of Justice.
Since Kemal Atatürk Turkey has maintained a secular state against the growing power of fundamentalist and literalist Islam. I wonder whether the Turks realise that entering the EU will fundamentally undermine their ability to resist militant Islam. If Turkey joins the EU, their Islamists will use the human rights legislation as a shield from behind which to advance their jihad in Turkey and Europe.
The British people, Mr Batten said, are coming to realise that if Turkey joins the EU another 70 million people will have the right to come to Britain. Turkish accession, he said, will be a disaster for the Turks and a disaster for Britain.
Charles TANNOCK (EPP-ED, UK) said that according to The Times newspaper of London, the recent US Congressional resolution on the Armenian genocide was appallingly timed. So when is it a suitable time to talk about genocide, he questioned.
The Armenian lobby is so vociferous in this Parliament precisely because of the apparent conspiracy of silence that has surrounded the genocide question for almost a century. The murder of the Turkish-Armenian journalist Hrant Dink should have provided a period of national reflection but sadly this did not happen.
Nevertheless reconciliation between Turkey and Armenia, including the reopening of the closed border, is an important element of Turkey's efforts to join the EU. But in my view no true democracy can be in denial of its past, even its deepest and darkest secrets.
Just as important is a lasting settlement of the conflict in Cyprus which remains at an impasse caused by the presence of occupying troops in an EU Member State as well as non-implementation of the Ankara Protocol.
Article 301 of the penal code on insulting Turkishness has resulted in many convictions and in March – rather bizarrely in my view – a court in Istanbul issued an order denying access to the video-sharing website YouTube when allegations on the sexuality of the founding father of modern Turkey, Kemel Atatürk, were made. A lot clearly still needs to be done, he concluded.
Richard HOWITT (PES, UK) welcomed the strategic partnership between the UK and Turkey announced by Prime Ministers Brown and Erdogan in London yesterday, including positive cooperation in combating organised crime and terrorism. I call on other Member States to do the same.
Mr Howitt also welcomed the youngest female Turkish MP elected, Ayla Akat, who was in Brussels last week as one of a number of Kurdish MPs returned to the Turkish Parliament for the first time in 14 years, who, he said, give us hope that the problem of Kurdish cultural and political rights could be solved through democracy and not through violence.
Commissioner's response to the debate
Responding to the debate Commissioner Olli REHN said that with today's debate and subsequent resolution, this House sends some very clear messages to Turkey. Now is the time, he said, to step up the reform efforts in the country for the sake of the Turkish citizens and also for making serious progress in the EU accession negotiations. There is, he said, strong emphasis on reforms without unnecessary delay as regards the freedom of expression, the infamous Article 301, and other equivalent articles as well as religious freedoms. Likewise progress on women's rights, trade union rights, as well as cultural and religious rights and international obligations over Turkey.
"Moreover, we condemn terrorist attacks and we understand the Turkish need to protect its citizens but we also urge Turkey to seek a political solution in cooperation with Iraqi regional authorities and the international community and to show a sense of proportionality in its response to PKK terrorism.
Concerning the Armenian issue the Commission supports Parliament's call, as expressed in your draft resolution, for a process of reconciliation between Turkey and Armenia. This is the best and most effective way in time that would lead to genuine results over reconciliation and justice.
We also consider that all the issues including the Armenian issue in Turkey should be debated openly and peacefully within the Turkish society in the name of freedom of expression. Therefore the reform of Article 301 is also essential for a serious and effective debate on the Armenian issue that could lead to genuine reconciliation.
The current restraints over freedom of expression have a chilling effect and even contribute to creating an atmosphere of intolerance and hatred, as was unfortunately and sadly shown in the case of the assassination of Hrant Dink earlier this year.
Finally, we have to recall one thing. I do, and you have also, set very strong demands for Turkey as regards the reform process and rightly so. At the same time, we need to recall that the equation works only if both sides do what they have got to do. That means, when we are firm we also must be fair. We have to keep our word and stick to the accession perspective of Turkey as outlined in the negotiation mandate. " Text adopted by the EP on Turkey
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0472 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External relations
European Parliament debates EU-Russia relations ahead of summit
2007-10-29 - 12:13
The House debated EU-Russia relations ahead of the forthcoming summit which take place in Mafra (Portugal) on Friday 26 October. The twice-yearly summits are hosted by Russia and by the country holding the rotating presidency of the European Union. MEPs voted by 321 for and 309 against, to postpone the vote on a resolution to a plenary after the summit. On the request of Christopher Beazley (EPP-ED, UK), the verbatim coverage of the debate will be handed to the Russian authorities at the summit. José Ignacio SALAFRANCA SÁNCHEZ-NEYRA (EPP-ED, ES) said that the strategic relationship with Russia was important but that "the climate at the upcoming meeting in Mafra will depend more on Russian than on the European side." He highlighted the importance of raising issues such as security of energy supply at the meeting. With that in mind, he stated that "decisions or acts taken against one Member State should be seen as attacks on all of the EU." We must "defend the interest of the EU in a pragmatic way", he added, but "hard figures should not blind us to principles. Our commitment to human rights is inalienable."
Jan WIERSMA (PES, NL) said that at the upcoming summit, "we should remember that we share a lot of common interests" and that cooperation was important where major international issues are at stake. He stressed that "mutuality and reciprocity should be our starting point", pointing, among other things, to the need for "more cooperation in the Black Sea region. Yet, at the same time, we "need to support democratic development in Russia." Expressing concern about the fairness of the upcoming Duma election, Mr Wiersma said "we need to be willing to work with OSCE on electoral observation." We "need to cast a critical eye when it comes to human rights and democracy but should avoid polarisation."
Graham WATSON (ALDE, UK) claimed that the summit in Samara "exposed the cracks in our relationship with Russia. Those fissures have become fault lines, these have become wide and deep." Watson criticised ignoring Russia's denial of "Europe's sacred values, like freedom, democracy, rule of law, which are conspicuously absent in Russia today." More honesty was needed regarding Russia's upcoming elections. If human cloning were legal, Putin would probably consider cloning himself and running both for president and prime minister, following in the footsteps of the Kaczynskis, he said. He went on to say that it is incredible that a new autocracy was gaining ground in the country which overturned oligarchy in 1917. "The Reform Treaty promised the European Parliament a real say on external action, so let's deliver a message at the summit that President Putin cannot ignore."
Konrad SZYMAŃSKI (UEN, PL) criticised the leaders of the EPP-ED and PES for deciding not to take a resolution before the Summit: "this is a huge mistake", showing that "we still have a problem dealing with Russia." Before the last summit in Samara a resolution had been declared: "I hope our silence today doesn't mean we are trying to back-track. If our line from Samara is compromised, "Russia will end up believing that it can overlook or ignore the reality of EU integration and enlargement. Such a policy will mean an "assent to discriminate" against countries in East and Central Europe"
Bart STAES (Greens/EFA, BE) asked the Portuguese Minister if he were living on Mars or Venus for declaring that the relations with Russia are good. "Is the EU only about money and naked commerce? Is that more important than democracy and human rights?," he asked. "Russia is slipping down a slippery slope down to dictatorship", secret police forces are being deployed and all sorts of trickery was used by those trying to hang on to power. "Human rights in Russia continue to be under pressure, the state of democracy is lamentable." The press was sliding into strict self-censorship. "Reality is that free elections are a utopia. Any one who tolerates these things is complicit with it."
The need for "sensible, practical proposals" for working with Russia was stressed by Helmut MARKOV (DE) for the GUE/NGL. "Stability and development in Europe and worldwide are impossible unless we co-operate with Russia" in areas such as foreign policy (e.g. in Kosovo, the Middle East, Iran and Transnistria), new technologies and travel visas, he said.
"The EU and Russia should stop acting like two cities joined only by a road and a pipeline, said Jana BOBOŠÍKOVÁ (CZ), for the non-attached group. Energy aside, Russia currently exports to the EU only about as much as it exports to Morocco or Argentina, she noted, stressing the need to build a stable business climate for investment and trade.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External relations
Call to produce legal analgesics instead of illicit opium in Afghanistan
2007-10-29 - 12:13
The European Parliament is urging the Council to put forward a plan to the Afghan government which would include the possibility of a pilot project to turn part of the illicit poppy crop into legal opium-based analgesics. In an own-initiative report drafted by Marco CAPPATO (ALDE, IT), and adopted in Strasbourg, the House notes that "insurgents, warlords, the Taliban and terrorist groups are obtaining their major source of funding through trade in illicit narcotics", thereby jeopardising the political stability and economic development of Afghanistan.
Almost 40% of Afghanistan's GDP is opium-related and, according to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime, Afghanistan produces 93% of the opiates on the world market.
Fight against corruption
MEPs want the Council to look at "the possibility of pilot projects for small-scale conversion of parts of the current illicit poppy cultivation into fields for the production of legal opium-based analgesics".
The report also urges the Council to devise and submit to the Afghan government a "comprehensive plan and strategy aimed at controlling drug production in Afghanistan", by "tackling corruption at the highest levels of the Afghan administration", especially the Ministry of the Interior.
Eradication
Lastly, the report calls for measures to improve rural development in the poorest areas of the country, especially in those not yet producing opium on a large scale, by "carefully and selectively engaging in manual eradication".
The European Union is the biggest donor as regards efforts aimed at reducing the opium supply through projects to promote alternative livelihoods for Afghan farmers. Text adopted by the EP on production of opium for medical purposes in Afghanistan
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0485 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External relations
Political reforms welcome, but full ICTY cooperation needed from Serbia, say MEPs
2007-10-29 - 12:13
Parliament welcomes recent political events in Serbia, such as a new constitution, the formation of a new government, and the signing of a visa facilitation agreement with the EU. Nevertheless, MEPs underline that full cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), and the arrest of the four remaining indicted war criminals, is a pre-condition for the signing of a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA). The Parliament notes that "the future of Serbia lies in the European Union," and that it "deserves special commendation for the peaceful resolution of a series of difficult challenges over the past year," including the independence of Montenegro, parliamentary elections and the formation of a new, pro-European government. It also "welcomes the completion of technical negotiations on an SAA," and the signing of the visa facilitation and readmission agreements on 18 September 2007.
Nevertheless, Members note that "corruption, particularly in the police and the judiciary, remains a serious problem," and that the Constitutional Court is not functioning, which is "not conducive to the development of democracy" in the country. The report also says that "a resolution to the status of Kosovo will both consolidate stability in the Western Balkans and facilitate the integration of the region into the European Union."
The ICTY and the legacy of the war
The report "welcomes the Serbian Government's desire to cooperate with the ICTY, which opens the way to further cooperation with the EU, but stresses that this cooperation must rapidly lead to further results." It reminds Serbia that "signature of the SAA is conditional upon full cooperation with the ICTY," and notes that in case arrests are made after this year (at the end of which the ICTY is currently envisaged to close), "it would be necessary to consider extending the mandate" of the court. Parliament also calls on the Commission to "initial the SAA without further delay," once the ICTY criteria have been met.
In addition, MEPs say "Serbia must honestly confront its recent past in order to progress," and call on the Serbian Parliament to "adopt a declaration denouncing the genocide in Srebrenica." The report also calls on Serbia to "pursue its efforts to implement the Sarajevo Declaration, including by adopting a clear legal framework covering, inter alia, the right to return to the place of origin and the right to property compensation."
Minority rights
The House underlines the need to find durable solutions for refugees and internally displaced persons (IDPs). MEPs also emphasise "the importance of ensuring that EU assistance is delivered both in a manner which takes into account the current territorial and administrative structure of Serbia and the ethnic composition and traditional economic and cultural relations within the territories concerned, with the full involvement of local and regional authorities."
Both of these points are especially relevant to the areas of Vojvodina and Sandzak, which have large ethnic Hungarian and Bosnian populations, respectively. On the former, the report commends Serbia on improved inter-ethnic relations, and calls on it to "promote peaceful coexistence" amongst the different ethnicities there. On the latter, the House notes with pleasure that minorities are now represented in both the executive and the legislative bodies, but insists that more needs to be done to curb further radicalisation in the region. In general, the Parliament says that "the legal framework for the protection of minorities needs to be improved further" and is concerned by "persisting discrimination against the Roma community." Text adopted by the EP on EU-Serbia relations
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0482 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External relations
European Parliament objects to special measure for Iraq
2007-10-29 - 12:13
MEPs endorsed a resolution in plenary on the Akkas Gas Field in Western Iraq calling on the Commission "to withdraw or amend its draft decision establishing Special Measure for Iraq", and to submit a new draft decision. According to the EP, the special measures for the exploration of the Akkas Gas Field in Western Iraq in view of linking its output to the Syrian gas pipeline network are not in line with the Development Cooperation Instrument (DCI)'s main objective which is poverty alleviation. The resolution says that "the Commission exceeds the implementing powers laid down in the basic act by selecting as one of the areas of intervention ‘Feasibility Study for the Akkas Gas Field". Text adopted by the EP on Special Measure 2007 for Iraq
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0481 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Budget
Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund: redundancies in the car production sector in France
2007-10-29 - 12:13
Parliament adopted a report approving the use of the Mobilisation of the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund for redundancies in the car production sector in France. In March 2007, France requested assistance in respect of two cases concerning redundancies in the automobile sector, specifically suppliers to Peugeot-Citroen and Renault. The European Globalisation Adjustment Fund is intended to provide additional support for workers who suffer from the consequences of major structural changes in world trade patterns, to assist them with their reintegration into the labour market.
On 12 July, the Commission adopted its proposal for a decision on the mobilisation of the Fund for a total amount of €3 816 280, to be allocated under heading 1a of the financial framework 2007-2013. Parliament's vote will approve the release of this funding for France. Mobilisation of the EU Solidarity Fund
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0457 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Budget
European Parliament completed its first-reading vote on the 2008 draft budget
2007-10-29 - 12:13
In adopting its first-reading of the 2008 EU budget, MEPs want the overall amount of payment appropriations to be higher than in the Commission's preliminary draft budget (0.97%) and the Council's draft budget (0,95%), while not exceeding 0.99% of the EU's gross national income (GNI). They propose restoring the level of expenditure entered in the preliminary draft budget and making full use of the margins envisaged under the financial perspectives in several headings. The EP wants to sharply increase the funding for Galileo, to appropriate additional funds for Palestine and for Kosovo. MEPs reinstate sums devoted to the Lisbon purposes (competitiveness, growth, employment) and the cohesion funding cut out by the Council. In the 2008 budget, for the first time ever there will be more money allocated for growth and job creation than for agriculture. The EP decided to put into the reserve more then EUR 40 million devoted to versatile administrative expenditures of the European Commission. The Budgets Committee does not support the expenditure cuts on the agencies desired by the Council.
The total Budget 2008 amount proposed by the EP is of €124.201.365.130 in payments (€129.693.891.505 in commitments)
"Sustainable growth and employment" (heading 1a & 1b)
1a - €9.93bn(in payments)
1b - €42.448bn(in payments)
Parliament adopted a series of amendments for the old structural funds lines now in heading 1a and 1b. MEPs reversed over €1bn of cuts made by the Council to payments in headings 1a (competitiveness) and 1b (cohesion) for multi-annual programmes identified as priorities under the Lisbon Strategy and recently co-decided by the Parliament and the Council itself.
Under heading 1a for competitiveness and growth, among the Lisbon Strategy priorities, the European satellite navigation system Galileo and the European Technology Institute (EIT) are particularly important for the EP. MEPs have set aside an additional €739m for the financing of Galileo and EIT to reach a total in 2008 of €890m in commitments (€400m in payments). The EP wants Galileo to be funded wholly by the Community and upholds the Commission's proposal requesting a revision of the financial perspective to provide adequate financing for Galileo and the European Institute of Technology over the 2007 - 2013 period. The Galileo project could fail unless sufficient funding is provided. The funding level proposed by the Council in its first reading (€151m in commitments), is regarded as utterly inadequate by both MEPs and the Commission (which in September put forward a new funding plan).
By their vote, MEPs clearly affirmed their request for a revision of the medium-term financial planning. In case no deal can be reached with Council on this point, the EP would prefer to transfer the funds foreseen for Galileo in the financial perspective 2007 to 2013 to the projects such as Lifelong Learning or Trans-European Networks, so that the amount earmarked for funding Galileo does not disappear from the budget.
As regards the European Institute of Innovation and Technology (EIT) the EP proposes a figure of €2.9m (in commitments and payments), for the funding of the EIT board and the creation of a new budget line for Knowledge and Innovation Communities (KICs). Like the EU agencies, the EIT's administrative budget would be separate from its operational budget. The EIT's operational budget would be transferred from the "education and culture" heading to "research and innovation".
"Natural resources " (heading 2)
€54.9bn (in payments)
The EP "is strongly opposed to the indiscriminate cuts proposed by Council to many lines under this heading" and calls for the re-establishment of the figures in the PDB for many such lines. Parliament is also concerned with the fall in real terms of adoption of operational programmes as regards the rural development pillar of the CAP, despite the need to restructure the rural economy and expects to see rapid improvements in this regard. MEPs note however that the Council will have the final say on those lines which concern compulsory expenditure.
" Freedom, Security and Justice" (heading 3a)
€533 million (in payments)
Given the urgency of immigration matters, the Parliament proposes an increase for the agency managing EU external borders the EP decided to double the amounts allocated to FRONTEX, the agency for the EU's external frontiers,. with €30m extra for operational costs. The figure earmarked for this agency thus rises to €70m in total. The EP underlines the importance of the work of the Frontex agency but remains critical of the results achieved by Frontex and calls for 30% of its administrative costs to be placed in reserve. MEPs want the Agency to present regularly the state of play and the scheduled forthcoming operations and urge the Member States to deliver on their promises and support the Agency's missions so that the Agency can perform its tasks more effectively
"Citizenship" (heading 3b)
€708 million (in payments)
MEPs restore the PDB under this heading in order to preserve programmes such as Culture 2007, Media 2007 and Youth in action. The EP proposes appropriations for a number of new and ongoing pilot projects and preparatory actions in this regard. MEPs support within the Civil Protection Financial Instrument, the provision of a complementary capability in the form of a stand-by force for handling natural or man-made disasters as well as in cases of acts of terrorism or environmental accidents.
"The EU as a global partner" (heading 4)
€8.13bn (in payments)
Parliament has said many times that the funding available for the EU's action outside its borders for the period 2007-2013 is inadequate. The EP is proposing to cut by 20% the funds allocated to the Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP) to the level of budget 2007 and to use the €40m thereby released to finance other objectives under this heading. MEPs support the increases for Kosovo and Palestine proposed by the Commission (letter of amendment to the PDB of 17 September 2007) and propose a supplementary €10m each for Kosovo and Palestine. Additionally, to fund aid to Kosovo and Palestine, MEPs suggest drawing on €87m via the flexibility instrument. Of this figure, €40m would be added to funds already envisaged for the missions to Kosovo and Palestine (to be divided equally between these two objectives). The flexibility instrument could also be used to fund unforeseen expenditure on the CFSP. Ultimately, the CFSP would still be allocated €200m, as originally planned, since the CFSP's €40m, which could be found via the flexibility instrument, is exactly the same as the cut of 20% proposed by MEPs. A discussion on the level of funding of Heading 4 and other policies would seem to be needed between Parliament and Council, inter alia on these CFSP-related matters.
"Administration" (heading 5)
€7.291bn (in payments)
Including 1bn 452m for the EP, 595m for the Council, 4bn 612m for the Commission
On the question of the posts at the Commission, for which Council had proposed a major cut, Parliament has reinstated the initial funding put forward by the Commission in its pre-draft budget. 49m go in the reserve, though, which will be released if a number of conditions are fulfilled. One of these conditions features a "screening" of administrative needs to be done by the Commission as well as a redeployment plan. As regards the EU recruitment procedure, "MEPs deplore the inefficiencies inherent in a competition system" ... which can "contribute to lowering the average standard of new EU officials as the best candidates will seek employment in more dynamic sectors of the EU economy."
Pilot projects and preparatory actions
Concerning the pilot projects and preparatory actions (instruments aiming to finance temporary actions which are not covered by other community programmes), MEPs adopted a list of projects including the creation of an emergency telephone line for victims of trafficking, pilot programme for motorway rest areas for the long-distance transport of animals, in accordance with earlier positions in favour of animal welfare objectives.
The European Parliament budget for 2008 (Report by Ville ITÄLÄ (EPP-ED, FI))
The EP's draft budget set a level of €1.452bn. In the report by Ville ITÄLÄ (EPP-ED, FI) on the EU 2008 budget (other sections), the House underlines that this is the last full year of this legislature and the last year before the entrance into force of the new Members’ Statute. The Parliament considers that this should be taken into account in view of the forthcoming financing requirements.
Environmental concerns
The Budgets Committee regrets that, more than five years after the start of the EMAS (Eco-Management and Audit Scheme) process in the budget procedure, EMAS registration is still pending and the impact on the environment as well as the savings and the investments in relation to its implementation are still not known.
Regarding the Parliaments three places of work (Brussels, Luxembourg and Strasbourg), the Budget Committee was the administration to encourage the staff, while travelling between the three places of work, to use the most environmentally friendly means.
The report considers that the Presidencies of the Parliament and the Council should take into account EU citizens' opinion as regards the geographical dispersion of the Parliament amongst the three places of work and the related costs and environmental consequences.
Next steps
There remains controversy with the Council about additional money for the satellite navigation program Galileo and the financing of the external policy programs, for which the European Parliament will submit proposals. The next key step now sees Parliament and Council engaged in the 2nd conciliation on 23 November, aiming to strike an agreement before the 2nd reading. The EU 2008 Budget should be approved and signed in December in Strasbourg. Draft general budget for 2008 (Sections I, II, IV, V, VI, VII, VIII and IX) Draft general budget 2008 (Section III)
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0474 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0473 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Energy
EU will need conventional energy sources for sometime yet, says EP
2007-10-29 - 12:13
On current trends, the EU will rely on imports to meet 65% of its energy needs by 2030. Yet gas and oil supplies are dogged by uncertainty due to geopolitical risks and growing demand elsewhere. The report, drafted by Herbert Reul (EPP-ED, DE), was adopted with 509 votes in favour, 153 against and 30 abstentions and says that nuclear energy is "indispensable if basic energy needs are to be met in Europe in the medium term." Nuclear energy "indispensable" for some time to come
Acknowledging that nuclear energy is a key component of power supply in most EU Member States, providing one-third of the EU’s electricity supply, MEPs say that nuclear energy is "indispensable if basic energy needs are to be met in Europe in the medium term." Given that "nuclear energy is currently the largest low-CO2 energy source in Europe", they added, "the renunciation of nuclear power will make it impossible to achieve the objectives set regarding reductions in greenhouse gas emissions and the combating of climate change".
Commissioner Piebalgs agreed. "It will be difficult", he said, "to achieve our climate change goals without the use of nuclear energy"
The need to produce and use energy more safely, efficiently and sustainably across the Union is also underlined in an own-initiative report on "conventional energy sources" adopted by the European Parliament.
Welcoming the Commission’s communications on sustainable power production from fossil fuels, MEPs underlined that these and other conventional sources will remain highly important in ensuring the EU’s security of energy supply. Given the EU's commitment to tackling climate change, however, MEPs stressed that the Union and its Member States should redouble their R&D efforts "to enhancing the efficiency of energy production and supply, reducing environmental consequences, improving the safety of existing technologies, developing storage techniques for renewables and developing new generations of nuclear reactors."
Carbon capture
MEPs called on the Commission to quickly table legislative proposals on carbon capture and storage (CCS) technology "so as to respond to the legal issues surrounding the storage and transportation of CO2." They underlined "that CCS should be fitted to fossil fuel plants at the earliest practical opportunity". The committee nonetheless acknowledged that CCS technology is linked to losses of efficiency in power stations and called for research to address the issue.
Speaking prior to the vote, Industry Commissioner Andris Piebalgs assured MEPs that the Commission will address the issue of the legal framework for CCS in a legislative proposal. The goal, as far as CCS is concerned, "is clear: to see several large-scale demonstration plants operational in the EU by 2015, and to bring the technology to the market by 2020".
Members also stressed the significant potential of energy generation from biomass, the need for the EU to support synthetic fuels technology and, with a view to the diversification of gas imports, the importance of liquefied natural gas (LNG). Conventional energy sources and energy technology
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0468 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Culture
And the LUX Prize for European cinema goes to… "Auf der anderen Seite" ("On the Edge of Heaven")
2007-10-29 - 12:13
The Turkish-German co production "On the Edge of Heaven" ("Auf der anderen Seite") won the first edition of the European Parliament LUX (light) Prize for European cinema. The German Actress Hanna Schygulla received the trophy from EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering in front of the Members of the European Parliament, and representatives from the other films in competition. MEPs voted for the winning film from a short-list of three. Hans Gert Pöttering said: "Today, we are experiencing a premiere: 50 years after signing the Treaty of Rome, the European Parliament is awarding for the first time the newly created cinema prize "LUX".
With this prize we want to award annually a film that raises attention to current social questions that affect our continent and highlights European Integration especially. Furthermore, the award is supposed to highlight the richness of linguistic diversity within the European Union and to support the artistic production of the cinema sector.
We are sending a strong signal for multilingualism and aim to breakthrough the logic of economic efficiency that often results in lack of translations in some countries of the EU. We want to work equally with all official languages, so that every European citizen can watch the film in his/her own language."
Hanna Schygulla said: "This is a film that gives hope and is not blind to the brutality, the cynicism and the horrible tension that sometimes can lead to terrorist attacks."
The three films that were in competition are listed below. They were selected by a 17 member jury composed mainly of people working in the cinematic professions:
- Auf der anderen Seite (The Edge of Heaven), by Fatih Akin
- 4 luni, 3 saptamini si 2 zile (4 Months, 3 Weeks and 2 Days), by Cristian Mungiu
- Belle toujours, by Manoel de Oliveira
Each film was shown nine times, from 1 October to 18 October 2007, within the European Parliament in Brussels in a 90 seat cinema room specially conceived and built for this purpose.
Present in Strasbourg
For Auf der anderen Seite, the producer Klaus Maek.
For 4 luni, 3 saptamini si 2 zile, co-producer Philippe Avril.
For Belle toujours, the director, Manoel de Oliveira, Michel Piccoli, leading male actor and co-producers Miguel Cadhile and Serge Lalou.
The jury
Only MEPs who have seen all three films during the screenings or extra muros, could exercise their right to vote. The film which gains the highest number of votes will be the winner.
The prize
The LUX Prize consists of assistance in kind in the form of subtitling and video-to-film transfer (kinescopage) of the winning film in the 23 official EU languages. There will also be an original language adaptation for the deaf and hard of hearing.
If the winning film has already been sold for projection in cinemas in some countries and subtitled for the purpose, the nature of the prize (e.g. assistance with production of the DVD) will be determined by agreement between the European Parliament and the film’s appointed representatives.
The trophy, inspired by a representation of the Tower of Babel which forms the LUX Prize's visual identity, will be given to the laureate. The trophy is made by the Belgian artist, Jocelyne Coster.
About the winning film: Auf der anderen Seite
Director: Fatih Akin
Co-production: German-Turkish
Length: 122’, Year: 2007
Original language: German
Award: Cannes 2007 – Screenplay Prize
With Nurgül Yesilcay, Baki Davrak, Nursel Köse, Tuncel Kurtiz, Patricia Ziolkowska and Hanna Schygulla
The film shows the relation between six people whose lives become connected through a series of events happening in Germany and Turkey. Ali, who decides to move in with the prostitute Yeter to escape from his loneliness. His son Nejat, who is not happy with the arrangement, but changes his view on his father's friend, when he realises that she sends most of what she earns to her daughter in Turkey. When Yeter dies in an accident Nejat goes to Turkey to look for her daughter Ayten, but is unaware the 20-year old daughter who is a political activist has fled to Germany to escape the Turkish Police. Here Ayten meets Lotte, at German student. She is invited to stay with Lotte, although Lottes mother Susanna is not in favour. Ayten is then arrested and deported to Turkey, where she is sent to prison.
When Lotte goes to Turkey, but her effort to secure Ayten’s release seems doomed to failure. She happens to meet Nejat and they become flat-mates. A tragic event prompts Lotte's mother Susanne to travel to Istanbul to continue her daughter’s quest. As he grows closer to Susanne, Nejat feels the need to be reconciled with his father, who now lives in Turkey, by the Black Sea. He decides to go and look for him. Background note on LUX prize Leading Director Cédric Klapisch warns of "crisis" for European film
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070927BKG10868 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071012STO11629 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Education
Job qualifications should be comparable EU wide by 2012
2007-10-29 - 12:13
Job qualifications earned in any EU Member State should be comparable throughout the EU by 2012, but Member States should be given a year longer than planned to implement the proposed European Qualification Framework (EQF) and it should be accompanied by a system of vocational training credits, says the European Parliament. The EQF aims to ease cross-border mobility for workers and learners, and help meet labour market needs, by using a common language to describe qualifications. Under the EQF proposal, all qualifications, from school-leavers' diplomas through vocational training certificates to the highest academic degrees are to be assigned to one of eight reference levels, based on knowledge, skills and competence acquired.
A year more to build mutual trust
The House says that Member States should be given until 2010 - a year longer than the Commission proposed - to relate their national qualifications systems to the EQF and to build the "mutual trust" needed to implement the proposal (which, as a European Parliament and Council recommendation, would not be binding upon Member States).
EU-compatible by 2012
By 2012, all new qualification certificates, diplomas and "Europass" attestation documents issued by the competent authorities "should contain a clear reference to an EQF's reference level, says the report, by Mario MANTOVANI (EPP-ED, IT). Qualifications Framework for lifelong learning
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0463 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External/international trade
TRIPS: MEPs give their assent to the modification of the agreement
2007-10-29 - 12:13
The European Parliament has given its assent to the modification of the agreement on intellectual property rights relating to trade (TRIPS), allowing for a better access for developing countries to medicine for the fight against Malaria, HIV or Tuberculosis. MEPs linked their vote of assent to commitments of the Council of Ministers and the European Commission for measures that would go beyond what is envisaged by the World Trade Organisation (WTO) when developing countries want to produce or import generic substitutes of patented medicines.
In the absence of a response on behalf of the Portuguese presidency, MEPs had pushed back the vote on the assent three times.
Declaration of the Portuguese presidency
In a statement made in plenary, the Portuguese presidency committed itself to supporting the requests of the European Parliament regarding transfers of technologies and research.
The Council also guaranteed not to insert the "TRIPS-plus" clause into Economic Partnership Agreements with ACP countries and other future bilateral or regional agreements with developing countries.
As of today, only Rwanda, on 19 July 2007, has announced its intention to make use of the obligatory licences as an importer. On 4 October 2007, Canada notified the WTO of its intention to authorise a company to produce a generic version of TriAvir, a triple-combination therapy medicine for the treatment of AIDS, which will be exported to Rwanda.
Ratification
The European Parliament's assent will allow the 27 EU Member States to ratify the amendments with the WTO.
Once two thirds of the WTO members (100 of 151 members of the organization) have officially accepted the amendment, it will take effect. As of 28 September 2007, eleven countries approved it: Australia, the United States, India, Israel, Japan, Norway, Philippines, the Republic of Korea, El Salvador, Singapore and Switzerland. Protocol amending TRIPS
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0459 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Human rights
Sakharov Prize 2007 awarded to Sudanese lawyer Salih Mahmoud Osman
2007-10-29 - 12:13
Sudanese human rights lawyer Salih Mahmoud Osman is the winner of this year's Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought. Thursday's unanimous decision by the European Parliament's political group leaders was announced to Parliament's plenary sitting in Strasbourg by President Hans-Gert Pöttering. Mr Osman, who works with the Sudan Organisation Against Torture, has for over two decades provided free legal aid to victims of human rights abuses in his country. The prize will be formally awarded to Mr Osman in Strasbourg on 11 December, the day after the 59th anniversary of the UN Universal Declaration of Human Rights. The prize comes with a certificate and a cheque for €50 000.
Since 1988 the European Parliament has awarded the Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought to exceptional individuals or organisations fighting injustice and oppression throughout the globe, from South Africa to Belarus, from Cuba to Bangladesh.
Addressing the plenary in Strasbourg, President Pöttering said: "In the face of violence and arbitrary power, Mr Osman stands up for dialogue and justice. And there can be no democracy without justice. By granting the Sakharov Prize to Salih Mahmoud Osman, the European Parliament shows its support for the action of this courageous man who has become the voice of Darfur, and through him, for the establishment of the rule of law in Sudan".
Salih Mahmoud Osman
Over two decades during Sudan's various civil wars Salih Mahmoud Osman (b.1957) has risked his own life to provide legal and medical aid to the countless victims of the conflict. Working with the Sudan Organisation Against Torture ("SOAT') he has given legal protection and representation to the victims of human rights abuses.
In its work SOAT has been successful in overturning judgements of death or amputation and they are engaged in a campaign to have rape established as a war crime.
As well as dealing with the victims of abuses, Mr Osman and SOAT have also been active in cataloguing crimes that have taken place - particularly in the Darfur region of Sudan.
Persecuted for his actions
Mr Osman's fight against injustice in Sudan has had a personal cost. Members of his own family have been killed, tortured, or burned out of their homes by the militias. He himself was imprisoned by the Sudanese government for over seven months in 2004 without charge or trial. On 8 November 2005, he was awarded Human Rights Watch's highest honour for his work in Sudan.
Mr Osman currently serves as a Member of the Sudanese National Parliament. In that new role, he is focused on promoting the rule of law through the implementation of the provisions of the interim constitution.
Anna Politkovskaya
The group leaders also decided to find an appropriate way to honour Anna Politkovskaya, the Russian journalist who was killed last year and was also on this year's Sakharov shortlist. They will decide at their next meeting how this should be done.
Previous winners of the Sakharov prize
1988 Nelson Mandela and Anatoli Marchenko (posthumously)
1989 Alexander Dubcek
1990 Aung San Suu Kyi
1991 Adem Demaçi
1992 Las Madres de la Plaza de Mayo
1993 Oslobodjenje
1994 Taslima Nasreen
1995 Leyla Zana
1996 Wei Jinsheng
1997 Salima Ghezali
1998 Ibrahim Rugova
1999 Xanana Gusmão
2000 ¡Basta Ya!
2001 Izzat Ghazzawi, Nurit Peled-Elhanan and Dom Zacarias Kamwenho
2002 Oswaldo José Payá Sardiñas
2003 UN Secretary General Kofi Annan and all the UN staff
2004 Belarusian Association of Journalists
2005 Ladies in White, Hauwa Ibrahim, Reporters without Frontiers
2006 Alexander Milinkevich More information on the Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought Audio, 03:07
EN
2
MULTIMEDIA
20071025MLT12507.mp3
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070906FCS10161 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Human rights
Human rights: Iran, Pakistan, Sudan
2007-10-29 - 12:13
In three human rights resolutions adopted at the end of this week's plenary session, Parliament voiced concern at the worsening situation in Iran, called for democracy to be restored in Pakistan and condemned the killing of 10 African Union peacekeepers in Sudan. Executions and other abuses in Iran
Iran is the focus of the first resolution adopted today. Here the EP expresses deep concern at "the deterioration of the human rights situation", notably the "dramatic increase in the repression of civil-society movements in Iran over the past year". It urges the authorities "to honour their obligations in accordance with international human rights standards and instruments ratified by Iran".
Sharp increase in executions
Among other things, MEPs are "appalled at the spiralling numbers of executions recorded, many of those executed facing unfair trials". The number of executions in Iran, including those of minors and homosexuals, often public by hanging or stoning, has dramatically increased, bringing the number recorded since the start of 2007 to at least 244. The EP "calls on the Iranian authorities to implement their declared moratorium on stoning" and "demands that the Islamic Penal Code of Iran be reformed in order to abolish stoning".
Iran is also urged "to fully respect its Code of Criminal Procedure and to grant the right to a fair trial to all individuals", including access to a lawyer from the start of the judicial process. The EP calls for "legislation outlawing the execution of juvenile offenders and the application of the death penalty for homosexual acts or adultery". Lastly, the authorities are asked to release all prisoners of conscience unconditionally, notably several journalists named in the resolution.
International bodies urged to keep up the pressure
Pressure should be kept up on Iran from outside the country, MEPs believe. They urge the UN General Assembly, for example, "to vote on a resolution explicitly and decisively condemning the violation of fundamental human rights in Iran and to adopt urgent measures to halt the recent wave of executions in Iran".
As to the European Union, the resolution calls on the Council and Commission "to closely monitor developments in Iran and also to raise concrete cases of human rights abuses". It also suggests "restarting the EU-Iran Human Rights Dialogue, which has been interrupted since June 2004, and which could possibly be accompanied by a joint initiative of the Majlis [the Iranian Parliament] and the European Parliament".
In conclusion, the resolution calls on the Commission to support civil society in Iran, notably through the new Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights, and on the EU Member States to refrain from expulsions of Iranian asylum-seekers.
Attack on Bhutto prompts call for restoration of democracy in Pakistan
In a resolution on Pakistan adopted in the wake of the suicide bombing attack against Benazir Bhutto, Parliament voices concern at the unstable political situation in the country and calls on the authorities to restore democratic standards ahead of the parliamentary elections.
MEPs condemn the attack against Benazir Bhutto and call on the Pakistan government to conduct a "thorough and independent investigation". Parliament extends its deepest sympathy, especially to the families of those killed and injured, and reaffirms its solidarity with the people of Pakistan who want "democratic governance and transparent, accountable rule and who act with courage and determination in the face of terrorist and criminal violence".
Military dictatorship must be replaced through free and fair elections
The EP urges Pakistan to uphold all the principles enshrined in the Cooperation Agreement with the EU, in particular the democracy and human rights clause and, alluding to the forced departure of former Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif to Saudi Arabia, asks the government "to allow the return of all political leaders to counter the extremist forces in the country and contribute to establishing a legitimate government through free and fair elections, replacing the current military dictatorship".
The lack of independence or neutrality of Pakistan's institutions and judiciary is a major worry: the caretaker government is chosen by President Musharraf, the government interferes with the courts and the president failed to relinquish his post of army chief before being elected president. Against this background, the resolution calls for "immediate action to restrict the influence of the military in society as a whole". It also "urges that Pakistan returns to democratic government by holding free, fair and transparent elections in January 2008", warns against "the imposition of emergency rule" and urges the government "to provide all parties with equal access to the media".
The fact that EU will monitor the parliamentary elections and the European Parliament will participate in the observer mission is welcomed.
Religious issues, women's rights
MEPs note the reports of "ongoing oppression of religious minorities such as Christians, Buddhists, Hindus, Sikhs and Ahmadis" and call for "immediate action to cease such religious-based repression". They also stress the importance of "effective monitoring of the madrassas to prevent control by extremists".
Parliament urges the repeal of the Hudood Ordinances, which have led to the imprisonment of hundreds of women, as well as the removal of a restriction on women's participation in the parliamentary elections (an academic qualification is currently required as a condition for standing for election, thus excluding 70% of women).
Lastly, EU Member States are urged "fully to respect the EU Code of Conduct on Arms Exports".
Killing of AU peacekeepers in Darfur
On the day the EP's Sakharov Prize was awarded to the Sudanese human rights lawyer Salih Mahmoud Osman for his work in Darfur (see link below), MEPs also adopted a resolution (by 65 votes to 0, with 0 abstentions) condemning the killing of 10 African Union peacekeepers in that region and calling on the Sudanese government to shoulder responsibility for the country's internal security, notably by allowing the UNAMID peacekeeping force to be deployed.
On 30 September 2007 unidentified forces attacked an African Union base in Haskanita, South Darfur, killing 10 AU peacekeepers and civilian police, at least eight other personnel from the African Union Mission in Sudan (AMIS) were seriously injured and approximately 40 remain went missing. Attacks on AMIS personnel have increased lately and, since the force was deployed in 2004, more than 25 soldiers and staff have been killed.
The resolution strongly condemns the killing of the 10 AU peacekeepers and considers it "a war crime to be promptly investigated by the African Union and the United Nations". It stresses that "customary laws of war prohibit directing attacks against personnel and objects involved in international peacekeeping missions".
MEPs demand an immediate cessation of hostilities and attacks not only on AMIS but also on civilians and humanitarian agencies, their staff and assets and relief convoys. They call on "the Sudanese Government and the rebel groups to cooperate fully with an independent investigation into the dreadful attack in Haskanita and to bring all those responsible to justice". They add that the fate of those peacekeepers still missing must be established.
Sudanese Government urged to allow deployment of UNAMID force
The AMIS force in Darfur comprises approximately 7000 troops and civilian police at the present moment, and is virtually the only force on the ground in Darfur providing civilian protection. A 26,000 member AU-UN hybrid operation, UNAMID, was authorised by the UN Security Council in July 2007 but has yet to be deployed, owing to unwillingness by the Sudanese Government.
The resolution points out that "the Sudanese Government has made previous unfulfilled commitments to allow the hybrid force into Sudan". It calls for "rapid deployment of the UNAMID force with a mandate which enables it to efficiently protect civilians" and calls on the UN "to fulfil its commitment and provide the troops that have been promised".
In addition, the resolution "reminds the Sudanese Government that it bears the prime responsibility for internal security and that it should not abdicate this responsibility in favour of the international community".
Lastly, the EU, the UN and the African Union are called upon to show a united front in efforts to resolve the conflict in Darfur and "to prioritise a comprehensive peace process through a political dialogue with all parties concerned". Resolution adopted on Iran Resolution adopted on Pakistan Resolution adopted on Sudan
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0488 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0489 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0490 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Development and cooperation
'Towards a global treaty to ban all cluster munitions'
2007-10-29 - 12:13
In adopting a joint resolution entitled "Towards a global treaty to ban all cluster munitions", MEPs reaffirm the need to strengthen international humanitarian law (IHL) as it applies to cluster munitions and speedily to adopt at international level a comprehensive ban on the use, production, transfer and stockpiling of cluster munitions, and therefore strongly supports the Oslo Process launched in February 2007. The House calls for an immediate moratorium on using, investing in, stockpiling, producing, transferring or exporting cluster munitions, including air-dropped cluster munitions and submunitions delivered by missiles, rockets, and artillery projectiles, until a binding international treaty has been negotiated to ban the production, stockpiling, export and use of these weapons.
MEPs call on all EU Member States to adopt national measures that fully ban the use, production, export ant stockpiling of cluster bombs.
The House calls on all States which have used cluster munitions and comparable weapons that produce explosive remnants of war to accept responsibility for clearance of these munitions and, in particular, to keep accurate records of where such munitions have been used, in order to help clearance efforts following conflict.
The European Parliament calls on all Member States which have used cluster munitions to provide assistance to the populations affected.
Finally, the House calls on the Commission urgently to increase financial assistance to communities and individuals affected by unexploded cluster munitions through all available instruments. International treaty to ban cluster munitions
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0484 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Development and cooperation
EU strategy for Africa: European Parliament calls for stronger parliamentary dimension
2007-10-29 - 12:13
The EU Strategy for Africa needs a stronger parliamentary dimension, says an own-initiative report, adopted by the European Parliament, that sets out priorities for the EU-Africa Strategy to be adopted at the second EU-Africa Summit in Lisbon in December. MEPs will meet African MPs in Lisbon prior to the Summit. "The 2005 EU Strategy for Africa was adopted without in-depth consultation with the African Union (AU) institutions and African governments and parliaments", notes the House, which wants to see co-operation between the EP, the Pan-African Parliament (PAP) and the African regional parliaments encouraged.
The report, drafted by Maria MARTENS (EPP-ED, NL), was adopted with a large majority.
Lisbon parliamentary meeting
A 25-strong delegation of MEPs, most of whom are Development Committee members, will meet 25 members of the Pan-African Parliament in Lisbon on 7 December, where a joint declaration by both Parliaments is likely to be adopted. EP President Hans-Gert PÖTTERING and PAP President Gertrude MONGELLA will be invited to address the Heads of States and Governments meeting on 8 December.
Arms control
The report says that existing commitments to control the arms trade should be implemented in full and that the EU Code of Conduct on Arms Exports should be upgraded to a legally-binding Common Foreign and Security Policy Common Position. The EU should also accelerate the implementation of the EU Strategy to Combat the Illicit Accumulation and Trafficking of small arms and light weapons (SALW), it adds.
Migration and brain drain
The joint strategy should address the root causes of migration and to pay particular attention to the rights and the integration of migrants and to the issue of the "brain drain", particularly in the health sector, by proposing practical solutions for successful "circular" migration, says the report.
Crimes against humanity and impunity
Provisions to address impunity should be included in the joint strategy, says the European Parliament, which calls for Africa’s legal and judicial systems to be strengthened, in accordance with human rights, to enable them to try perpetrators of serious crimes against humanity in Africa itself.
EPAs
MEPs acknowledge that the Economic Partnership Agreements (EPAs) can "become an important tool for African trade and regional integration, but only on condition that their substance fully accords with development policy objectives", by providing exemptions and long transition periods where necessary to enable domestic producers and industries to adapt to new market situations and to allow regional integration to proceed at its own pace.
EU-Africa relations
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0483 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-024-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Justice and home affairs
Sentencing across the EU
2007-10-29 - 12:13
MEPs adopted a non-binding report on laying down the rules according to which one Member State is to supervise suspended sentences, or alternative sanctions, contained in a judgment given in another Member States. The purpose of the Framework Decision is to facilitate a sentenced person's reintegration into society, to provide better protection for victims and society as a whole and to facilitate the enforcement of appropriate suspended sentences, alternative sanctions and conditional sentences in the case of offenders who are not resident in the State in which they were sentenced.
The European Parliament underlines that the Framework Decision should apply only to the recognition of judgments and the transfer of responsibility for the supervision and execution of suspended sentences, alternative sanctions and conditional sentences, and for all other subsequent decisions provided for in this Framework Decision.
Objectives
As to the objectives, the report says the Framework Decision should seek to facilitate the social re-integration of sentenced persons, to improve the protection of victims and society and to facilitate the application of appropriate suspended sentences, alternative sanctions and conditional sentences in the case of offenders who are not resident in the sentencing State. With a view to achieving these objectives, this Framework Decision should lay down rules pursuant to which the Member State, in which the sentenced person has his lawful and ordinary residence, should recognise the judgments passed in another Member State and should supervise and execute suspended sentences, alternative sanctions and conditional sentences. Recognition and supervision of suspended sentences, alternative sanctions and conditional sentences
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0475 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-025-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Fisheries
Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the EC and Madagascar
2007-10-29 - 12:13
The Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the EC and Madagascar is a tuna agreement which allocates fishing opportunities according to three categories of vessels from Spain, France, Italy, Portugal and the United Kingdom. It also introduces the possibility for an additional five vessels to carry out exploratory fishing for demersal species. The European Parliament approves the conclusion of this Agreement with some amendments. According to the rapporteur, Margie SUDRE (EPP-ED, FR), this new agreement is "highly satisfactory, for both the European Community and the Republic of Madagascar", since "it provides fishery resources for community vessels whilst enabling Madagascar to receive income for stocks which the country would not have the technical capacity to exploit". She has, however, tabled some amendments, under consultation, aimed at improving the information forwarded to the European Parliament. Furthermore, the Commission is asked to submit a report on the application of the agreement to the EP and the Council during the final year of the protocol's validity and before another agreement is concluded on its renewal. These amendments were approved today in plenary.
The new Partnership Agreement was signed for a renewable period of six years, from 1 January 2007 to 31 December 2012, and it grants the following fishing opportunities:
Fishing category
Type of vessel
Member State
Licences or quota
Tuna fishing
Freezer tuna seiners
Spain
23
France
19
Italy
1
Tuna fishing
Surface longliners over 100 GT
Spain
25
France
13
Portugal
7
United Kingdom
5
Tuna fishing
Surface longliners of 100 GT or below
France
26
Demersal fishing
Exploratory line or bottom longline fishing
France
5
As financial contribution, The EC is paying Madagascar a sum of EUR 1.197.000 per year for a reference tonnage of 13.300 tonnes per year. This sum will be divided up into EUR 864.500 per year equivalent to the reference tonnage and EUR 332.500 per year for the support and implementation of Madagascar's sectoral fisheries policy. Payment of the financial contribution is to be made no later than 31 December 2007 for the first year and no later than 28 February 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011 and 2012 for the following years. 80% of the financial contribution and fees paid by shipowners will go towards supporting and implementing initiatives taken within the framework of the sectoral fisheries policy drawn up by Madagascar.
Licences are valid for one year and are renewable. The fee has been set at EUR 35 per tonne caught within Madagascar's fishing zone in the case of tuna seiners and surface longliners, against EUR 25 previously.
Owners of tuna seiners and surface longliners must employ at least 20% ACP nationals among the seamen signed on. For the first category of vessel, however, a minimum of 70 seamen out of the total European fleet must be from the Indian Ocean Tuna Commission (IOTC) member countries. EC-Madagascar Fisheries Partnership Agreement
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0477 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-024-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-026-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Fisheries
Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the EC and Mozambique
2007-10-29 - 12:13
The European Parliament approved today a consultative report on the conclusion of a new Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the EC and Mozambique. The agreement has been signed for a period of five years (renewable) from its entry into force and it grants fishing opportunities to vessels from Spain, France, Italy, Portugal and the United Kingdom. (The report was adopted by 407 votes in favour to 73 against and 76 abstentions). MEPs have approved some amendments to improve the information forwarded to the European Parliament. They also call for the Commission to submit a report on the application of the agreement to the EP and the Council during the final year of the protocol's validity and before another agreement is concluded on its renewal.
As regards the fishing opportunities granted to Community vessels, 44 purse seine vessels and 45 surface longliners are allowed to fish:
Fishing category
Type of vessel
Member State
Licences
Tuna fishing
Purse seine vessels (44)
Spain
23
France
20
Italy
1
Tuna fishing
Longliners (45)
Spain
21
France
15
Portugal
7
United Kingdom
2
The rapporteur, Emanuel Jardim FERNANDES (PES, PT), acknowledges the urgency of concluding the agreement and considers the proposal "to be positive in some respects", in that it can contribute to and support Mozambican sectoral policy on fisheries. Nevertheless, whilst bearing in mind that it is not feasible to amend it, this being the responsibility of the Council and Commission, the rapporteur expresses, in the explanatory statement, "his clearest possible disagreement with regard to the distribution of fishing licences under the regulation on the conclusion of the Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the European Community and the Republic of Mozambique", since "it fails to respect the principle of relative stability which has always been followed in previous agreements, even though other criteria have also been used".
The rapporteur also regrets that, owing to possible legal considerations, it has been impossible to table legislative amendments to the articles of the agreement aimed at, firstly, the improved analysis and management of future fisheries agreements, above all through strengthening Mozambican civil society with the active participation of fishermen, and secondly, the optimisation of international rules as regards the occupational categories concerned, particularly in relation to the setting of minimum wage rules for ACP seamen, "a situation which substantially restricts the European Parliament's political mandate resulting from its democratic legitimacy", he says.
The protocol fixes a reference tonnage of 10.000 tonnes of tuna per year. The financial contribution is fixed at EUR 900.000 to be paid annually by the Community during the period of application of the protocol. The payment will be made no later than 31 October 2007 for the first year and no later than 15 January 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011 for the following years. 100% of the financial contribution will be used to support the implementation of the sectoral fisheries policy drawn up by the Mozambican Government.
Fishing licences are valid for a maximum of one year (renewable), from 1 January to 31 December of each year. The fee has been set at EUR 35 per tonne caught within Mozambique's fishing zone.
Shipowners undertake to employ, for the tuna-fishing season in Mozambique's fishing zone, at least 20% of seamen of ACP origin, of which, if possible, at least 40% Mozambican. The International Labour Organisation (ILO) Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work will apply as of right to seamen signed on by Community vessels.
The new agreement granting fishing opportunities to Community fishermen in the Mozambique fishing zone has been initialled on 21 December 2006. Accompanied by a protocol and an annex, the agreement has been signed for a period of five years (renewable) from its entry into force. EC-Mozambique Fisheries Partnership Agreement
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0478 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-025-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-027-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Petitions
MEPs welcome European Ombudsman annual report for 2006
2007-10-29 - 12:13
MEPs adopted a report on the activities of the European Ombudsman in 2006 - Mr Nikoforos Diamandouros. The report says that the Ombudsman has continued to exercise his powers in a balanced and energetic way both with regard to examining and handling complaints, and conducting and concluding enquiries, and with regard to maintaining constructive relations with the European Union's institutions and encouraging citizens to avail themselves of their rights in relation to those institutions. Slothful, negligent or lacking in transparency
The House agrees that the term 'maladministration by the Community' should be broadly interpreted so as to include not only unlawful administrative acts or infringements of binding legal rules or principles, but also, for example, cases where the administrative authorities have been slothful, negligent or lacking in transparency or have infringed other principles of good administration.
European Personnel Selection Office (EPSO)
The report calls on the European Personnel Selection Office to ensure it complies effectively and fully with the rules and established practice as regards the openness and transparency of competition procedures, particularly with regard to candidates' access to information relating to them about the marking of papers, to put an end to linguistic discrimination and to refrain from evading its own responsibilities by reference to decisions made by selection boards.
Examination of the statistics
The figures for 2006 record that the Ombudsman received 3830 complaints, 2% fewer than in 2005, but at the same record level attained in 2004, which represented a 53% increase compared to previous years. A complaint was transmitted electronically in 57% of cases, most of which, i.e. 3619 cases, were sent by individual citizens, and only 211 of which were submitted by associations or firms. The nationality of the authors, in descending order was: Spanish (20.4%), German (14%), French (8.7%), Belgian (6.3%), Polish (6%), Italian (5.4%) and British (3.8%). This ranking changes, however, if the percentage of complaints submitted by a country is divided by the percentage of the EU population it represents. On this calculation, in only 22 countries is the quotient greater than one; a ratio greater than one indicates that the country in questions submits more complaints to the Ombudsman than might be expected given the size of its population, as in the case of Luxembourg (with a quotient of 14.2), Malta (10), Cyprus (7.6), Belgium (2.8), Slovenia (2.7) and Spain (2.2). Turning to the question of language distribution of complaints, English and Spanish each account for over 20% of complaints, German and French each account for over 10% and Polish for over 5%.
In the 95% of cases where the examination of admissibility was completed, once again the majority did not fall within the mandate of the European Ombudsman (78.5%), either because the complaints were not made against a Community institution or body (93.7%) or because they did not involve maladministration (5.4%). Of the 21.5% of cases which did fall within the Ombudsman's remit, 449 of the 838 complaints were formally declared admissible, of which 258 led to an inquiry. In 2006, the Ombudsman carried out 582 enquiries in total; of which 315 were already underway in 2005 and 9 were launched on the Ombudsman's own initiative.
As in previous years, the institutional body which was the subject of most enquiries was the Commission, which accounted for 66% of enquiries (387); the European Personnel Selection Office (EPSO) accounted for 13% (74) the European Parliament for 8% (49) and the Council of the European Union for 2% (11). The predominant type of maladministration alleged was lack of transparency, including refusal of information (25%) followed by unfairness or abuse of power (19%) and a variety of other types of maladministration, culminating in the least-frequently alleged categories of legal error (5%) and failure to ensure fulfilment of Treaty obligations by the Commission (4%). European Ombudsman's activities in 2006 Homepage of the European Ombudsman
EN
2
LINK
http://www.ombudsman.europa.eu/home/en/default.htm
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0487 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-026-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-028-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Consumers
European Parliament adopts written declaration on origin marking
2007-10-29 - 12:13
MEPs adopted a written declaration on origin marking which emphasises the right of European consumers to immediate access to information about their purchases; stresses that fake indications concerning product origin are, like any kind of fraud, unacceptable; believes that a level playing field with the EU's trading partners must be guaranteed, in line with a fair trade agenda. The declaration was sponsored by Joseph DAUL (EPP-ED, FR), Enrique BARÓN CRESPO (PES, ES), Graham WATSON (ALDE UK Liberal Democrat South West), Heide RÜHLE (Greens/EFA, DE)and Eugenijus MALDEIKIS (UEN, LT). Over half the total number of MEPs (399 so far) have signed the written declaration meaning that it becomes an official position of the European Parliament.
The declaration fully supports the Commission’s proposal for a Council regulation introducing compulsory indication of the country of origin of certain products imported into the European Union from third countries. MEPs also call on the Member States to adopt the proposal without delay, in the interests of consumers, industry and competitiveness in the EU.
MEPs underline that the European Union attaches the utmost importance to transparency for consumers, and whereas information on the origin of goods is vital in that respect.
The House also says that the number of cases of misleading and fraudulent indications of origin on goods imported into the European Union is increasing, potentially jeopardising consumer safety. A number of the EU's major trading partners, says MEPs, such as the United States, Japan and Canada, have enacted mandatory origin-marking requirements. Text adopted by the EP
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/writtenDecl/wdFastAdopted.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-027-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-029-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Consumers
MEPs concerned about rising feed and food prices
2007-10-29 - 12:13
In adopting a joint resolution on food prices, MEPs call on the Commission and Member States to analyse the discrepancies between farmgate prices and the prices charged by the major retailers. Parliament points out, in particular, that the Commission should investigate the effects of concentration in the retail sector, mainly to the disadvantage of small producers, small enterprises and consumers, and employ all the legal means available to it should abuses of market power be identified. MEPs urge the Commission to authorise advance direct payments to livestock farmers, especially to those affected by disease outbreaks (e.g. bluetongue), as they may face serious cash-flow problems as a result of increased feed prices. The resolution was adopted with 460 votes in favour, 30 against and 44 abstentions.
Biofuels
The House emphasises that only a very small proportion of EU cereal production is currently being used for biofuel production and that meeting the EU’s biofuel targets in 2020 would still require the use of only 15% of the EU’s arable land.
MEPs also emphasise that biofuels are at present the only substitute for fossil fuels which is available on the market on a large scale and, unlike fossil fuels, is renewable and can produce significant reductions in greenhouse-gas emissions.
Parliament calls on the Commission and Member States, nevertheless, to do more to promote the use and production of second-generation bioenergy, which involves processing of manure and agricultural waste materials rather than primary agricultural products.
The House calls on the Commission to carry out an environmental and food-security impact assessment which takes account of existing competition for land and resources between food and plant-based fuel production, including the impact of climate change and possible measures to avoid further depletion of food-production resources.
Imports and exports
MEPs reject any moves to impose export quotas and tariffs on EU agricultural production. The House demands that third-country operators be subjected to the same stringent controls as EU producers.
MEPs call on the Commission to undertake a stocktaking exercise of possible supply management and food security measures which could avoid further extreme volatility of feed and food prices and unsustainable competition between food and fuel production.
Global food insecurity
The House calls on the Commission to analyse carefully the effects of supply shortages of cereals and oil seeds on the most vulnerable food producers and consumers in the EU and third countries, including proposals for instruments and measures to prevent disruptions of food supply and the inflationary effects of further price increases.
Finally, the European Parliament calls on the Commission to undertake an in-depth analysis of world market trends, including the increased demand for food in developing countries, in order to consider, as part of the CAP Health Check, the creation of permanent mechanisms to guarantee an adequate market supply in future. Rise in foodstuff prices
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0480 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-028-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-030-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Parliament's Rules of Procedure
Audiovisual record and translation of all debates in plenary
2007-10-29 - 12:13
MEPs decided to ensure that all parliamentary proceedings are covered in all 23 official languages. MEPs also want to make the recordings of each sitting available for the public in all languages and via the Internet. By approving the report by Richard Corbett (PES, UK) by 586 in favours, 94 against and 17 abstentions, the Parliament amended its Rules of Procedure so that, after each plenary sitting, a verbatim report of the proceedings is made available in all official languages. Moreover, the EP will produce and store the complete audiovisual recording of all sittings, which will include the soundtracks from all interpretation booths. The latter will be put on the Parliament's website and be accessible to the public.
Currently, the verbatim reports are delivered only in the 11 old official languages, as a transitory regime. Therefore, MEPs decided to end this practice and come back to full multilingual regime. The new rules will apply as from next plenary sitting, on 12 November.
All European Parliament plenary sessions are broadcast live in 23 languages via the European Parliament's website and previous sessions can also be accessed on demand via the link hereunder. Verbatim reports (amendment of Rule 173)
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0460 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-029-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-031-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
An audio summary of the Strasbourg plenary session
2007-10-29 - 12:13
The audio summary can be accessed via the link hereunder. . An audio summary of the Strasbourg plenary session
EN
1
LINK
/eplive/expert/multimedia/20071029MLT12547/media_20071029MLT12547.mp3
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-030-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-032-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Text adopted during October plenary session
2007-10-29 - 12:13
Text adopted by the EP can be accessed via the link hereunder. Adopted text during 22-25 October 2007. Click here
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-031-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-024-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-025-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-026-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-027-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-028-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-029-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-030-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-031-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-032-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-FULL DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-FULL DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-024-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-025-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-026-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-027-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-028-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-029-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-030-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-031-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019BRI11923 ITEM-032-EN DOC XML V0//EN
