October Plenary Session: Pesticides, Reform Treaty, CO2, Turkey,, Budget, 2 Prizes
Institutions
2007-10-29 - 08:43
October's Plenary session in Strasbourg saw MEPs approve a package of legislation on the safe use of pestcides in the EU. The week also saw Members approve the Union's 2008 budget at its first reading. The newly approved Reform Treaty was also debated, with MEPs supporting the way it would improve the working of the EU. The Treaty sets the number of Members of Parliament at 751 from 2009. An own initiative report on cutting C02 emisisons by Europe's cars by 2015 was also agreed.
Internationall y the EU's relations with Turkey, Russia and Serbian were all debated. Finally, the week saw the awarding of the 2007 Sakharov Prize for freedom of thought to Sudanese human rights lawyer Salih Mahmoud Osman. The inaugural LUX cinema prize was awarded to a Turkish-German production 'the Edge of Heaven". The next Strasbo u rg Plenary session opens on 12 November.
20071019FCS11876
Monday in Plenary: Treaty welcomed, pesticides protection, CO2 car emissions
Pesticides safety was debated by MEPs October's Strasbourg Plenary session of the European Parliament opened with its President Hans-Gert Pöttering welcoming agreement on a new Reform Treaty. The deal expands the role of the elected body and sets the number of MEPs at 751 from 2009. Later Members debated three reports on proposed legislation on pesticides aimed at modernising protection against them. Monday also saw debates on conventional energy sources and energy technology as well as the level of CO2 emissions from cars.
Reform Treaty welcomed President Pöttering used his opening remarks to tell MEPs that he personally considered the outcome of the Lisbon Summit extremely positive. He noted that the new Treaty would give the Parliament legislative powers equal to the Council of Ministers in many areas. He also confirmed that the Parliament would have 751 MEPs from 2009 will all having full voting rights. Mr Pöttering announced that prior to the signing of the Treaty on 13 December the European Parliament would hold a session where the Charter of Fundamental Rights will be formally proclaimed in Strasbourg. Pesticides - new package debated Proposals for modernising the scrutiny of pesticides were debated on Monday. Debated was an "approval system” for new pesticides, a political strategy and a directive on their use. The debate was closely watched by representatives of the farming, chemicals and environmentalists. During the discussion one of the MEPs who drafted the report, German Green MEP Hiltrud Breyer said that according to opinion polls "consumers' first worries are pesticides". She went on to say that "each year in Europe more than 200.000 tons of pesticides are produced, i.e. 25% worldwide for only 4% of agricultural land". German EPP-ED Member Christa Klass told the House that "different rules in the EU do not only mean different security standards but they are also confusing and they distort competition". The vote on pesticides (Parliament has an equal say on legislation with the Council) takes place on Tuesday 23 October. The Portuguese Presidency of the EU hopes to get an agreement between Member States at the Agriculture Council meeting on 26 November. Conventional energy, CO2 emissions Later on Monday evening, Parliament debated a report on conventional energy sources and energy technology. The need to produce and use energy more safely, efficiently and sustainably across the Union is underlined in an own-initiative report proposed by Parliament's Industry Committee. MEPs also debated a non-binding report from British Liberal MEP Chris Davies saying that CO2 emissions from cars should be capped at an average of 120g/km from 2012. Mr Davies believes the industry's voluntary commitment to reduce them is not working. About 19% of the EU's CO2 emissions come from passenger cars and light commercial vehicles. The vote takes place on Wednesday MEPs to debate pesticide use on Monday: 22 October CO2 and cars: 19 September
Tuesday in Plenary: Reform Treaty, budget 2008, blue card
Thumbs up for reform - Portuguese PM José Sócrates During the debate on the new Reform Treaty MEPs were agreed that it would produce a more democratic, transparent and efficient EU. Members also discussed draft proposals for the EU's 2008 budget and called for an increase of funding for the European satellite navigation system, Galileo. The hemicycle Chamber also saw a debate on a proposed "blue card" system for highly skilled immigrants to the European Union.
Outcome of Lisbon Summit welcomed in key debate The agreement reached by government leaders on 18 October will give birth to the new Lisbon Treaty, to be signed on 13 December. It received a broad welcome across the House as an enhancement of EU democracy, bringing noteworthy progress for the Parliament and greater transparency and efficiency to decision-making. The man who hosted the Summit at Lisbon - Portuguese PM José Sócrates - told the House that "Europe needed a speedy agreement and it got one. It needed a turn towards the future and it did it". Mr Socrates outlined what he considered the key improvements in the new Treaty;
more European Parliament participation in the legislative process
improved decision making through extension of qualified majority voting.
a clear list of the domains in which EU members transfer powers to the Union.
strengthening the supervisory role of the national Parliaments.
giving binding legal force to the Charter of Fundamental Rights. A key issue for Parliamentarians was the number of seats in Parliament after 2009. Mr Sócrates took the opportunity to clarify the question of the number of seats in the EP. He confirmed it would be composed of 750 members plus its President and that no member of the House would see his or her rights curtailed as a result of the new arrangement. Leading MEPs call for Union to move forward Reaction from political group leaders was generally positive, though many regretted the fact that the new treaty had not been more ambitious. Such voices included Joseph Daul (EPP-ED), who concluded "we have got a European project based on the genuine welcoming in of the citizens", but added, "now it's time to move from words to deeds." For the PES Group, Martin Schulz (PES) emphasised the need to move the agenda on to matters of direct concern to citizens: "now we can concentrate on doing what the people want from us". For the ALDE Group Graham Watson, was among those regretting the "poverty of aspiration", but acknowledged that the new treaty "gives us the capacity to confront challenges of globalisation". The UEN, represented by co-chair Brian Crowley, described the treaty as delivering "what the EU needs". Monica Frassoni, of the Green-EFA group, on the other hand, expressed her disappointment at what she saw as a backward step from the previous constitutional treaty, which was, in her view, more democratic and transparent. Francis Wurtz, chair of the GUE-NGL group, expressed his belief that Europe's political leaders had failed to heed the voice of the people and take on board their criticism. Outright opponents of the new treaty included Nigel Farage (Ind/Dem), calling the text a "copy" of the constitution produced by "euro-nationalists" and Jean-Marie Le Pen (ITS), who saw a threat to the independence and identity of nations. MEPs consider 2008 EU budget The EU budget for 2008 was debated in the afternoon, through 2 reports. In its draft report, Parliament's Budget Committee seeks to increase the overall amount of the Council's draft budget. The most significant increases of EU budget would be for Galileo (navigation system by satellite) and aid for Palestine and Kosovo. Finnish ALDE Budget rapporteur Kyösti Virrankoski criticized the Council's cuts to the Commission's initial budget proposal, especially on growth and employment, "although it is a priority". He underlined the Budget Committees key proposals, among which include:
Increased funding for Galileo and European Institute of Technology (EIT).
increased aid for Palestine and Kosovo.
MEPs on the Committee reversed the Council’s cut of EU agencies. Speaking on behalf of the EPP-ED Group, British MEP Richard Ashworth said the budget is "moving in the right direction to offer value for money". French PSE Member Catherine Guy-Quint said "the amount of less than 130 billion euros, i.e. 0.99% of the GDP, is very limited and cannot fulfill the hopes for the development of European policy". The vote at the first reading is on Thursday. Immigration "Blue card" - MEPs react In the course of the day, attention also focused on the proposed blue card system for highly skilled workers from outside the EU, recently presented in a Commission press conference. Reacting to this proposal, the Chairman of the Civil Liberties Committee Jean-Marie Cavada (ALDE) welcomed the proposal but said MEPs “shall examine carefully the safeguards they provide to limit the brain drain from developing countries". The rapporteur on immigration Manfred Weber (EPP-ED) said “the new rules must not put additional pressure on the millions of unemployed in the EU member states. Claudio Fava (PSE) said the “final text should be braver. In addition to the legal channels of immigration, there should be true and effective free movement of workers on all of the European territory". Pesticides - MEPs support protection of water sources Following Monday's debate, in a first reading vote Parliament approved new EU legislation on pesticides. MEPs voted to ban aerial spraying with pesticides and to prohibit the use of pesticides in buffer zones round water courses. They also approved plans to ban or at least restrict pesticides in parks and sports grounds. However, they threw out proposals to divide the EU into three zones for the purposes of approving new pesticide products. The Council must now consider its reaction Briefing Budget 2008 Story blue card: 26 September 07 Reform Treaty Reform Treaty debate in full Pesticides briefing: 23 October 07
Wednesday in Plenary: Turkey, Russia, Serbia, LUX-Prize
Istanbul - recent tension with the PKK has prompted protests Midweek debates in Plenary focused on the European Union's relations with its neighbours. A resolution on relations with Turkey was adopted and the upcoming EU-Russia Summit was debated. Serbia's relationship with the Union was also discussed by MEPs. An own initiative report to cap CO2 emissions from cars at 125g CO2/km from 2015 was also adopted. Wednesday also saw the inaugural LUX cinema prize awarded to Turkish-German production "Edge of Heaven".
EU - Turkey relations . MEPs welcomed recent elections in Turkey and the new government's commitment "to enhance the reform process in the coming months and years". They backed the resolution drafted by Dutch MEP Ria Oomen - Ruijten (EPP-ED) ahead of the Commission's November annual progress report on Turkey. The report describes progress on achievements but also areas where more progress is needed. Among issues of concern are the content of upcoming constitutional reforms and Turkish military actions in Northern Iraq. MEPs strongly condemned the violence perpetrated by the PKK and reiterated the call for the Turkish and Armenian Government to "start a process of reconciliation for the present and the past". On Cyprus the EP notes that "the withdrawal of Turkish forces would facilitate the negotiation on a settlement". In the debate many MEPs expressed concern about freedom of expression and the reform of Turkey's penal code. However, many groups supported the accession negotiations. Mrs Oomen - Ruijten noted that the Parliament sought to "broaden and deepen" debate with Turkey and noting that the need to safeguard freedom of expression features prominently in the report. EU - Russia Summit MEPs debated EU-Russia relations ahead of a Summit between the two due to be held in Portugal on 26 October. It coincides with the tenth anniversary of the signature of the Strategic Cooperation Agreement between Moscow and Brussels, which expires this year. This is also the last summit for Vladimir Putin as President of Russia. At the last Summit in May, the two sides disagreed over issues such as democratic freedoms in Russia and economic ties. MEPs will vote on a resolution after the Summit. Several speakers in the debate highlighted that Russia is not only a close neighbour but a strategic partner for the EU. Solidarity, reciprocity and respect for human rights were also mentioned as key principles in bilateral relations EU-Russia. José Ignacio Salafranca (EPP-ED) said that the strategic relationship with Russia was important but that "the climate at the upcoming meeting in Mafra will depend more on Russian than on the European side". Dutch Socialist MEP Jan Wiersma expressed concern about the fairness of the upcoming Duma election. He said that "we need to be willing to work with the OSCE on electoral observation. We "need to cast a critical eye when it comes to human rights and democracy but should avoid polarisation". Graham Watson (ALDE) criticised ignoring Russia's denial of "Europe's sacred values, like freedom, democracy, rule of law, which are conspicuously absent in Russia today." He said that "the Reform Treaty promised the European Parliament a real say on external action, so let's deliver a message at summit that President Mr. Putin cannot ignore." CO2 emissions MEPs adopted an own-initiative report which calls for legislation to cap average emissions from all new passenger cars at 125g CO2/km by 2015. MEPs decided to move away from an earlier proposal to introduce a cap of 120g CO2/km as of 1 January 2012. As of 2020 such average emissions should not exceed 95g CO2/km. Long-term targets, urge MEPs, should be determined by no later than 2016: these targets "will possibly require further emissions reductions to 70g CO2/km or less by 2025". EU-Serbia MEPs debated EU-Serbia relations on Wednesday afternoon. Slovene MEP Jelko Kacin (ALDE) who drafted the report on the issue said "the prospect of EU membership is a strong incentive of further democratisation" for Serbia". He added that "the EU will not be complete until Balkan form part of the EU but not at any price and certainly not at the price of undermining international law and ignoring fundamental values". He also stressed that Serbia need to prove itself by cooperation with the International Criminal Court for Former Yugoslavia (ICTY). A vote will be held on Thursday. Other business A busy day in plenary also saw votes on conventional energy sources and energy technology, stressing the "indispensable" role of nuclear energy in Europe, and a call for smoke-free workplaces across Europe within two years. In a brief interruption to formal proceedings, the European Parliament's first "LUX" cinema prize was awarded to Fatih Akin for his film "Auf der anderen Seite" (The edge of heaven), - See separate coverage Press-Info on EU-Turkey debate 24 Oct Press-Info on EU-Russia relations 24 Oct Press-Info: Conventional energy 24 Oct Press-Info Smoke free Europe 24 Oct Press-Info CO2 emissions 24 Oct Article: For Belgrade, road to Brussels runs through Strasbourg 23 Oct LUX Prize 24 Oct
Thursday in Plenary: Ombudsman, Sakharov prize, 2008 budget
Budget rapporteurs Kyösti Virrankoski and Ville Itälä The final day of the October plenary saw the announcement of the winner of the 2007 Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought - this year it went to Sudanese human rights lawyer Salih Mahmoud Osman. MEPs also voted on the first reading of the Union's 2008 budget. European Ombudsman Nikiforos Diamandouros presented his annual report for the year 2006 to MEPs.
Sudanese Human rights lawyer wins Sakharov prize 2007
Sudanese human rights lawyer Salih Mahmoud Osman won this year's Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought. EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering announced the decision of the leaders of political group on Thursday, 25 October.
Salih Mahmoud Osman from the Sudan Organisation Against Torture and has offered free legal aid to victims of human rights abuses in Sudan for over two decades. "Despite the high personal risks, he manages to push his issues at a high international level," said Pöttering when announcing the winner. He highlighted Salih's work on defending the victims of Darfur crisis.
When awarding the Prize, political group leaders in Parliament also undertook to find an appropriate way to honour murdered Russian journalist Anna Politkovskaya who was also one of the candidates for Sakharov Prize this year. They will decide at their next meeting how this should be done.
EU's budget for 2008 - more Galileo funding
Guided by rapporteurs Kyösti Virrankoski (ALDE, FI) and Ville Itälä (EPP-ED, FI), Parliament gave initial approval to the 2008 EU budget. MEPs voted to restore amounts cut by finance ministers in the 2008 draft budget and to redirect some planned expenditure. In particular, they reduced the amount allocated in the budget to the Common Foreign and Security Policy, preferring the use of the so-called "flexibility instrument" to fund certain EU external policy commitments. They increased funding for the Galileo satellite navigation system and the new European Institute of Technology in order to ensure the viability of these two flagship projects.
European Ombudsman - 320 complaints a month
The key message of the Ombudsman's 2006 annual report was that the number of complaints remained close to the record high levels reached in 2005 and 2004. Complaints to the Ombudsman have now stabilised at the previously unprecedented rate of 320 per month.
According to the Ombudsman these developments indicate that citizens are beginning to have a better knowledge of his role, which he described as giving the EU institutions a "human face and to communicate personally with citizens".
Rapporteur Luciana Sbarbati (ALDE, IT) said in her report that the "work of the Ombudsman is not legally binding, but what he does helps". She supported in particular his suggestion to review the procedures of the European Personnel Selection Office (EPSO).
Press info on Ombudsman's annual report European Ombudsman Press info on Sakharov prize Sakharov Focus MEPs gear up to scrutinise 2008 jobs and growth budget
EN
1
PHOTO
20071025PHT12519.jpg
EN
2
PHOTO
20071005PHT11282.jpg
EN
5
PHOTO
20071024PHT12216.jpg
EN
8
LINK
http://www.consilium.europa.eu/cms3_fo/showPage.asp?id=1317&lang=en&mode=g
EN
11
PHOTO
20071024PHT12283.jpg
EN
19
PHOTO
20071025PHT12521.jpg
EN
21
LINK
http://ombudsman.europa.eu/home/en/default.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019STO11857 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070913STO10369 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071012BRI11613 ITEM-006-EN NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070921STO10548 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019IPR11928 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019IPR11929 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071023IPR12108 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071023IPR12113 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019IPR11930 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071023IPR12111 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071023IPR12110 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019STO11860 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071023IPR12109 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071024IPR12333 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071024IPR12329 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070906FCS10161 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071012STO11627 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
