2006 Discharge press kit
Budgetary control
2007-11-09 - 14:50
The European Parliament kicks off the 2006 budget discharge procedure on Monday 12 November, with the presentation of the Court of Auditors' Annual Report for the 2006 financial year. The discharge procedure enables Parliament to make a political appraisal of how the budget has been spent, and to recommend improvements. This background note looks at what has been achieved since the start of Parliament's term on the control and audit fronts.
Since the Maastricht Treaty entered into force in 1993, the Court of Auditors must each year issue a "statement of assurance" or DAS (from "déclaration d'assurance), in the Court's Annual Report.
The Budgetary Control Committee starts work on the 2006 discharge when the Annual Report is unveiled in Strasbourg on Monday 12 November.
This background note reviews the key findings of the discharge reports adopted by Parliament since the start of the current term and reiterates some basic principles with respect to the budget discharge procedure.
20071031BKG12594
What is the budget discharge?
EC Treaty Article 276 provides that "the European Parliament, acting on a recommendation from the Council, which shall act by a qualified majority, shall give discharge to the Commission in respect of the implementation of the budget...".
In other words, granting a discharge is a Parliament decision that reflects its conclusions on how the Commission has carried out its task of implementing the expenditure authorised in the budget of a given financial year. Parliament's decision on this issue is taken every year (in principle, in April).
Parliament's decision to grant a discharge (or, as sometimes seen in the past, not to do so) is accompanied by a resolution setting out which its comments on the budget's implementation. These comments may require changes to the Commission's procedures and practice, or seek improvements in the way it administers Union policies.
During the discharge procedure, Parliament may ask the Commission to provide explanations as to the implementation of expenditure or to defend itself against charges of mismanagement and fraud. In so doing, the Budgetary Control Committee, and ultimately Parliament, are performing a task of political appraisal .
The committee is thus adding value by exercising parliamentary control to ensure that problems flagged up in audits by the Court of Auditors and/or in investigations by the Anti-Fraud Office (OLAF) are given political prominence and remedied by improvements in the system.
Scope of the discharge
Parliament's Rules of Procedure say the Budgetary Control Committee may invite Parliament to grant, postpone or refuse discharge in respect of implementation of the budget. This enables MEPs to express their approval or disapproval of the way EU funds have been spent. The Commission must act upon any comments or recommendations in Parliament's resolution.
By granting a discharge through a resolution voted in April, Parliament approves the implementation of the budget in respect of the relevant financial year.
If Parliament concludes that there are serious issues to be addressed, it will postpone the granting of discharge. The Commission then has to take swift action to remedy the problems.
A refusal to grant discharge has no legal consequences but may be regarded as a serious political sanction . This has happened twice in the past twenty years, first in 1984 and then in December 1998. The latter refusal, concerning the implementation of the 1996 budget, led to the setting up of a Committee of Independent Experts to investigate serious mismanagement charges levelled against the Commission. Following the publication of its findings, the Santer Commission resigned on 15 March 1999.
It should be stressed, however, that Parliament's decision not to grant the Commission a discharge for the implementation of the budget for a given financial year does not in itself constitute a motion of censure on the Commission. Although a decision by Parliament not to grant a discharge may have very serious political and institutional consequences, as was shown in 1998, it must nevertheless be distinguished from a motion of censure, for which the Treaty requires a separate procedure and a larger majority.
The discharge decision regarding the general budget managed by the Commission concerns by far the largest share of the EU budget, which goes to finance EU policies in the Member States. However, some 80-85% of EU funds are managed and monitored primarily by national and local administrations, under a system of "shared management" with the Commission. Only a small part of the budget is managed directly by the Commission itself.
2003 discharge in brief
Advent of the "national declaration" concept
With the EU budget managed by the Commission but implemented by the Member States for 80-85%, the so-called " delegation risk " issue arises and means that Member States and beneficiaries do not always, arguably, give the same attention to the spending of EU funds as to the spending of national ones.
In a report by Terry Wynn on the 2003 discharge, Parliament took the view that this problem could not be resolved solely by centrally imposed controls, and that the current situation clearly demonstrated the need for new instruments to enhance the Commission's insight into the Member States' management and control systems.
Only sufficiently comprehensive ex-ante disclosure in a formal Disclosure Statement and an annual ex-post Declaration of Assurance (DAS) as regards the legality and regularity of the underlying transactions from each Member State's highest political and managing authority (finance Minister), as suggested several times by the Commission's Internal Audit, would enable the Commission to fulfil its obligations under Article 274 of the Treaty, said the report.
Parliament invited the Commission to present an initial report exploring the road map to a protocol with Member States in which the managing authority (finance minister) would declare, prior to disbursement and on an annual basis, that proper control systems, capable of providing adequate assurance for Commission accountability purposes, are in place.
DAS
The central question should be whether the supervisory systems and controls that have been implemented at Community and national level provide the Commission with a reasonable assurance as regards the legality and regularity of the underlying transactions, said the report.
Parliament therefore invited the Court of Auditors to further improve the presentation of the global DAS and the specific appraisals by providing a more comprehensive description of the reservations, and to include more explicit and specific information on weaknesses in the different sectors and Member States with a view to establishing an operational listing, drawn up on a risk-based approach, of the reservations which can be monitored over time.
Single Audit model
This model, demanded by Parliament since 2002, aims to improve budgetary control mechanisms.
Parliament welcomed the Court of Auditors' recommendations for an effective and efficient internal control framework. However, it regretted that the Court had not presented any bold proposals as regards national audit institutions' participation in enhancing transparency and accountability at Member State level.
Sectoral issues
Agriculture : Parliament noted that the Commission had been responsible for failing to recover at least EUR 1 120 million during the 1971-2004 period. The EP considered this unacceptable, and said that the Member States and the Commission had shown a lack of due diligence.
Structural measures : Parliament deplored the failure of some Member States to control and manage taxpayers' money for which they are responsible, and highlighted the hypocrisy of some Member States in blaming the Commission for failing to control expenditure for which those Member States are responsible. The Commission was asked to inform Parliament of the countries which had failed to rapidly implement agreed improvements in their control systems. Parliament also encouraged the Commission to suspend interim payments to Member States in cases of serious irregularity or when serious failings in the Member States' management control systems are found.
External Policies : despite the success of the reform of the management of external aid, the observance of tender and procurement procedures by project management units and NGOs remained an area of concern and Parliament urged the Members of the Commission with responsibility for external aid to submit an action plan by 1 September 2005, in order to bring those problems under control. Finally, the report expressed concern about the use of international trust funds for the implementation of EU taxpayers money with limited control possibilities and even less EU value added and visibility.
2003 discharge line-up
Terence WYNN (PES, UK) - Section III Commission
Ona JUKNEVICIENE (ALDE, LT) - Section I - Parliament
Alexander STUBB (EPP-ED, FI) - Other sections
Inés AYALA SENDER (PES, ES) and Carl SCHLYTER (Greens/EFA, SE) - Agencies
Marilisa XENOGIANNAKOPOULOU (PES, EL) - European Development Funds (EDF) 2003 discharge page
2004 discharge in brief
National declarations follow-up
A key milestone in the national declarations talks was reached on 8 November 2005, when EU finance ministers gave a lukewarm welcome to the concept.
Earlier that year, a report by Jan Mulder, on the 2004 discharge to the Commission, re-introduced the concept of "national management declarations", to be signed by the relevant bodies of the Member States, with a slightly modified approach to that for the 2003 discharge: a series of sectoral declarations signed by bodies selected by the Member States themselves.
National declarations might comprise several declarations within a national framework, rather than one alone, in order to acknowledge the federal and decentralised political systems in existence in some Member States.
Parliament drew attention to the fact that the level of a possible signature at Member State level is not mainly a matter of form but a signal showing the expected quality of the supervisory and control systems operating under the signature.
Until such a system is in place, it invited the Commission to set up a more intense programme of ex post clearance-of-accounts audits and fully to make use of suspension of payments or financial corrections whenever it cannot obtain assurance from the Member States.
Review of Commission's internal control systems needed
The other main part of the 2004 discharge relates to the accountability of the Commission under Article 274, which requires it to manage the Community budget properly.
Parliament underlined that whilst ultimate responsibility for transactions after the reform lies now - and rightly so - with line managers (Directors-General), final responsibility for control systems must be anchored in the centre, not in the periphery.
Parliament felt that the quality of information contained in the reports is not checked and no one is accountable for it. It recommended that:
- the Director-General of the Directorate-General for Budget should give a formal opinion on the quality and efficiency of the internal control systems;
- since the Synthesis report is drawn up by the Secretary-General of the Commission, the Secretary General, who has ultimate operational executive responsibility for the bureaucracy, should give a formal declaration of assurance as regards the quality of the individual declarations from the line managers (Directors-General);
- the internal auditor of the Commission should give his assessment of the quality and effectiveness of the controls as described in the management's annual activity reports and Synthesis report in the form of an audit opinion as regards the adequacy of the Secretary-General's assurance statement;
- the responsible Commissioner should co-sign the declaration given by the Director-General, as this would bridge the gap between the Director-General's individual assurance declarations and the College's institutional assurance declaration.
Sectoral issues
Agriculture : for the first time, the Court issued a positive statement on expenditure under the Integrated Administrative and Control System (IACS). Parliament recognised this system as a strong instrument in reducing the risk of irregular expenditure.
Structural funds : Parliament argued that what was needed was better controls, not more controls. Also, the EP called for an end to the practice whereby managing authorities are allowed to delegate actual payment decisions, which undermines efficient checks and balances, in a sector which the Court of Auditors described as "in need of some degree of improvement".
Parliament's discharge
Days before the plenary vote on the discharge for the European Parliament, allegations of irregularities emerged in relation to the purchase by the EP of the Winston Churchill and Salvador de Madariaga buildings in Strasbourg. The decision to grant discharge was postponed but eventually approved after the Summer recess.
2004 discharge line-up
Jan MULDER (ALDE, NL) - Section III Commission
Markus FERBER (EPP-ED, DE) - Section I - Parliament
Nils LUNDGREN (IND-DEM, SE) - Other Institutions
Umberto GUIDONI (EUL-NGL, IT) - Agencies
Rodi KRATSA-TSAGAROPOULOU (EPP-ED, EL) - European Development Funds (EDF) 2004 discharge page
2005 discharge in brief
National declarations again…
On top of complicated talks with Council on the 2007-13 Financial Perspective, the European Parliament pursued its idea of "national declarations" in the first half of 2006. MEPs negotiated the inclusion of a key paragraph 44 in the Inter-Institutional Agreement of the 2007-13 multi-annual financial framework, which states that "priority will be given to sound financial management aiming at a positive Statement of Assurance, for funds under shared management. Provisions to this end could be laid down, as appropriate, in the basic legislative acts concerned".
In a notable departure from past discharge reports, the report by Mr Garriga proposed introducing national declarations at an appropriate political level (and no longer at the highest level), covering all Community funds coming under the shared management arrangement. Such declarations could comprise several declarations within a national framework, rather than one alone, in order to acknowledge the federal and decentralised political systems in existence in some Member States.
Whilst welcoming the initiatives of the Dutch, UK and Swedish governments, MEPs expressed concern that most Member States were resisting their introduction.
They nonetheless called on the Commission to submit, before the end of 2007, a proposal for a national (management) declaration covering all Community funds under shared management, based on sub-declarations by the various national bodies responsible for managing expenditure.
Sectoral issues
Agriculture : the European Parliament again urged the Commission to step up post-payment checks and to ensure that irregular payments are recovered, whereas the otherwise functional Integrated Administration and Control (IACS) system had not been fully implemented in some Member States in 2005.
Structural actions : the level of errors was again deplored by the European Parliament, which called on the Commission to effectively supervise the checks delegated to the Member States.
Agencies : with the ever growing number of agencies not always reflecting the real needs of the Union and its citizens, the European Parliament invited the Commission to present a cost-benefit study before any new agency is set up. Furthermore, i n the discharge to the European Reconstruction Agency, the EP underlined its high appraisal for this unique form of prompt and reliable deliver y of post conflict assistance with high European added value. In this context EP demanded not to close the Agency by 2008 but, rather, to use it in other parts of the world, where the EU is most of the time the biggest donor, but lacks visibility as funds are implemented via international trust funds, where the control possibilities of the EU are limited.
2005 discharge line-up
Salvador GARRIGA POLLEDO (EPP-ED, ES) - Section III Commission
Bart STAES (Greens/EFA, BE) - Section I - Parliament
Daniel CASPARY (EPP-ED, DE) - Other Institutions
Edit HERCZOG (PES, HU) - Agencies
Mogens N.J. CAMRE (UEN, DK) - European Development Funds (EDF) 2005 discharge page
Turning to 2006…
Information on the discharge procedure for the financial year 2006 as well as all relevant documents can be found via the link below.
The rapporteurs for the 2006 discharge are:
Dan JØRGENSEN (PSE, DK) - Section III Commission
José Javier POMÉS RUIZ (EPP-ED, ES) - Section I - Parliament
Nils LUNDGREN (IND/DEM, SE) - Other Institutions
Hans-Peter Martin (NI, AT) - Agencies
Alexander STUBB (EPP-ED, FI) - European Development Funds (EDF)
In the course of the 2006 discharge, the Budgetary Control Committee will hold a series of hearings with European Commissioners and senior officials from all EU institutions. See link below for provisional timetable. 2006 discharge page 2006 discharge timetable
EN
1
LINK
/comparl/cont/adopt/discharge/2003/default_en.htm
EN
2
LINK
/comparl/cont/adopt/discharge/2004/default_en.htm
EN
3
LINK
/comparl/cont/adopt/discharge/2005/default_en.htm
EN
4
LINK
/comparl/cont/adopt/discharge/2006/default_en.htm
EN
5
LINK
/comparl/cont/adopt/discharge/2006/timetable.pdf
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
