Backstage during President Sarkozy's day at the Parliament
Institutions
2007-11-14 - 17:53
13 November - President Pöttering welcomes President Sarkozy to Parliament
When French President Nicolas Sarkozy stepped off a plane at Strasbourg airport at 0945 on Tuesday 11 November, two months of planning by the protocol service of the European Parliament and the Elysée Palace swung into action. The visit of a Head of State is always an important event for the EP and every last detail was worked out ahead of time to ensure it ran smoothly. Here is a backstage look at the visit.
0945 Strasbourg Airport: President Sarkozy lands and is welcomed by Parliament's vice-president Rodi Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou and the head of Parliament's protocol service, François Brunagel. They then make their way to the Parliament, located in the Wacken area of Strasbourg.
Mr Brunagel explains, "this is the traditional package for an official visit: the Head of State is welcomed at the airport by the 1st vice-president of the EP and the Head of Protocol, then they all go in an official cortège to the EP”. He’s in charge of all practical aspects of the organisation of the visit, from the means of transport to the programme.
1000 President Sarkozy is welcomed by EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering at the “protocol entrance” of the Parliament's "Louise Weiss" building. They walk together down the red carpet, followed by their staff.
Journalists (together with video cameras, sound technicians and photographers) are in a corner on a podium. This is quite new, to allow the two presidents to be more visible to the cameras, a new podium has been installed for all video cameras and photographers. This allows the presidents to walk apart from their delegations, which leads to better photographs.
So far, everything is running smoothly - Mr Pöttering personally checked things on Monday to ensure everything was ready.
1005 Anthems: It's time for the anthems. Standing on a dais the men stand side by side listening first to the French National Anthem and then the EU anthem - Beethoven's 9th symphony.
The playing of anthems is also quite a new innovation; it was first used for the Portuguese President in September. As Katrin Ruhrmann, President Pöttering's spokeswoman explains; "It was the initiative of the President but he has the support of the Conference of Presidents (political group leaders). This issue was debated several times in the Conference of Presidents and they agreed that it would be a good idea".
The use of the anthem is, according to the President's Cabinet, a way to affirm the symbols of the EU, which are not mentioned in the new Reform Treaty.
1008 Photo opportunity: The presidents shake hands for an official photo for the gathered press. They then go apart for bilateral discussions: “ One can't arrive in the institution without talking to the master of the house, who in this case is the EP President," said the protocol service. One of the subjects discussed is cooperation between the EP and the French Government when France holds the EU Presidency for 6 months from July 2008.
1100 Meeting the leaders of the political groups: The two men and their staff leave the meeting room and walk to the next one to meet the leaders of Parliament's political groups. This gives the crucial “political” dimension to the visit. Ms Ruhrmann said "when he comes to the Parliament, the French President also has the chance to have political meetings so he is not limited to the formal Plenary session discussion.
The meeting is closed. The subjects of discussion - many raised by the group leaders - were the new Reform Treaty, Turkey, enlargement, industry, agriculture, Mediterranean politics and relations with Russia.
1155 End of the meeting and it is now time for President Sarkozy to address the assembled MEPs in the Parliamentary Chamber. He is formally welcomed by President Pöttering, the French President moves over to the lectern to start his speech, and photographers have just two minutes to take photos.
The speech is broadcast live with journalists in the press gallery and Parliament's press room waiting for the phrase or word that will create tomorrow's headlines around the world. Different national journalists look for different things in the 40 minute address.
1240 The speech ends: President Pöttering accompanies President Sarkozy and his staff to the exit where they make their farewells.
A key protocol moment is the swapping of gifts. As the visit was short, the gifts are exchanged by the heads of protocol. Mr Brunagel said: “To my colleague from the Elysee, I presented a framed and coloured 19th century engraving of Europe. He presented me with a box. When we opened it we found six bottles of excellent burgand, a present that is very symbolic of France."
20071109STO12835 Sarkozy address Focus on Parliament's Protocol Service Hans-Gert Pöttering welcomes President Sarkozy Edited extracts from the visit
EN
1
PHOTO
20071113PHT13005.jpg
EN
4
LINK
/president/speeches/or/files/sp0061.htm
EN
5
LINK
ftp://epavradioget:mo12SSB@ftpeps01.europarl.eu.int/epavradio/highlights
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109IPR12787 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060728FCS09980 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
