Petitions: MEPs wish to see EU law enforced
Petitions
2007-11-14 - 13:06
In 2006, the European Parliament received no fewer than 1,016 petitions from citizens alleging failures to comply with EU law in their countries or regions. MEPs are now calling on the Commission to take more systematic legal action against Member States in the event of infringements, and wish the Council to be more extensively involved in the work of the EP Petitions Committee.
MEPs, in a report by Carlos José Iturgaiz Angulo (EPP-ED, ES) on the Petitions committee's deliberations in 2006, underline that petitioning is a "fundamental right" that enables European citizens to participate in monitoring the application of Community law by national, regional and local authorities. This right also contributes "significantly" to the EU's efforts to "reconnect with its citizens" and provides an insight into the expectations of the European public.
Between 1 January and 31 December 2006, the EP received 1,016 petitions, or roughly three per day, a figure comparable with 2005's (1,032). But about one-third of these were found to be inadmissible because they did not relate to the EU's spheres of competence. - which points to a need, say MEPs, to ensure that citizens are provided with adequate information on these spheres of competence. They also asked that visibility of the "Citizens Portal" on the European Parliament's web site be improved.
The most active petitioners were German, British, Spanish, Greek, French, Italian and Polish citizens. The majority of petitions illustrate difficulties involved in applying Community law in areas such as the environment, social security, the recognition of qualifications and the functioning of the internal market. MEPs regret the "widespread failure" by Member States to correctly implement environmental norms and called for "improved consistency in the monitoring" notably of respect for Community law on the protection of biodiversity and on the assessment of the impact of certain public and private projects and plans on the environment.
Equitable Life
The significant number of petitions received from United Kingdom, Germany and Ireland on major financial losses incurred following alleged mismanagement at Equitable Life resulted in the European Parliament setting up a temporary committee of inquiry to investigate "alleged contraventions or maladministration in the implementation of Community law" (Article 193 of the EC Treaty).
Take Member States to court more systematically
The report reiterates the House's growing concern about the unjustified and excessive time taken by the Commission - often several years - to conclude infringement proceedings. MEPs also criticise frequent failures by Member States to comply with Court of Justice decisions. They consider that this situation "undermines the credibility of the formulation and coherent application of EC law and that it serves to discredit the objectives of the EU".
MEPs therefore call on the Commission to avail itself of the possibility of taking Member States to court to have them ordered to pay fines and damages if they delay implementing the Court's rulings in infringement proceedings.
Involve the Council and the Member States more extensively
MEPs underline the need to involve the Council more extensively in the activities of the Petitions Committee, inter alia by sending representatives to its meetings. They also reiterate their proposal that the Council appoint a senior official responsible for petitions, given that many complaints are to do with the Member States' transposition of Community legislation into national law.
In this connection, the report refers to the "key role" of the Member States in correctly implementing Community legislation and underlines that the practical application thereof "is decisive for the purposes of increasing the relevance of the European Union for its citizens". Greater participation by representatives of the Member States and their parliaments in the debates of the Committee on Petitions is needed, say MEPs.
Close co-operation with Commission and Ombudsman
MEPs believe that cooperation between the Petitions Committee and the European Commission "remains critical" for dealing effectively with petitions, especially in relation to Community decisions or activities with a direct impact on the citizen.
Welcoming the constant dialogue between the Committee on Petitions and the European Ombudsman, MEPs point out that they had supported the special report on the transparency of Council meetings, welcomed the successful resolution regarding the way the Commission handles complaints alleging an infringement, and supported the Ombudsman's request for an increase in his budget.
20071109IPR12789 Report on the deliberations of the Committee on Petitions during the year 2006 Text, as adopted by the EP on 14 November, will shortly be available here
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5496042
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
