Citizens' forum in Galway a success
Future of Europe/European integration
2007-11-19 - 18:14
Members of the public taking part in citizens' forum in Galway
People from as far afield as Loughrea, Ballinasloe, and Mayo travelled to the Ardilaun Hotel in Galway on 16 November to participate in a European Night with Seán Ó Neachtain MEP as the key speaker. The event was part of a series being organised by the European Parliament Office in Ireland to provide an opportunity for Irish people to find out more about the work of MEPs or to ask an MEP to raise a particular issue during an EP session. Similar events are being organised throughout the EU.
Former Irish Minister for European Affairs, Noel Treacy TD, gave an introduction at the event reminding those attending of the 'new sense of confidence' and 'new purpose' which Ireland developed as a result of EU membership. He also stated that the objective of the new Treaty was to 'make the institutions more responsive to the citizens'.
During his address, Seán Ó Neachtain MEP spoke about the changes brought about on the European continent as a result of the cooperation between Member States - the transitions 'from war to peace', 'from poverty to prosperity' and 'from dictatorship to democracy'. He spoke also about the impact of EU membership on Ireland and then went on to give an outline of the issues he is involved with in the European Parliament. He described the work he does on the Fisheries and Transport Committees in the EP and the impact an MEP can have on the formulation of EU law. Seán concluded by giving his views on the new EU Treaty.
The questions which followed from those attending covered a wide range of issues - divergent standards in relation to health and safety throughout the EU ( Christy Kelly ), questions about corporation tax ( Seán Mac Éabhair and Ger Leahy ), questions about the issue of Brazilian beef ( Jack Conway ), questions about a potential role for the EU in the fight against drugs ( Councillor Seán Reilly ) and questions about the EU's Common Foreign and Security Policy ( Michael O'Reilly ).
Seán Mac Éabhair pointed to the role of information as 'the lifeblood of democracy'. He also pointed to the responsibility of the media in this regard. Josephine Tighe asked whether the economic success in the EU had come 'at the expense of Christian values'. Declan Ganley expressed his concern about 'giving a say to people [in the EU] whom we cannot hold accountable.' There were many questions and comments about the new EU Treaty and some of the politicians in the audience also contributed to the debate, alluding to 'the importance of holding a debate about the Treaty' ( Councillor Michael Connolly ) and the situation at Council meetings where the reality is 'the search for consensus rather than the use of QMV voting procedures' ( Minister Éamon Ó Cuív TD ). The last question of the evening was asked by Christy Kelly - 'where does Europe end?
Seán Ó Neachtain MEP answered all of the questions asked and many of the participants commended Seán and the EP Office for organising such an event, pointing for example to the vital feedback now coming through on what MEPs are doing in Europe.
20071119STO13384 European Parliament Office in Ireland Profile of Seán Ó NEACHTAIN MEP
EN
1
PHOTO
20071119PHT13294.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.europarl.ie/
EN
3
LINK
/members/public/geoSearch/view.do?country=IE&partNumber=1&zone=North+West&language=EN&id=22861
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
