Opening of the November plenary session in Strasbourg - Pöttering condolences after shooting in Finland / anti-personnel mines
Institutions
2007-11-12 - 18:11
At the opening of this week's Strasbourg plenary session, EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering spoke of the shooting at a school in Tuusula, Finland, which left several people dead. He sent his heartfelt condolences to the people of Finland and the families of the deceased.
Mr Pöttering then made a statement to mark the 10th anniversary of the signing of the Ottawa Convention banning the use and transport of anti-personnel mines. While welcoming the progress made, he called for a final effort to secure full ratification of the convention by all countries in the world.
The President announced that a special plenary session would be held in Brussels on 18 December starting at 3pm, to enable the Portuguese Council presidency to report to Parliament on the achievements of its term of office and the outcome of December's EU summit.
One change was made to this week's agenda. The Council and Commission will make statements on Wednesday on the situation in Georgia. This item will be debated with the Obiols/Tannock report on the European neighbourhood policy and Parliament will vote on a resolution on the subject at its Brussels plenary session on 28-29 November.
Selected highlights of the Strasbourg plenary session 12-15 November 2007:
Address to the House by Mr Nicolas Sarkozy, President of the French Republic
Key debate - The European interest: succeeding in the age of globalisation
Greenhouse gas emission allowance trading scheme
Framework for the protection of soil
Situation in Pakistan
Commission work programme for 2008
Regulations governing political parties at European level and the rules regarding their funding
Role of sport in education
Monday 12 November 2007
The November plenary session opens with a debate on the role of sport in education with a report which says physical education should be compulsory in school and children should have at least three physical education lessons a week.
The House then turn its attention to the protection of soil with MEPs debating and voting on legislation on a legal framework and a thematic strategy. Among the key points proposed by MEPs in the committee is the proposal to set up public inventories of contaminated sites within the EU. Amendments are proposed aiming to give more flexibility to Member States in how they put the directive into practice. As for the thematic strategy, floods, landslides, desertification and climate change are among the reasons why a strategy for soil protection is needed in Europe, according to an own-initiative report.
The European Parliament will address a legislative report on the scheme for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading. The Environment Committee wants significantly tougher CO2 emission limits, and a stipulation that the emissions trading scheme should include flights between the EU and third countries, as well as intra-EU ones, by 2010, rather than 2012 as the Commission had proposed.
Tuesday 13 November 2007
Tuesday starts with a debate on the Commission legislative programme and work programme for 2008. The Commission's priorities for 2008 are: "growth and jobs, sustainable Europe, an integrated approach to migration, putting the citizens first and Europe as a world partner. " The House will vote on a resolution on this during the December plenary session (10-13 December)
At midday on Tuesday, French President Nicolas Sarkozy will address the House in a formal sitting.
The House will debate the regulations governing political parties at the European level and the rules regarding their funding. A European Commission proposal to allow European political parties to finance campaign activities for the 2009 elections is backed by the EP Constitutional Affairs Committee. If approved, the new legislation would improve the financial stability of European parties, and thus facilitate long-term planning. It would also permit the creation of European political foundations. The vote takes place on Wednesday.
Tuesday evening sees MEPs debate the "proclamation of consensus on humanitarian aid". The EP Development Committee is proposing an own-initiative report outlining the EP's position on the "European Consensus on Humanitarian Aid", aimed at rationalising the efforts and the distribution of aid between the European Commission and the Member States. The European Consensus on Humanitarian Aid is likely to be signed by the three institutions in plenary on 18 December in Brussels.
The EP also debates the complaint by Boeing against Airbus before the WTO after hearing a statement from the European Commission.
Wednesday 14 November 2007
The key debate of the plenary session is on: The European interest: succeeding in the age of globalisation. This is the name of the discussion paper presented to Heads of State and Government at the Lisbon summit of 18 and 19 October. Commission President José Manuel Barroso will set out the views of the European Commission. MEPs will also vote on a resolution on this topic.
The House will vote on a resolution on the recent EU-Russia summit held in Mafra Portugal on 26 October 2007.
At 3pm on Wednesday, the House will debate the dramatic situation in Pakistan with statements from both the Council and the Commission. MEPs will also vote on a resolution on this topic on Thursday. MEPs and NGOs have criticised the imposition of a state of emergency in Pakistan last Saturday by President Pervez Musharraf.
Wednesday afternoon sees MEPs questioning the Commission and Council on preparations for the Bali conference on climate change.
Parliament then turns its attention to strengthening the European neighbourhood policy. The Foreign Affairs Committee is putting forward a report assessing the European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP). The committee notes that although some common threads such as visa facilitation and the encouragement of civil society and people-to-people contacts existed, the Eastern, potentially candidate countries and the Southern Mediterranean Neighbourhood countries, needed to be dealt with in quite different ways.
Late on Wednesday, the House debates cross-border collective copyright management with an oral question to the Commission.
Thursday 15 November 2007
MEPs vote on a report on the interoperability of digital interactive television services. The report underlines the importance of the switchover from analogue to digital technology and MEPs are concerned about delays in the 2012-deadline set by the Commission.
Liz Lynne (ALDE, UK) will present her report on social reality stocktaking 2007. The Employment and Social Affairs Committee calls on the Commission and Member States to pursue "an ambitious objective of reducing poverty, especially among working people, in Europe".
The session ends with three debates and votes on human rights issues in the world, on this occasion, the topics are: Christian communities in the Middle East, Uzbekistan and Somalia.
20071109IPR12794 Briefing - 12-15 November 2007 Final draft agenda - 12-15 November 2007 Watch the plenary sitting Audio, 31:21
EN
2
LINK
/activities/public/plenSession.do?language=EN
EN
3
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/faces/vod/research-by-date.jsp?language=en
EN
4
MULTIMEDIA
20071109MLT12814.asf
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071105BRI12655 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
