Bangladesh: MEP sees EU humanitarian aid reach cyclone victims
Humanitarian aid
2007-11-22 - 10:11
Rebuilding after Cyclone Sidr
When cyclone Sidr crashed into Bangladesh it took the lives of over 3,500 people and left two million people destitute. With winds of 220 km/h and tidal surges of up to 5 metres it swept away 450,000 homes. Bangladesh is one of the poorest countries in the world and aid has been pouring into the country after the disaster. UK MEP Robert Evans, chair of the EP delegation for Southern Asia, has been in Bangladesh as part of a long planned visit. We spoke to him by phone about what he has observed.
Mr. Evans, what have you seen so far in terms of destruction and aid delivery?
We have been visiting the Southern part of Bangladesh which has been hardest hit. We have seen wholesale destruction, lots of homes that have been completely destroyed, in some villages up to 80 percent of them. The wind and the tidal wave, a small Tsunami if you like, swept away these houses mostly made of corrugated iron. Despite the official warning many people have been taken by surprise.
On the other side we have also seen the military and many charities actually getting aid to the people. It seems to be filtering through although of course more would be required.
Also a huge number of people have lost their live stocks and livelihoods. From the helicopter we’ve seen whole fields of rice that have been flattened. Which means that they lose two harvests: the current one and the next one because they don’t have seeds.
So the problems will not be for a few weeks but for months on the food front. Also, as it gets colder they will need more clothing and fresh water of course. So there are ongoing issues for Bangladesh for the next months, perhaps years.
In December the Presidents of the three EU institutions will jointly sign the "European Consensus on Humanitarian Aid". What do you make of the EU's disaster aid in this case and more generally?
I think the EU is one of the fastest and in some ways most sensible actors, in the way we provide our aid in circumstance as cyclone hit Bangladesh.
What is a continual problem from my experience – whether we look at Bangladesh now or Pakistan after the earthquake or in the Tsunami area – is the logistics on the ground for actually distributing the aid. The management in disaster areas often seems not to function properly. The Bangladeshi army are working very well, but I think some logistical aid perhaps from EU countries with experience could help.
Southern Asia is affected by natural disasters regularly like few other world regions. Based on your experience after the 2004 Tsunami and now, do you think the EU could make a greater contribution so that countries like Bangladesh are better prepared for and to some extent can mitigate natural disasters?
Yes, I think the EU could do more. We could not have prevented the cyclone but Bangladesh also gets flooded regularly because much of the land is low lying. In the EU, particularly in the Netherlands, we have great experience in protecting land and buildings from flooding. I am not sure we are doing enough in offering expertise and skill to the people of Bangladesh. There is a real opportunity to assist them to stop the flooding from affecting them the way it has done and then lessening the need of the international community to continually be coming to their support. For many people in Bangladesh, this cyclone is the third time they have been hit in the space of 12 months!
NGO's distribute EU aid
A day after the cyclone (the Asian equivalent of a hurricane) hit Southern Bangladesh, the EU’s Humanitarian Aid office (ECHO) made available € 1.5 million funding for emergency relief efforts and another € 5 million this week. The emergency aid financed by the EU is carried out by non-governmental organisations such as Action Aid, Oxfam and Islamic Relief.
Bangladesh is one of the world's most densely populated countries, and almost half of the population live on less than one dollar a day. Since October last year the country is being run by a caretaker government and elections have been put on hold, but are now planned for sometime next year.
MEP Robert Evans, together with MEP Jaromír Kohlíček ( GUE/NGL) and Ms Mariela Velichkova Baeva (ALDE), was in the country on a long time scheduled visit to examine the political situation in relation to the elections.
"European consensus on humanitarian aid"
During its last plenary session the European Parliament adopted the report drafted by Thierry Cornillet (ALDE) on a "European consensus on humanitarian aid" which outlines principles, values and coordination mechanisms of the EU’s and the Member States emergency relief.
The Council endorsed a document setting out this “Consensus” on Monday (19 November) and the EP plenary is expected to do likewise during next week’s session. The Consensus document will then be signed by the Portuguese President for the Council, Parliament President Pöttering and Commission President Barroso on 18 December in Brussels.
20071122STO13449 Post Tsunami reconstruction - triumph or tragedy? Resolution (14 November 2007): The European Union and humanitarian aid EU consensus on humanitarian aid EP Southern Asia Delegation EU Humanitarian Aid Office (ECHO):
EN
1
PHOTO
20071122PHT13451.jpg
EN
4
LINK
http://register.consilium.europa.eu/pdf/en/07/st14/st14503.en07.pdf
EN
5
LINK
/activities/expert/delegations/presentation.do?delegation=2469&rewritten&language=EN
EN
6
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/echo/
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070601STO07342 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0508 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
