Labour market should reflect a good balance of flexibility and employment security
Employment policy
2007-11-29 - 12:27
The European Council should adopt a balanced approach towards flexicurity which should include key principles like adaptable and reliable contracts, investment in lifelong learning, and a core of rights regardless of workers' employment status, says an own-initiative report adopted by the European Parliament.
The report was adopted by 496 votes in favour, 92 against with 49 abstentions. The report stresses that the set of common principles of flexicurity which the European Council is to adopt during its next meeting on 13 and 14 December should include the following principles:
promoting stable employment relationships and sustainable labour market practices,
action for adaptable and reliable contractual arrangements and action against abusive labour practices especially in certain non-standard contracts,
promoting employment security and improving job security: all workers should have a core of rights regardless of their employment status,
reconciliation of employment and family or private life, and the promotion of the concept of "decent work",
partnership between government, social partners and civil society in managing change,
gender equality and promoting equal opportunities for all,
design and implementation of national pathways in close consultation with social partners, in accordance with national customs and practices,
enhancement of companies and workers' adaptability by strengthening transition security by better mobilising active labour market policies,
the need for a skilled and adaptable labour force, therefore combining active labour market policies with investment in lifelong learning to enhance employability,
a macro-economic framework for balanced and sustainable growth and more and better jobs
After the adoption by the European Council the common principles should become part of the "Integrated Guidelines for Growth and Jobs" and should thus be incorporated into Member States' national reform programmes.
No progress on key employment dossiers in Council
MEPs regret that "the Council has failed to progress key employment dossiers which could help promote flexicurity as a positive concept". Rapporteur Ole Christensen (PSE, DK) stated that "Directives such as Working Time, Temporary Agency, Posting of Workers and the European Works Council [...] need to guarantee and raise the protection of employees across the EU in order to enhance their trust and to balance the risks associated with the pressures of enhanced competition, restructuring and labour market flexibility".
More training and retraining programmes and integration of older workers into the labour market
MEPs believe that one of the EU's biggest problems concern "the supply of a skilled and adaptable workforce in competitive and innovative companies". Therefore, apprenticeship opportunities, training and retraining programmes should be extended, they say.
Member States and social partners should change their policies of putting workers into early retirement, says the report. The Parliament advocates a "flexible retirement of older workers" e.g. through part-time employment, job-sharing and similar schemes that promote active ageing.
Social benefits for women during transitional periods
Women are over-represented in non-standard employment i.e. fixed-term or part-time contracts, states the report. As they frequently have to switch between work and care activities, women need proper protection and social benefits during transitional periods, say MEPs.
20071128IPR14002 Common principles on flexicurity Text, as adopted by the EP on 29 November, will shortly be available here
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5531922
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
