World Bank President Robert Zoellick says development agenda must include the fight against climate change
Development and cooperation
2007-11-20 - 09:17
"Fighting climate change can't be the frosting on the cake of development, it needs to be baked into the recipe," said World Bank President Robert Zoellick in the European Parliament on Monday. In a joint meeting of the international trade, development and foreign affairs committees, MEPs also quizzed Mr Zoellick on India and China, the impact of demographics on social security and the promise of renewable energy sources.
Foreign Affairs Committee Chairman Jacek Saryusz-Wolski (EPP-ED, PL) welcomed Mr Zoellick, telling him that "the European Parliament is very curious about the current priorities and projects of the World Bank," after its change of leadership this past July. Mr Zoellick noted that while globalisation offers many opportunities, it also poses dangers, especially to the weakest and least protected elements of societies. He said the "challenges are not just ones of money, but of creating markets and institutions," adding that "countries need help taking advantage of markets, not just gaining access to them." He explained that one of the roles of the World Bank was to serve as a "knowledge and learning institution," and that its value lay in its expertise that it can transmit to countries who are in need of it.
Emerging economies
The World Bank President said that in large emerging economies such as Brazil and India, his institution had been increasingly dealing with sub-national actors, such as state governments, allowing it to tackle regional disparities more directly. He also noted that many developing countries face big infrastructure deficiencies, an area in which private investment was indispensable, as public funds and international aid would not be enough to provide the means for full financing.
Libor Roucek (PES, CZ) wondered how the Bank could influence China to take on more responsibility in the field of international development, especially concerning human rights in Africa. Mr Zoellick replied that even though insufficient, some progress has been achieved, citing the fact that China had at least shown willingness to name a special representative for Darfur, whereas before it had simply pursued its oil interests in the area.
Annemie Neyts-Uyttebroeck (ALDE, BE) asked about the role the World Bank has been playing in thinking about social security challenges worldwide. Mr Zoellick replied that the social security challenges of different countries varied widely according to demographic trends, and that the Bank is offering advice on these issues. He pointed especially to China, a country, he said, that will "grow old before it grows rich."
Climate change and development
Elisa Ferreira (PES, PT) asked about the upcoming international conference on climate change in Bali, asking "what kind of recipe can we find to reconcile economic growth with an engagement to fight climate change?" Mr Zoellick replied that one very promising idea was to develop a carbon or emission trading scheme, "something developing countries could gain tremendously from."
Monica Frassoni (Greens/EFA, IT) asked why the World Bank did not place a greater emphasis on renewable energies, as opposed to traditional forms of energy. Mr Zoellick replied that he had "vastly ramped up" these types of projects. Nevertheless, he urged caution, saying that "if you go to developing countries and say that they should develop with renewables, they will not support global efforts against climate change." These countries' needs could not be met by renewable energy sources alone, he said, and more transitional solutions were needed.
2007-11-19 Committee on Foreign Affairs In the chair Jacek SARYUSZ-WOLSKI EPP-ED PL Committee on International Trade In the chair Helmuth MARKOV GUE/NGL DE
20071119IPR13326
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
