EP calls on Georgia to respect democratic principles and freedom of expression
External relations
2007-11-29 - 12:27
The European Parliament held a debate during the Strasbourg plenary on 14 November, debating the situation in Georgia along with the EU's Neighbourhood Policy. The resolution following this debate was voted in Brussels, and calls on the Georgian authorities to "respect the principle of freedom of expression, including freedom of assembly and freedom of the media," and to investigate violations of human rights and the freedom of the media during the past few weeks.
After a week-long series of opposition protests in Tbilisi, which were dispersed using tear-gas, rubber bullets and water cannons, Georgian President Mikhail Saakishvili imposed a state of emergency on the country on 7 November. He blamed Russian agents for inciting the protests, and expelled some Russian embassy officials. A few days later, President Saakishvili announced early presidential elections for 5 January, 2008, which was one of the key demands of the opposition. He has also lifted the state of emergency on 16 November.
Political developments
The House welcomed the announcement of early elections, and " calls upon the Georgian authorities to ensure free and fair elections," with "impartial access to the media during the election campaign." MEPs also call on "all parties to show openness and restraint, tone down statements and engage in a constructive and fruitful dialogue aimed at supporting and consolidating Georgia's fragile democratic institutions." Finally, the Parliament encourages all Georgian political forces to start a debate that could lead to a more open public discussion about the pressing issue of the country, such as: 'the Russian factor' in Georgian politics, the fate of frozen conflicts, and the social implications of economic reforms.
Russia
The resolution also considers that "the EU must adopt a more resolute stance on crucial issues in the region and become more deeply involved, despite Russia’s current negative attitude towards the EU’s role in their common neighbourhood," and underlines that "in the end, it is up to the Russian authorities to understand that it is not so much geopolitical rivalry with the EU that diminishes Russian influence in its neighbourhood, but Russia’s own approach to some of its neighbours."
20071128IPR14043 Situation in Georgia Text, as adopted by the EP on 29 November, will shortly be available here Briefing article 22.11.07 with added links
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/motion.do?language=EN
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071108BRI12759 ITEM-016-EN NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
