Zapatero to MEPs: "Be ambitious, experience tells us that when we are, things tend to go well"
Future of Europe/European integration
2007-11-28 - 19:47
MEPs debated the future of Europe, with Spanish Prime Minister José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero. PM Zapatero staunchly supported both the work of the European Parliament and a strong Union. "Too often have we heard that Europe is in crisis", said Mr Zapatero, but he stressed "I do not share this pessimistic outlook". The new treaty should enable Europe to become "a beacon of progress and welfare. "Let us be ambitious" he told MEPs. "Experience tells us that when we are, things tend to go well".
In welcoming Prime Minister Zapatero, European Parliament President Hans-Gert Pöttering said: "These debates are extremely important for the European Parliament." He announced the end of these types of meetings with the agreements reached in Lisbon, after the next debate with the Swedish Prime Minister. The EP President also recalled that Spain was the first country to approve the Constitutional Treaty by referendum, with 77 per cent voting in favour. President Pöttering stated: "It gives me even more pleasure to welcome the head of government of Spain just a few days before the signing of the Treaty of Lisbon. Since accession in 1986, Spain has always given a lot to Europe and Spain is ready to commit to Europe's future."
Spanish Prime Minister José Luis RODRÍGUEZ ZAPATERO told the European Parliament meeting in Brussels in its plenary session that "in Spain, the notion of Europe is associated with our longing for peace, freedom, democracy and prosperity" and that "we owe a lot to Europe, and the people of Spain consider this project, in the first place, with a sense of deep gratitude".
Now, however, the challenge is to create the "Europe of values" the world needs in the 21st century. "Freedom, the rule of law, human rights, tolerance, equality between men and women, solidarity – this is the moral code of Europe." "We Europeans enjoy the most rights and are best protected. But we are not an island, and cannot live at ease knowing that these rights are absent or are trampled upon in other parts of the world. We must obey an ethical imperative to strive to disseminate them".
No need for pessimism
"Too often have we heard that Europe is in crisis", said Mr Zapatero, but he stressed "I do not share this pessimistic outlook". The new treaty should enable Europe to become "a beacon of progress and welfare", partly by opening up and modernizing its economies. "Let us be ambitious" he told MEPs. "Experience tells us that when we are, things tend to go well".
Mr Zapatero also stressed that "our economic model is inconceivable if fairness is absent", Stable, decent employment was required, as well as continued solidarity among Member States through cohesion policy.
Immigration seen as a boon but root causes must be tackled too
Mr Zapatero pointed to the creation of a Common Space of Freedom, Security and Justice, the development of the Schengen space and the system of external borders as important future EU policies that Spain would support. Then, turning to the subject of immigration, he said "Let us begin by unequivocally acknowledging immigration’s positive potential, which ranges from the demographic contribution to the dynamism of cultural diversity, including the boost to the potential growth of our economies, which has been very clear in the case of Spain". At the same time, he said, "let us address the causes that spur emigration" and "neutralize the mafias that profit from the urgent desire of these men and women to leave their lives of misery and frustration".
Isolation not an option for Europe
On external affairs, he said "With the new Treaty, we will have effective instruments for our common external policy". He added "We are the largest donor of development assistance and humanitarian aid. But we must be more ambitious. We are so obliged by our concept of dignity, by our humanist roots, by our sense of justice. But also by our interest. Only shared development and equality can ensure security in an ever more agitated world."
In particular, he emphasised that "The new Europe cannot be understood in isolation from its Eastern and Southern neighbours" and stressed "the importance of intensifying our relations with Latin America". A common defence policy was also needed to enable Europe to help preserve international peace and security under the United Nations mandate.
Spain's economic and social progress
Turning to developments in recent years in Spain, he told the House "We have gone through, and are still undergoing, a period of intense economic growth, becoming ever more open, introducing reforms in line with the Lisbon Strategy". He added "Our social model has become richer and stronger".
In his view, "Spaniards today have more rights". "The right with greatest social impact, that of equality between men and women, is extensively developed and guaranteed by Law. A right with great significance, that of marriage between people of the same gender, provides these men and women with equality with others and dignifies us all as a society".
Winding up his speech, the prime minister said "I am fully convinced that Europe will continue to exceed our expectations. We can count on the extraordinary capacity of all its institutions. And, most particularly, we trust in this Parliament. At the most difficult times, the European Parliament has always been able to repel pessimism, and to be a tough and tireless champion of European integration". His final words were "Let us keep our eyes raised towards the future and work together so that we may soon achieve the Europe we need. The Europe the world needs".
Political group speakers
For the EPP-ED group, Jaime MAYOR OREJA (ES) argued that words were not enough and that deeds were needed, for example to transpose EU directives and comply with the Kyoto protocol. He also stressed the need to strengthen the moral values of the Union, which in his view meant "being honest with our citizens about the difficulties we face".
His group believed in the need not just to reinforce the EU but also to strengthen Europe's different nations, and in this connection pointed out that freedom was one of the EU's basic values. He closed his speech by emphasising the importance of "consistency" rather than mere words.
Martin SCHULZ (DE), for the Socialist group, highlighted Spain's progress on democracy, the economy and social issues.
He saw Spain as a country that had set an example in emerging from dictatorship and, by "blossoming economically", had shown how the value of the EU's structural funds. It had also demonstrated that ceding sovereignty - e.g. over its currency - could bring benefits.
Lastly, he pointed to the "progressive policies on equal opportunities and gender issues" pursued by Mr Zapatero's government, saying they were "good for Spain and good for Europe".
Graham WATSON (ALDE, UK) said: "When Member States ratify the reform Treaty as we hope and believe they will, we can look forward at long last to a revitalised European Union, a Union with the capacity to confront new challenges, with the humility to listen to its citizens and the political will to act ratification of the Treaty cannot come a moment too soon and my Group thanks you Mr Zapatero for your efforts to speed up the process. My Group sees no need for a group of wise people to ponder Europe's future. We have been there, done that, we even have the T-shirts to prove it. It was called ‘the period of reflection’ and it has come to an end.
Now is not the time to go back to a French drawing board nor to follow a new British plan for a glorified free trade zone. those visions are just views from the margins packaged as majority opinion. They are not where consensus lies. Liberals and democrats will work together with all those who share it and live up to it whether on the right, the left or in the centre, to ensure Europe moves forward. What we will not tolerate are those who profess such a vision but fail to live up to it.
Prime Minister, Spain is often and rightly praised for its social and economic transformation since joining our Union. We need others to follow your example and your ambition for a prosperous and open Europe."
Brian CROWLEY (UEN, IE) said "Too often the views and opinions of the European Parliament are kept to the sidelines as regards what kind of discussion debate takes place at intergovernmental level. Indeed, I was delighted some time ago that when the whole issue of reflection with regard to the Treaty that has now gone and that will no longer be around again, that the Prime Minister decided to regroup the friends of the Community method and call it the ‘friends of the Constitution method’ and to bring those together to try and form a vanguard as regards how things can move forward. He saw that the success of that move opened up other doors and opportunities for him in government when he needed support with regard to immigration and other developments.
If I could make an appeal as regards the future of Europe to the Prime Minister today. I would ask that he would continue to use his influence not just in the European Union but particularly in Latin America where the issues with regard to freedom, democracy and respect for human rights are becoming ever more apparent under the guise of democratic movements.
Finally, some of us see a vision of Europe that brings bright stars, great opportunities and, most importantly of all, respect for the fundamental differences and dignities that exist within the European Union. We should come at a time when no longer do we try to homogenise everything into one single shape or size but understand that by giving dignity to that difference we can actually create a better, more colourful and certainly a more vibrant European Union for the future."
Monica FRASSONI (Greens/EFA, IT) praised Mr Zapatero for his "European-minded position and courage of organising a referendum" on the European Constitutional Treaty. "We also appreciated what you said on integration, even though it was not always followed up by action." She stated that she had missed Mr Zapatero during the constitutional crisis, which was in the end "concluded without much glory or passion." The agenda, she said, was dictated by enemies of the constitution, the friends of the constitution, like you, were far too discreet." On climate change, Ms Frassoni said that Spain was "far away from the Kyoto objectives." She hoped that with the election commitment the Prime Minister had made on climate change, Spain will move forward decisively."
Francis WURTZ (GUE/NGL, FR) thanked the Spanish Prime Minster for a "wonderful speech. In many ways, he said, it was a humanist speech, as well as something which is idealistic for the future. Mr Wurtz said that a social Europe "basically is still to be built - the current framework of European social policy is an open market economy where you have competition." This would foster competition of social models, tending to lead to a downward spiral in salaries and social rights. "This is one of the main problems" he concluded.
Graham BOOTH (IND/DEM, UK) said: "Prime Minister, It is a pleasure to see you here in Brussels. You are an exemplar to other European heads of government as a man who allowed your own people to decide whether they wished to have the Constitution. For that you must be applauded. In the event the people of Spain voted overwhelmingly to support the plans.
What I would like to know is why you have no intention of repeating the exercise? After all you should be confident that you will get a similar result. Is it because, as you have said the Reform Treaty has "not let a single substantial point of the Constitutional treaty go"?
This of course is key to all our futures. Either the political elite don't care what people want, as in the case of Mr Sarkozy and Mr Brown, or they feel that the people are too stupid to make any decision more important than what burger to buy at McDonalds. It seems to me that the European Union is rapidly becoming the world's first post democratic state I can tell you this Prime Minister, if the European elite do not allow the people to speak, then in the end they will find other ways to make their voice heard".
Frank VANHECKE (NI, BE) said that the big challenge facing the EU is the lack of democratic decision-making. The EU Institutions, he said, increasingly ignore the people and decisions are taken behind people's backs and there is no proper scrutiny. He said that everyone is aware that the Reform Treaty is a scarcely altered version of the Constitution. "Despite the No in two countries, eurocrats will have their way, they will be smug, but there won't be democracy. Europe is descending into an elite run superstate devoid of democracy", he concluded.
British speakers
Andrew DUFF (ALDE, UK) thanked the Prime Minister for his refreshing speech about political union. Noting that, in a fortnight, the Prime Minister will be in the December European Council discussing with President Sarkozy the proposal to establish a ‘comité de sages’. he asked the Prime Minister to please tell President Sarkozy that "we ought not to upset the prospects for the ratification of the Treaty by reopening the quarrels about procedures and the balance of power; and also say to him that it is not sensible to try to set the geographical frontiers of Europe. The enlargement process is firmly set and established. Europe will find its final shape when European countries as yet outside the Union stop wanting to join us."
Roger HELMER (NI, UK) stated that the Lisbon Treaty, or rather the renamed Constitution, is the Constitution that was decisively rejected by French and Dutch voters in 2005 and which we are now seeking to force through without the consent of the people.
Across the 27 Member States, he said, opinion polls show that a majority of citizens want a referendum on the Treaty. In the UK, he said, 80% want a referendum and two-thirds would vote ‘no’, "yet our government denies us the vote it solemnly pledged in its election manifesto."
While the Prime Minister, he said, spoke of a Europe of democracy but Europe tramples on public opinion. "The contempt we show for public opinion makes a mockery of our claim to be a union of values. Over and over again my constituents tell me they voted in 1975 for a free trade area, not a political union. It is time to dismantle the supranational political structures of the EU and return to the simple trading group which the British people were promised in 1972."
Spanish Prime Minister responds to the debate
Responding to the debate, José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero reaffirmed the need for a common policy on immigration, the only solution which would avoid "the temptation to criticise the policies of other Member States". The Prime Minister also underlined that his government " was the on only one to be successful in reducing increases in greenhouse gas emissions", and concluded "I felt European when I came into this House of Europeans, and in leaving, I feel even more European".
20071128IPR14001 Briefing article 22.11.2007 including links to previous debates with Prime Ministers. Audio, 29:23 Audio, 30:54
EN
2
MULTIMEDIA
20071128MLT14090.asf
EN
3
MULTIMEDIA
20071128MLT14096.asf
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071108BRI12759 ITEM-001-EN NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
