MEPs favour ending design protection for car parts
Industry
2007-11-20 - 14:45
The Legal Affairs Committee on Tuesday backed a Commission proposal to end design protection for spare car parts and other machinery components. Members of the committee proposed a five year transitional period before full liberalisation of the market takes effect.
In approving the first-reading report by Klaus-Heiner Lehne (EPP-ED, DE) - which it did unanimously - the committee agreed to open up to competition the secondary market in spare parts intended to restore the original appearance of complex products, e.g. cars and industrial machinery. If adopted, the directive will allow suppliers to produce motor vehicle components which are identical to the original parts without infringing design protection.
Most EU Member States currently have a design protection regime for spare parts. Under the draft directive, design protection would remain for spare parts purchased for decorative reasons, i.e. to change the original appearance.
Five year transition period agreed
Members in the committee amended the Commission's proposal, to grant Member States a five year transition period before implementing full liberalisation. This provision followed an agreement between all political groups to guarantee a smooth transition to the new regime.
Consumers to be informed
The Legal Affairs Committee also approved an amendment requiring consumers to be informed about the origin of the components by means of trade names or other appropriate forms. This would allow the public to make an informed choice between the available products.
Differences in national legislations
According to the Commission, Austria, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia and Sweden still have design protection for spare parts.
In Belgium, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Spain and the United Kingdom, spare parts for repair or replacement are allowed in the after-sales market. Greece protects designs for 5 years.
2007-11-19 Committee on Legal Affairs In the Chair: Cristian Dumitrescu PES RO
Procedure: codecision, 1st reading
Plenary vote: December, Strasbourg
20071119IPR13321
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
