MEPs to debate tightening gun laws
Justice and home affairs
2007-11-28 - 11:37
MEPs Wednesday debate proposals aimed at making it harder to acquire guns in the European Union. Control on internet sales, targeting converted guns and giving greater weight to the European Firearms Pass are among the proposals. The report, drafted by German Green MEP Gisela Kallenbach follows Commission proposals to update rules agreed in 1991. It would bring EU rules into line with a UN protocol on weapons and takes into account the size of the EU.
Earlier this month an 18 year old killed 8 people and himself at the Jokela High School in Finland. In Erfurt in Eastern Germany 17 people were slain in a school shooting five years ago. These incidents are part of a sad litany of tragedy reminding Europeans that gun control really matters. In a world of internet sales and open borders, national laws cannot sufficiently address what many authorities see as a growing and sometimes critical problem.
There are more guns in Europe than might you think. According to the "Small Arms Survey" (a Geneva based NGO), average firearms per 100 people is 46 in Finland, 36 in Cyprus, 32 in Sweden. These are often used for hunting. In contrast it's 9 in Estonia and Ireland, 3 in the Netherlands and 1 in Poland. In the United States the figure is 90 guns per 100 people.
Report targets smuggling and "converted" guns
The proposals in the report include making it harder to acquire guns by controlling sales over the internet. It also targets arms trafficking: criminal gangs who make and smuggle arms would be covered by the new directive with a stricter definition of what the practice is. Ammunition and gun parts would also be included.
The increasing prevalence of "converted guns" has been identified by police forces across Europe as a growing problem. They are either replica guns converted into "real" guns by criminals or decommissioned guns being put back into service. For the first time these guns will be classified as "firearms" and brought within the directive's remit.
Member States will no longer be allowed to make acceptance of the European firearms pass conditional upon the payment of any fee or charge. EU members will also remain free to introduce stricter rules in their national legislation implementing the directive.
ID that gun!
The report calls for each gun to have a proper ID that will record the make, model, calibre, serial number and the names and addresses of those who supply and own such weapons. The report makes the case that more widespread use of "alphanumeric" symbols would improve traceability. It proposes the information be held for the natural working life of a gun - 20 years, up from the 10 years proposed by the Commission.
The focus is on a "European Firearms Pass", which would become the recognised document needed when transporting firearms across borders. Ms Kallenbach told us that "one document for all EU citizens is better than 27 documents".
There is also a call for either a central or national databases with the rapporteur laying out her position; "we want either a central database or member states to have a decentralised one which guarantees access of the authorised authorities to the data filing systems".
Italian MEP Guido Podestà acted as shadow rapporteur on the report. Speaking ahead of the debate he welcomed the fact that subsidiary would be upheld and that each country could choose their own system. He also stressed the importance of having one document as "this would be particularly useful for those who possess legal weapons - like people who play sports".
Legal users will be protected
Ms Kallenbach was keen to avoid being seen to target legitimate gun users. Speaking to us ahead of the debate she said, "personally I am not a gun fan but I try to understand people who love guns and think it is a right to have them".
Her colleagues on Parliament's Internal Market Committee are also not keen not to alienate those who possess and use guns legally for their work (i.e. farmers) or sportsmen and women. So the rules on the acquisition and possession of weapons by individual collectors or officially recognised bodies concerned with the historical and cultural aspects of firearms remain unchanged.
What next?
Following the vote in Committee, the Chair of the Internal Market Committee, Arlene McCarthy said "following the recent tragic school massacre in Finland, the attempted school shooting in Germany and the spread of deadly converted weapons in cities in the UK, MEPs have the opportunity to join the Commission and Council in backing this law to tackle the illegal trade and smuggling of weapons".
The text being debated Wednesday is a first reading compromise with the Council of Ministers. If approved it will come into force in January 2008 and should be transposed into national legislation by 2010. Watch the debate live online from 1830 CET this evening.
20071126STO13628 Press release on Kallenbach report: 22 November 07 Wednesday's Plenary Agenda Watch live from the Plenary
EN
1
PHOTO
20071128PHT14006.jpg
EN
4
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/faces/live/live-video.jsp?language=en
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071108BRI12759 ITEM-004-EN NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT AGENDA 20071128 SIT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
