European Aviation Safety Agency will be able to impose fines
Transport
2007-12-12 - 14:09
The European Parliament adopted a second reading report on common rules in the field of civil aviation and establishing a European Aviation Safety Agency. There is now an agreement between the European Parliament and the Council. The European Aviation Safety Agency is the centrepiece of the European Union’s strategy for aviation safety.
Its mission is to promote the highest common standards of safety and environmental protection in civil aviation.
The amendments adopted at second-reading which are agreed with the Council introduce fines and periodic penalty payments. The report says at the agency's request the Commission may impose fines as an alternative for the outright withdrawal of a certificate. The report states:
(a) impose on the persons and the undertakings to which the Agency has issued a certificate, fines, where, intentionally or negligently, the provisions of this Regulation and its implementing rules have been breached;
(b) impose, on the persons and undertakings to which the Agency has issued a certificate, periodic penalty payments, calculated from the date set in the decision, in order to compel those persons and undertakings to comply with the provisions of this Regulation and its implementing rules.
The proposal seeks to address a long-standing anomaly in the EU: while aircraft now enjoy complete freedom within a unified market, safety standards continue to vary between the Member States. This, in spite of rapid growth in air traffic and the phenomenal success of low-cost airlines which now account for 12% of intra-Community traffic. Currently, responsibility for regulating air traffic standards in Europe falls on a number of bodies including the European Civil Aviation Conference (ECAC) and the Joint Aviation Authority. In addition, there is the International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO). A further organisation, Eurocontrol, brings together 35 European States. It is responsible for developing, co-ordinating and planning pan-European air navigation strategies. These organisations, however, are inter-governmental in nature and the rules decided are only applied if the States concerned wish to apply them. They do not have any binding regulatory powers. The differences in standards can be considerable. Sometimes the highest standards are not applied.
20071211IPR14761 Civil aviation: common rules and creation of the European Aviation Safety Agency EASA (amend. Regulation (EC) No 1592/2002) Text, as adopted by the EP on 12 December, will shortly be available here
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5292632
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
