Cross-compliance of CAP aid: a more flexible, efficient system
Agriculture
2007-12-11 - 14:42
Parliament adopted a consultation report on farm support which states that the system by which EU farm aid payments are tied to certain conditions should be made simpler and more flexible so that farmers can support it more easily. The European Parliament backs the European Commission's proposals but calls for greater tolerance for minor infractions, the abolition of needless constraints and advance warning of certain inspections.
Since the last major overhaul of the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) in 2003, the granting of EU agricultural aid has been tied to compliance with criteria found in around 20 different regulations. These include environmental protection, maintaining land in good agricultural condition, animal welfare and livestock identification. Farmers are recompensed for services rendered to society if they put the accent on rural development and quality rather than productivity.
This system has proved very complicated to manage for small-scale farmers and local authorities. The Commission therefore proposed a package of measures in August to make the current regime more flexible, including abolition of the “10 month rule” (the minimum period that a piece of land must be held by the farmer), the introduction of a degree of tolerance in minor cases where Community rules are not complied with, and a gradual introduction period of three years for the system in the new Member States which apply the single area payment scheme.
Minor breaches to be tolerated
Most of the infractions of the legislation concern minor cases which could easily be corrected on site. Nearly seven out of ten such infractions concern livestock labelling and registration (e.g. animals which lose an ear-tag). The Commission proposes that the Member States could decide in such cases not to apply a reduction in aid for sums less than or equal to €50 per farmer per calendar year. MEPs believe this threshold should be set at €100 in order to reduce bureaucracy sufficiently. They also envisage provisions to avoid farmers being penalised more than once (reduction of European aid and national fines) for the same infraction.
Needless constraints on farmers to be avoided
The European Parliament welcomes the plans to scrap the 10-month rule but believes the Commission's alternative solution - that pieces of land should be available to farmers on 15 June each year if they wish to be entitled to the single payments - would result in red tape. Instead the House suggests that farmers should have to prove that they held the land on the deadline set by the Member State concerned. MEPs also want farmers to be given prior notification of inspections, except where this could enable them to manipulate the results.
The European Parliament wants the Commission to carry out a progress report every two years and to bring forward proposals to resolve the “bottlenecks” in controls and to review the nitrates directive. And lastly, it wants the transition period for application of cross-compliance rules by new Member States to be extended: to 2013 for countries that joined the EU in 2004 and to 2016 for those that joined in 2007.
Irish and British speakers in the debate preceding the vote
Mairead McGUINNESS (EPP-ED, IE) felt that the level of farm inspections is excessive and very unwelcome on farms that are active and busy. She agreed with the need to radically alter the way cross-compliance checks are carried out on farms and also the need to streamline – as Mr Mulder said – the many different types of inspections, whether they are Member State or private industry, or EU-required.
Ms McGuinness stated that about 68% of cases of non-compliance are considered to be minor, but yet they lead to sanctions, and she felt that flexibility is needed around this. She said that a sanction of less than 250 euros should not be imposed and she hoped that the Commission could be persuaded by Parliament's arguments. The majority of cases, she said, are over some minor issue with no risk to human or animal health. Farmers, she said, should be given advance notice which will allow them time to plan for an inspection.
Jeffrey TITFORD (IND/DEM, UK) said that the rapporteur'ss explanatory statement is instructive in that it depicts cross-compliance as a condition for continued public support and tells us that farmers are now being paid for, and he quoted, ‘complying with Community legislations in the field of environment, public and plant health and animal welfare’. It, he said, further states that such regulations are very strict compared with standards in the rest of the world.
This neatly encapsulates everything that is wrong with the EU’s attitude to agriculture, an aggressive regulatory regime diverting farmers away from their natural ambit of producing food and turning them into guardians of the environment, or what this report calls rural development policy, all of which adds mightily to their costs and reduces output. It has also had the effect of putting farmers into direct competition for funding with establishments such as country parks and wildlife preserves which would not naturally be their competitors.
While, he said, the intention of this proposal is to simplify cross-compliance because it is openly admitted that it has created a heavy, bureaucratic burden for farmers and for Member States to enforce, Mr Titford felt that it was a bad idea in the first place and simplifying it is to merely administer a band aid rather than a cure. This report, he said, enthusiastically trumpets the view that cross-compliance is an important instrument in justifying public support for farmers. Mr Titford doubted that even one percent of the public would have heard of cross-compliance, never mind understand what it means. For real simplification, he said, let us do away with cross-compliance altogether and let farmers get on with what they do best, grow crops and rear animals.
Jim ALLISTER (NI, UK). said that cross-compliance often treats farmers unfairly, with disproportionate penalties for minor offences and no-notice inspections. We have heard that 68% of all cases of non-compliance are classified as minor, yet the sanctions imposed are too often, for the struggling farmer, almost crippling. Disparity in how cross-compliance is administered from country to country compounds the resentments which it has built up in some.
In his constituency of Northern Ireland, Mr Allister spoke of a particular problem with duplicate fields, arising from the conacre system. Instead of a pragmatic search for a solution, he said, we have had heavy-handed rigidity. Much of the blame lies with the local Department of Agriculture, but it, and Brussels, could each have done more to resolve that problem. Mr Allister said he would like to see simplification and flexibility, and a good dose of good old-fashioned common sense to replace the inflexibility of some over-zealous mandarins.
Cross compliance and how it is implemented at Member State level is crucial, stated James NICHOLSON (EPP-ED, UK). We must, he said, not allow each other and each and every Member State to make their own interpretation. There appears, he said, after listening to various speakers, to be a difference of interpretation in different Member States. We have, he said, got to get it right at Member State level and we have got to insist that each Member State implement this directive in the right and proper way in each and every Member State.
Concluding, Mr Allister stated that cross-compliance must not become a system that allows farmers to be penalised and policed. We should be there to help farmers and to offer advice on how they can do things better. Cross-compliance could be a force for good and those who do the inspection should have clear and proper training and know their responsibilities.
S eán Ó NEACHTAIN (UEN, IE) ( spoke in Irish - English summary hereunder )
Mr. O'Neachtain stated that the European Union has given a promise to farmers concerning the support which would be available under the CAP from 2007-2013. This is the reason he could not agree with the Commission in their attempt to renege on that promise under the 'Health Check' which was advertised recently. The Commission, he said, are trying to cut direct payments by 13% which would be available to farmers. He believed that this is a breach of promise and that we should not agree with it. Farmers have made arrangements about the output they would have during those years and this should not be revised.
With regard to standards - and I will say this much - if standards are to be implemented, the same standards should be in place on the food we product as well as on the food we bring import into the European Union - and not carrying out inspections without sense or reason on farmers throughout Europe.
Concluding, he stated that we should look at the quality of the food we are allowing into Europe and that is the area where the Commission should act and not obstruct farmers who are doing their best throughout Europe and certainly in my country in Ireland, he concluded.
20071210IPR14716 Common agricultural policy CAP: common rules for direct support schemes and certain support schemes for farmers (amend. Regulation (EC) No 1782/2003) and support for rural development by the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development (EAFRD) (amend. Regulation (EC) No 1698/2005). Text, as adopted by the EP on 11 December, will shortly be available here
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5522032
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
