Opening the December plenary session: Pöttering condemns ETA terrorism / welcomes 35 new Romanian MEPs
Institutions
2007-12-10 - 18:17
Opening the final Strasbourg plenary of the year, President Pöttering made two statements: first, on condemning the murder of Spanish policemen by ETA terrorists and second, welcoming the new 35 Romanian MEPs who were elected on 25 November. President Pöttering also announced that the Agriculture Committee would re-examine the large number of amendments proposed to the report on wine reform (pursuant to Rule 156, see below) which is to be debated in plenary on Tuesday 11 December.
Pöttering condemns ETA terrorist murders
Speaking in Strasbourg at the opening of the EP plenary session, President Pöttering said: "On 1st December, two members of the Spanish security forcers were shot by terrorist organisation ETA in Capbreton, France. A young civil guard of 24 years old, Raúl Centeno, was murdered and another one, Fernando Trapero, aged 23 was seriously injured and died last Wednesday.
I wish to express my deep sadness and profound sympathy to the families and friends of the victims. I want also to express my solidarity with the Spanish people, their authorities and democratic institutions and in particular with their security forces.
The European Parliament unequivocally condemns the use of violence as a means to achieve any aim. Terrorism is an attack on freedom and democracy and it can only be defeated by using all means available under the rule of law and strong democratic institutions. There can be no justification for terrorism, and in fight it, we can allow ourselves no weakness. That's why the terrorist threat will never be able to bring democracy to its knees ."
Pöttering welcomes first ever directly elected 35 new Romanian MEPs
President Pöttering also congratulated the 35 Romanians directly elected to the EP on 25 November 2007. "It is a great joy to us all to welcome the 35 MEPs from Romania which are the first directly elected members of the EP from this country. This was an important day for Romania. Romania's integration into the European family is now fully recovered - and thereby a continent is reunited after the fall of communism and return of freedom and democracy. The 35 Romanians will be the voice of their people." Mr Pöttering wished the new colleagues every success in the remaining year and a half of their mandate.
"I also would like to thank the Members of the Romanian Parliament who since 2006 had been acting as observers and since January as members, for their hard work and commitment. Thirteen of the first original delegation members have been re-elected and I hope that they will now be able to help their colleagues to quickly integrate into the EP for the common good for their constituents."
Wine reform report - reduced number of amendments?
The report by Mr Castologine will be re-examined in the Agriculture Committee on Monday 10 December in order to try and reduce the number of amendments proposed to the plenary. The report will be debated on Tuesday morning.
Rule 156 . When over fifty amendments have been tabled to a report for consideration in Parliament, the President may, after consulting its chairman, request the committee responsible to meet to consider the amendments. Any amendment not receiving favourable votes at this stage from at least one-tenth of the members of the committee shall not be put to the vote in Parliament.
Selected highlights of the Strasbourg plenary session 10-13 December 2007 include :
Pöttering, Sócrates and Barroso to proclaim Charter of Fundamental Rights
King Abdullah II of Jordan to address the House in a formal sitting
Darfur human rights lawyer to receive Sakharov Prize for freedom of thought
EU budget for 2008 - Galileo and European Institute of Technology
Wine reform - MEPs to set out their position
Legislative deals on cleaner air for Europe and the marine environment
Trains to run from Brussels to Bratislava
Ending design protection for spare car parts and other machinery components
Resolutions on the fight against terrorism, the rise of extremism in Europe, Economic Partnership Agreements and the 2008 Commission work programme
Monday 10 December 2007
MEPs face a packed agenda for the last plenary of the year. The 35 new Romanian MEPs will formally take their seats on Monday 10 December after the European elections of 25 November.
The session opens with two second-agreements on environmental legislation. On marine environmental policy, Member States have to take the necessary measures to achieve or maintain good environmental status in the marine environment by the year 2020, if the plenary confirms the agreement on the Marine Strategy Framework directive, reached between delegations of the EP and the Council. Marine strategies will have to be developed in order to protect and preserve the marine environment, prevent its deterioration, restore marine ecosystems and prevent and reduce inputs in the marine environment.
On ambient air quality and cleaner air for Europe, the text provides for maximum concentration levels for the atmospheric microparticles or dust most hazardous to human health, the PM2.5, which were not regulated until now. Under the second-reading deal reached in late November with the Portuguese presidency, the amount of PM2.5 and other gases in ambient air which are the suspected cause of the growth in respiratory illnesses such as asthma, bronchitis and emphysema, would be reduced.
Monday evening sees the Parliament debating on population and housing censuses. The Employment and Social Affairs Committee is backing a proposal to establish a census for collecting data on population and housing in the EU. MEPs in the committee deleted from the Commission's proposal a range of categories Member States were advised to collect including a critical one on "the beginning of consensual unions of women". The House will also vote on this topic at a later session.
There will also be Commission statements and debates on: toy safety, safety of hotels and the risk of fires, and on European contract law.
Tuesday 11 December 2007
MEPs will first vote on an urgent procedure on ovine and caprine animals: electronic identification.
Tuesday morning's main debate is on the reform of the wine sector. The aim of the reform is to bring the EU wine sector more into line with market trends such as shifting consumption patterns, enabling European wines to become more competitive on internal and world markets. The committee voted against the automatic liberalisation of planting rights in 2014 and the transfer of funding to rural development. It is also in favour of a grubbing up campaign limited to three years (instead of five); the retention of sugaring as well as aid for grape must; increased sales promotion and stricter rules for wine names and labelling. The vote takes place on Wednesday.
At midday, Sudanese human rights lawyer Salih Mahmoud Osman will receive this year's Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought.
MEPs vote on a report by Christopher Heaton-Harris (EPP-ED, UK, East Midlands Conservative) on a paperless environment for customs and trade. The purpose of the proposed legislation is to create an instrument for the implementation of interoperable and accessible automated customs systems, both under the current and the future modernised Customs Code, and for coordinated processes and services.
The afternoon is dedicated to debating the second-reading of the EU budget for 2008. At a budgetary conciliation meeting with the Council on 23 November, Parliament won a number of victories, notably on the Galileo project, the European Institute of Technology and EU missions to Kosovo and Palestine, while also safeguarding programmes belonging to the Lisbon strategy. The vote takes place on Thursday.
On Tuesday evening, MEPs debate a second-reading report on the European aviation safety agency which is the centrepiece of the European Union’s strategy for aviation safety. The proposal seeks to address a long-standing anomaly in the EU: while aircraft now enjoy complete freedom within a unified market, safety standards continue to vary between the Member States.
MEPs will also vote on a report on the interoperability of the EU's railways. Freight trains should soon run from Antwerp to Bratislava or Lisbon to Liverpool without stopping at borders or changing locomotives or train crews. So say three co-decision reports, debated by the House at its Brussels session on 28 November, on measures to revitalise the railways by removing obstacles to the free circulation of trains throughout the European network.
The last debate on Tuesday evening is on amendment of the legal protection of design. The Legal Affairs Committee is backing a Commission proposal to end design protection for spare car parts and other machinery components. Members of the committee propose a five year transitional period before full liberalisation of the market takes effect.
Wednesday 12 December 2007
Wednesday starts with the key debate on the forthcoming European Council just one day before the new EU Reform Treaty is due to be signed in Lisbon on 13 December. The meeting of the European Council on 14 December will be preceded by an exposé by Mr Hans-Gert Pöttering, President of the European Parliament, followed by an exchange of views.
The votes start at 11am with MEPs voting on a resolution on the Commission's legislative and work programme.
The European Parliament will also vote on a resolution on the Economic Partnership Agreements with ACP countries following the debate held at the last Brussels plenary session.
At 11.30am, Hans-Gert Pöttering, European Parliament President, José Manuel Barroso, Commission President, and José Sócrates, Portuguese Prime Minister and President-in-office of the EU Council, will sign the Charter of Fundamental Rights in a formal ceremony at the European Parliament in Strasbourg.
At midday on Wednesday, His Majesty King Abdullah II of Jordan will address the House in a formal sitting.
MEPs will vote on a resolution on the fight against terrorism. The draft resolution says that governments and EU institutions have often responded to terrorist attacks by adopting laws that have not been sufficiently discussed and some times in violation of basic human rights such as right to privacy or to a fair trial.
At 3pm, the House will debate "the rise of extremism in Europe" after hearing statements from the Commission and the Council. The House will also vote on a resolution on this subject on Thursday.
On Wednesday afternoon, the European Parliament will also debate "1 December - International Day on the fight against AIDS"
Thursday 13 December 2007
MEPs debate and vote on a resolution on the textiles sector after questions to the Commission. The WTO Agreement on Textiles and Clothing came to an end in 2005, at which point the last restrictions on textile trade inherited from the Multifiber Agreement lapsed. To manage the transition to free trade in textiles, the European Commission and China concluded a ‘Memorandum of Understanding’ in 2005. That Memorandum will expire on 1 January 2008.
The House also debates and votes on a report from David Martin (PES, UK, Labour, Scotland) on economic and trade relations with South Korea calling for the conclusion of a Free Trade Agreement (FTA) with South Korea that covers trade in goods and services, makes scientific and technical cooperation and intellectual property an essential element of bilateral agreements. This FTA, with the EU’s fourth largest trading partner outside Europe in 2006, is also expected to tackle energy policy and climate change.
The session ends with three debates and votes on human rights issues - Eastern Chad, Women's rights in Saudi Arabia and Justice for the "comfort women".
20071210IPR14625 Briefing - 10-13 December 2007 Final draft agenda 10-13 December 2007 Audio, 25:52
EN
2
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?language=EN&reference=2007-12
EN
3
MULTIMEDIA
20071207MLT14544.asf
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071129BRI14111 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
