Winners of climate change photo competition announced and new climate change website launched in Ireland
Environment
Ireland
2007-12-04 - 19:01
Winners with MEPs Liam Aylward, Avril Doyle and Bairbre De Brún
The winners and runners-up in this year's photo competition on climate change, organised by the European Parliament Office in Ireland, were announced on Monday, 3 December at a special ceremony in Dublin. Together with their teachers and some of their class mates, the prizewinners will each travel to the European Parliament in Strasbourg in January 2008 to participate in the Parliament's Euroscola programme.
The announcements were made by Liam Aylward MEP, Vice-Chairman of the European Parliament's special committee on climate change, Avril Doyle MEP (a full member of the Committee) and Bairbre De Brún MEP (a substitute member on the Committee).
16-18 year old students throughout Ireland (32 counties) were asked to submit photographs with accompanying captions, based on the following theme: 'Climate Change - causes, effects, solutions' and the winning entries were selected by an independent panel. The competition was organised by the EP Office in Ireland, with the support of the UK Office. It was co-sponsored by the Irish Department of the Environment, Heritage and Local Government and the Department of the Environment of Northern Ireland. The winning students, PJ Moloney from Dublin and Sharmin Rahman from Derry and the runners-up, Helen Quinn and Peter Donoghue from Galway and Steven King from Laois were present at the ceremony, together with their teachers and their classmates.
Speaking at the event, Liam Aylward MEP , Vice Chairman of the Committee praised the EP Office's initiative as "an opportunity to highlight climate change." He went on to highlight the importance of educational programmes in this regard. Avril Doyle MEP , also a member of the Committee, congratulated the students on the "very high standard of work" which they had submitted. Speaking directly to the students, Mrs Doyle said that "your involvement in this competition will have heightened your interest and awareness" of climate change. Mrs Doyle concluded by stating that climate change is "the most important topic that we face today." Bairbre De Brún MEP added that "this innovative schools competition can greatly assist the battle against climate change ..[..].. and I pay tribute not just to the winners but to all who took part."
The European Parliament's new website on climate change -(see link below)- was also launched during the event. A selection of entries to the competition, together with a latest news section and contributions from the MEPs on climate change all form part of the new website.
20071130IPR14183 New Climate Change website launched by the European Parliament Office in Ireland European Parliament Office in Ireland
EN
1
PHOTO
20071204PHT14271.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.europarl.ie/climatechange/
EN
3
LINK
http://www.europarl.ie/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
