European Parliament and Pan-African Parliament should have closer involvement with EU-Africa Strategy
Development and cooperation
2007-12-07 - 16:38
On the eve of this weekend's EU Africa summit, the European Parliament and the Pan-African Parliament called for the parliamentary dimension of the future EU-Africa strategy to be strengthened. The two Parliaments adopted a joint declaration at their meeting in Lisbon on Friday, at which EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering led a delegation of 25 MEPs.
The joint EU-Africa strategy should give more involvement to the European Parliament and the Pan-African Parliament, according to the declaration. It stresses the role parliaments play in scrutinising the executive, whether they are national parliaments, regional ones or those operating at a continental level like the EP and PAP.
The declaration also highlights the budgetary powers of parliaments over development aid payments, both on the side of the donors and on the side of the recipient states.
Budget aid to African parliaments
During the meeting, the two Parliaments called for the first action plan – of the EU-Africa strategy which should be adopted this weekend – to include specific financial resources to support the Pan-African Parliament, but also regional and national parliaments in Africa.
President Pöttering announced that he would urge Heads of State or Government to take up this approach. He promised to reiterate his call for the Parliaments to be "fully integrated in the institutional framework of the strategy and the action plan. Parliament has committed itself to give all the support it can to the Pan-African Parliament and to many other African parliaments."
EU-Africa summit
EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering and the President of the Pan-African Parliament, Gertrude Mongella, will each address Heads of State or Government at 9.30am on Saturday 8 December during the inaugural session of the second EU-Africa summit.
Hans-Gert Pöttering said: "Meetings of Heads of State or Government should be subject to parliamentary scrutiny. My participation, together with that of Mrs Mongella, at the summit of Heads of State is a first step, but what is needed is institutional involvement in these meetings." The third EU-Africa summit is scheduled for 2010.
The European Parliament has closely followed the development of the EU-Africa strategy, with two reports on the subject drawn up by Maria Martens (EPP-ED, NL). In November 2005, Parliament criticised the Council's unilateral action in adopting its Africa strategy without consulting African partners.
A delegation of 25 MEPs, for the most part members of the Committee on Development, met an equal number of representatives of the Pan-African Parliament in Lisbon on 7 December 2007.
20071203IPR14221
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
