MEPs concerned about textile sector and call for better access conditions
Industry
2007-12-13 - 15:10
In adopting a joint resolution on the future of the textile sector after 2007, MEPs express their concern with high tariff and non tariff barriers in many third countries. The House stresses that the Commission, in its bilateral, regional and multilateral agreements with third countries, should secure better market access conditions in such countries, as this is vital for the future of the Europe-based textile and clothing industry, especially for SMEs.
The House asks the Commission to take the opportunity of the negotiation of trade agreements to promote and strengthen environmental and social standards, such as decent work, in third countries, in order to guarantee fair competition.
Parliament maintains that the double-checking surveillance system will serve no purpose unless it prevents any repetition of the situation that occurred in 2005, when imports into the EU grew at an accelerating rate. The House stresses that new safeguard measures need to be enforced, covering, among other things, categories of products to be specified by Member States, so as to enable employment in, and the business of, this sector to be safeguarded and promoted in the EU.
MEPs call on the Commission and the Member States to actively promote the modernising of the EU-based textile industry by supporting technological innovation, research and development through the 7th Framework Programme, as well as vocational training, particularly for SMEs; in this respect, MEPs call on the Commission to conduct a proper and global investigation into this serious issue.
EU textile industry and workers
Parliament call on the Commission to guarantee that the Globalisation Adjustment Fund will be used in a substantial way for the restructuring and retraining of the textile sector and, in particular, SMEs largely affected by the liberalisation of the market.
The House calls on the Commission and the Member States to assist the textile and clothing sectors' workers with social measures and plans in companies facing restructuring.
Unfair trade and counterfeiting
MEPs call on the Commission to encourage the Chinese authorities to align their currency exchange rates and to review their euro/dollar foreign exchange balance, which are now facilitating a massive flow of Chinese textile and clothing imports.
Import surveillance
MEPs stress that a double checking system cannot be implemented solely in 2008 and that an effective surveillance system should be guaranteed for a longer period of time.
Parliament calls on the Commission and the US to engage in consultations on the issue of textile imports from China.
The House calls on the Commission to set up a monitoring system and to evaluate the results before the first quarter 2008 in order to ensure that the disruptive effects of a surge in textile imports are duly and promptly taken into account, and asks the Commission to report to Parliament.
Security and consumer protection
MEPs urge the Commission to use its powers to ban unsafe products from the EU market also in the case of the textile and clothing sector.
The House calls on the Commission to guarantee that imported textile products, particularly from China, entering the EU market are subjected to security and consumer protection requirements identical to those for textile products manufactured inside the EU.
MEPs ask the Commission to conduct a proper evaluation and study on the question of the alleged pass-through of price reductions to EU consumers.
Developing countries and EU Mediterranean partners
Finally, the House calls on the Commission to support the establishment of a Euro-Mediterranean production area in the textile sector, taking advantage of the geographical proximity of the Mediterranean and European markets in order to create an internationally competitive area which can ensure that industrial output and employment can be maintained.
20071211IPR14814 Joint motion for a resolution on the future of the textile sector after 2007 Text, as adopted by the EP on 13 December, will shortly be available here
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//TEXT MOTION P6-RC-2007-0495 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
