European Parliament calls for a far reaching revision of the COM in fisheries products
Fisheries
2007-12-12 - 14:09
"It is necessary, as a matter of urgency, to carry out a far-reaching revision of the common organisation of the market in fisheries products in order to boost its contribution to guaranteeing incomes in the sector, ensuring market stability, improving the marketing of fisheries products and increasing the value added generated", says European Parliament in a report adopted with 379 votes in favour, 30 against and 227 abstentions.
MEPs call on the Commission to submit, as soon as possible, a proposal for the revision of the common organisation of the market (COM) in fisheries products.
They emphasise that the contribution of the COM to the sector has fallen, especially since the 2000 revision. The reversal of this trend, notably by a significant reinforcement of financial resources, must be "one of the main objectives of a future revision of the COM in fisheries products", thus enabling it to guarantee Community funding at an adequate level for the fisheries sector's needs.
Average prices at the initial point of sale have stagnated or fallen since 2000, but this has not been reflected in a meaningful fashion in a reduction in prices for the end-consumers of fresh fish. Those prices have, rather, been constantly rising, notes the rapporteur, Pedro GUERREIRO (GUE/NGL, PT).
The existing system of initial sales of fish in lots, as practised in most Member States, tends especially to penalise the producers, "who may end up with one-tenth of the gains of the end distributors", states the report.
Production and marketing
The House calls on the Commission to determine whether the existing intervention mechanisms are the most suitable ones and whether they are sufficiently "flexible" to meet the needs of the existing structures of production/marketing in the Member States, with the aim of improving the marketing of fish and ensuring a fair income for producers.
The operational programmes should ensure - with suitable financial support - the possibility of the producers' organisations marketing their products directly, as a means of enhancing the value of their production, MEPs say.
The rapporteur supports the initiative of introducing a code of conduct for fisheries products in the EU, which would cover all participants in the sector, with the aim of defining "voluntary rules in order to ensure a fairer sharing of value added and marketing rules along the value chain."
Tuna and sardines
According to MEPs, the compensatory payment for tuna should be extended. They also call on the Commission to introduce a compensatory payment for sardines.
Labelling and ecological certification
The European Parilament stresses the importance of labelling and of accurate consumer information, with a view to boosting the quality and value added of fisheries products: "commercial designations, notably for imported products, need to be examined and checked with all care to ensure that consumers are not misled".
The Commission should accelerate the process of ecological certification of fishery products, since "this is vital if competition between economic agents within and outside the EU is to take place on a sound and equitable footing", adds the report.
Imports
MEPs highlight the "current dependence on imports for consumer needs", at a time when the Community's production is in free fall while world production continues to rise, and the existence of a "food deficit" as far as fish proteins are concerned
MEPs call on the Commission "to take a firmer line" in its evaluation of external trade relations, especially when activating the WTO safeguard mechanisms, adding that "it is vital to ensure the application to imported fisheries products sold on the internal market of the same rules and requirements as those applied to Community fisheries products", e.g. in terms of labelling, phytosanitary rules or the prohibition of fisheries products under the minimum sizes authorised for Community products.
The COM in fisheries products was the first element of the Common Fisheries Policy (CFP) to be created, in 1970, and has since become one of its four pillars, together with structural policy, the preservation of fishery resources and relations with third countries.
20071211IPR14797 Common organisation of the markets in fishery and aquaculture products Text, ad adopted by the EP on 12 December, will shortly be available here
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5484592
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
