What's on the 10-13 December Plenary session
Institutions
2007-12-08 - 12:56
2007 Sakharov Prize winner Salih Mahmoud Osman
The last Plenary session of 2007 promises to be a busy one. Some of the key elements will be the proclaiming of the Charter of Fundamental Rights and the Award of the Parliament's Sakharov prize to a Sudanese Human Rights lawyer. Jordan's King Abdullah will also address MEPs in Strasbourg. The House will also look at the EU's budget for next year (with implications for the Galileo space programme), reform of Europe's wine market and how to improve Europe's railways.
Resolutions on terrorism and the rise of extremism in Europe will also be debated as well as legislative deals on cleaner air for Europe and the marine environment. For a full run down of the Plenary day by day please see below.
Monday 10 December The 35 new Romanian MEPs will formally take their seats on Monday 10 December after the European elections of 25 November. The session opens with two second-agreements on environmental legislation. On marine environmental policy, Member States have to take the necessary measures to achieve or maintain good environmental status in the marine environment by the year 2020, if the plenary confirms the agreement on the Marine Strategy Framework directive, reached between delegations of the EP and the Council.
On ambient air quality and cleaner air for Europe, the text provides for maximum concentration levels for the atmospheric microparticles or dust most hazardous to human health, the PM2.5, which were not regulated until now. Under the second-reading deal reached in late November with the Portuguese presidency, the amount of PM2.5 and other gases in ambient air which are the suspected cause of the growth in respiratory illnesses such as asthma, bronchitis and emphysema, would be reduced. Monday evening sees the Parliament debating on population and housing censuses . The Employment and Social Affairs Committee is backing a proposal to establish a census for collecting data on population and housing in the EU.
There will also be Commission statements and debates on: toy safety, safety of hotels and the risk of fires, and on European contract law . Tuesday 11 December Tuesday morning's main debate is on the reform of the wine sector. The aim of the reform is to bring the EU wine sector more into line with market trends such as shifting consumption patterns, enabling European wines to become more competitive on internal and world markets. The vote takes place on Wednesday. At midday, Sudanese human rights lawyer Salih Mahmoud Osman will receive this year's Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought. The afternoon is dedicated to debating the second-reading of the EU budget for 2008. At a budgetary conciliation meeting with the Council on 23 November, Parliament won a number of victories, notably on the Galileo project, the European Institute of Technology and EU missions to Kosovo and Palestine, while also safeguarding programmes belonging to the Lisbon strategy. The vote takes place on Thursday. On Tuesday evening, MEPs debate a second-reading report on the European aviation safety agency which is the centrepiece of the European Union’s strategy for aviation safety. The proposal seeks to address a long-standing anomaly in the EU: while aircraft now enjoy complete freedom within a unified market, safety standards continue to vary between the Member States. MEPs will also vote on a report on the interoperability of the EU's railways . Freight trains should soon run from Antwerp to Bratislava or Lisbon to Liverpool without stopping at borders or changing locomotives or train crews. So say three co-decision reports, debated by the House at its Brussels session on 28 November, on measures to revitalise the railways by removing obstacles to the free circulation of trains throughout the European network. The last debate on Tuesday evening is on amendment of the legal protection of design. The Legal Affairs Committee is backing a Commission proposal to end design protection for spare car parts and other machinery components . Members of the committee propose a five year transitional period before full liberalisation of the market takes effect. Wednesday 12 December Wednesday starts with the key debate on the forthcoming European Council just one day before the new EU Reform Treaty is due to be signed in Lisbon on 13 December. The meeting of the European Council on 14 December will be preceded by an exposé by Mr Hans-Gert Pöttering, President of the European Parliament, followed by an exchange of views. The votes start at 11am with MEPs voting on a resolution on the Commission's legislative and work programme . The European Parliament will also vote on a resolution on the Economic Partnership Agreements with ACP countries following the debate held at the last Brussels plenary session. At 11.30am, Hans-Gert Pöttering, European Parliament President, José Manuel Barroso, Commission President, and José Sócrates, Portuguese Prime Minister and President-in-office of the EU Council, will sign the Charter of Fundamental Rights in a formal ceremony at the European Parliament in Strasbourg. At midday on Wednesday, His Majesty King Abdullah II of Jordan will address the House in a formal sitting . MEPs will vote on a resolution on the fight against terrorism. The draft resolution says that governments and EU institutions have often responded to terrorist attacks by adopting laws that have not been sufficiently discussed and some times in violation of basic human rights such as right to privacy or to a fair trial. At 3pm, the House will debate " the rise of extremism in Europe " after hearing statements from the Commission and the Council. The House will also vote on a resolution on this subject on Thursday. On Wednesday afternoon, the European Parliament will also debate "1 December - International Day on the fight against AIDS" Thursday 13 December MEPs debate and vote on a resolution on the textiles sector after questions to the Commission. The WTO Agreement on Textiles and Clothing came to an end in 2005, at which point the last restrictions on textile trade inherited from the Multifiber Agreement lapsed. To manage the transition to free trade in textiles, the European Commission and China concluded a ‘Memorandum of Understanding’ in 2005. That Memorandum will expire on 1 January 2008. The House also debates and votes on a report on economic and trade relations with South Korea calling for the conclusion of a Free Trade Agreement (FTA) with South Korea.
As usual, the session ends with three debates and votes on human rights issues around the world, on this occasion, the topics are: Eastern Chad, Women's rights in Saudi Arabia and Justice for the "comfort women". Extraordinary Brussels plenary 18 December 2007 - End of Portuguese Presidency An extraordinary plenary sitting will be held on Tuesday 18 December in Brussels at 15.00 so that Portuguese Prime Minister José Sócrates for the EU Council Presidency can report on the results of the European Council's meeting and present the conclusions of the Portuguese Presidency
20071130STO14198 Plenary highlights Agenda 10-13 December Wath live from Monday 1700 CET
EN
1
PHOTO
20071207PHT14591.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?language=EN&reference=2007-12
EN
4
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/faces/live/live-video.jsp?language=en
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071129BRI14111 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
