Thursday in Plenary: EU Budget, textiles, extremism, human rights
Institutions
2007-12-14 - 11:12
MEPs and the people say "NO" to racism
Thursday saw MEPs adopt the EU's budget for 2008 including EU funding for the Galileo satellite navigation system and the European Institute of Technology (EIT). MEPs also discussed the impact of Chinese textile imports on European companies and called for measures to ensure EU companies enjoy fair competition. The House also debated extremism and racism attacks in Europe. A resolution on the state of EU-China relations was also adopted.
Call for fair competition for textiles
With a deal between Europe and China on textile imports due to expire on 1 January, MEPs debated the future of Europe's textile industry. The deal, agreed in 2005, protects certain types of European textiles and clothing from Chinese imports.
In the debate French MEP Tokia Saïfi (EPP-ED) noted that "protecting our industry does not mean to be protectionist". For the Socialists Kader Arif warned of the "brutal competition we might be facing with China soon" and said that it is important "to make the European industry more competitive". Italian Liberal Patrizia Toia underlined the "need for careful checks and controls" on what is being imported to Europe from China, and urged the authorities "to ensure that the products are authentic".
MEPs adopt jobs and growth budget for 2008
The European Parliament adopted on Thursday the 2008 EU budget. It amounts to €120.346.758.612, in payment appropriations, nearly 0.96% of the total GNI (gross national income) of the Member States. It secures the funding of key EU priorities including Galileo, the EIT and the EU's commitments in Kosovo. The budget will be signed on 18 December.
The Parliament and the Council of EU ministers together constitute the Union’s "budgetary authority", which decides each year on expenditure and revenue.
Combating the rise of extremism in Europe
MEPs adopted a resolution showing its concern of recent racist and hate attacks and killings in several European countries.
The main points are:
Condemnation of racist and hate attacks and solidarity with victims of such attacks and their families.
Fighting extremism while respecting fundamental rights and fundamental legal principles.
Withdrawal of public funding from political parties - or media businesses - that incite hatred of a group of people on the basis of their race, religion, handicap, sexual orientation or nationality.
Speeches coming from public personalities should be considered an aggravating circumstance.
Improvement of anti-racist laws and campaigns on information and raising awareness within media and education of young people.
Support NGOs and civil society organisations that promote democratic values, human dignity, social inclusion, intercultural dialogue and social awareness.
Finally, MEPs called for an improved EU-China human rights dialogue
Extraordinary Brussels plenary 18 December 2007
At an extraordinary plenary sitting, Tuesday 18 December at 1500 CET in Brussels, Portuguese Prime Minister José Sócrates, will report on the results of Friday's summit and present the conclusions of the Portuguese Presidency.
20071213STO15249 Press-Info textile imports Press-Info budget Focus budget Press-Info extremism:
EN
1
PHOTO
20071213PHT15260.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/news/expert/default_en.htm
EN
3
LINK
/news/expert/default_en.htm
EN
5
LINK
/news/expert/default_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061106FCS12347 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
