Round-up of December Plenary
Institutions
2007-12-18 - 08:01
Newly elected Romanian MEPs
The last Plenary session of the year saw Parliament proclaim the Charter of fundamental rights ahead of the signing of the new Reform Treaty by EU leaders. Although it did not meet with universal approval by MEPs - some protested and called for a referendum - a large majority of Members backed the Charter. The week also saw the Sakharov prize awarded to a Sudanese Human Rights lawyer. On Monday newly elected Romanian MEPs took up their seats. One of their tasks was to adopt the EU's 2008 budget.
Also debated in Strasbourg was the rise of extremism in Europe - the House passed a resolution condemning terrorism and those who incite hatred. Europe's textile industry, as well as reform of the wine producing industry was also debated. The week also saw the issues of the Middle East brought to the Plenary with Jordan's King Abdullah addressing MEPs. He called on Europe to help to final a "final settlement" in the Israeli/Palestinian dispute. For a full day by day round up see the following sections.
20071213FCS15515
Monday in plenary: Air, sea pollution tackled; new Romanian MEPs
Traffic that doesn't produce pollution On Monday MEPs debated planned legislation on air quality and marine pollution aimed at improving quality of life and environmental protection. A proposal to ensure that population and housing data is better collected in the future was also considered by MEPs. Parliament's President Hans-Gert Pöttering welcomed 35 newly elected Romanian MEPs who took their seats after the election in November.
Romanian MEPs welcomed, ETA terrorism condemned When opening the plenary session, Mr Pöttering condemned the recent murder in France of two Spanish civil guards by ETA. "Terrorism is an attack on freedom and democracy" he said. As the new Romanian MEPs took their seats, the President welcomed them as "they will be the voice of the Romanian people" until elections in June 2009. Romania held its first European elections on November 25 after joining the EU in January. "In 50 years there might be no more fish at all" New laws to protect and conserve Europe's marine life, as part of the move to integrate environmental considerations into all relevant policy areas, were debated by MEPs. EU countries would have until 2020 to take necessary measures to achieve or maintain a good marine environmental status. French Socialist Marie-Noëlle Lienemann, the parliament's rapporteur on the issue, stressed the importance of taking action to protect biodiversity in the seas and oceans. Otherwise "in 50 years there might be no more fish at all," she said. Ms Lienemann urged EU countries to work faster than the requirements laid down in the legislation so as "not to lose time because our seas can not wait." Air quality - new limits and binding targets Breathing difficulties and illnesses such as asthma, bronchitis and emphysema may be affected by the amount of "particulate matter" (PM) in the air we breathe. In an agreement reached by Ministers and MEPs, binding targets to reduce the amount of dust in the air have been agreed. Other subjects Monday evening saw the Parliament debate population and housing statistics . Ona Juknevičienė (ALDE), on behalf of the Employment Committee, stressed the need for more consistent and reliable information on housing in support of various Community activities such as the promotion of social inclusion and the protection of the environment. Also discussed were Commission statements on safety of toys, safety and the risk of fires at hotels and European contract law Marine Strategy Framework Directive EP Press Service - Agreement on Marine Strategy Framework directive Dust in the air - a threat to human health Press Service - Air quality Population and housing censuses, Ona Juknevičienė (ALDE) Plenary press releases
Tuesday in Plenary: Sakharov Prize, wine reform, Europe's railways
The EU is the world's leading wine producer The highlight of Tuesday's Plenary was the awarding of the 2007 Sakharov Prize for freedom of thought to Sudanese human rights lawyer Salih Mahmoud Osman. MEPs also debated reforming the EU's wine market to bring it into line with changing consumption and backed plans to make it easier for freight trains to move across borders.
"European Union has a great responsibility" Mr Salih was welcomed by EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering, who said he "is one of the few people who have actively defended women's rights and the right for a compensation for the victims in Darfur". In his speech, Mr Salih urged the EU to play a greater role in the region. He told MEPs that "The European Union has a great responsibility to promote peace internationally. The victims feel disappointed. They are waiting to hear from you; from the people of Europe". The Sakharov winner also called for greater justice in the region saying that "as a lawyer, and a native of Darfur, I know that there can never be a lasting peace in the region without justice". He told MEPs that he thought the International Criminal Court is the "the most competent international criminal tribunal". Wine reform: MEP calls for "change of mentality" Tuesday morning MEPs debated plans to overhaul the EU wine sector - the EU is the world’s leading producer, consumer, exporter and importer of wine. The aim of the reform is to bring the EU wine sector into line with market trends such as shifting consumption patterns, enabling European wines to become more competitive on internal and world markets. The Italian MEP Giuseppe Castiglione (EPP-ED) who acted as the rapporteur called for a "necessary and "radical" reform. He said investment in the wine sector was the only way to guarantee its future. He also called for a change in mentality and move from a mentality of "quantity" to one of "quality". Condemnation of Algiers bombs Mr Pöttering condemned bomb attacks in Algiers on Tuesday which killed scores of people and sent a message of sympathy to the people of Algeria. Railfreight rejuvenated / air quality supported MEPs approved legislation on the "interoperability of EU railways" which should make it easier for freight trains to pass from one country to another without stopping to change crews. MEPs are also demanding measures to revitalise European railways by removing obstacles to the free circulation of trains throughout the European network. The House also approved a report by Ioannis Varvitsiotis (EPP-ED) on the Diplomatic and Consular protection of Union citizens in third countries and laws to improve air quality. Interview with Mr Salih 2007 Sakharov Prize: in detail 5 June 2007: MEPs urge action in Darfur EP to vote on reform of the EU wine market: 6 December 2007
Wednesday Session: Charter, Treaty and extremism debated, King Abdullah
Jordan's King Abdullah called for "end to conflict" Wednesday saw the proclamation of Charter of Fundamental Rights in the Hemicycle. It comes just one day before EU leaders sign the Reform Treaty - which gives the Charter legal force. MEPs debated the treaty Wednesday ahead of the meeting of EU leaders on Friday. Climate change, Schengen, anti-terrorism and Kosovo were debated. Jordan's King Abdullah addressed the House and called for support for peace in the Middle East. MEPs adopted a resolution on terrorism and debated combating extremism.
Charter of Fundamental Rights proclaimed "core of European identity" The three Presidents of the Institutions (Hans-Gert Pöttering, José Sócrates, José Manuel Barroso) proclaimed and signed the Charter of Fundamental Rights on Wednesday. The Charter will gain full legal force under the Reform Treaty. EP President Pöttering called the proclamation "a fortunate day for the citizens of the EU". "We celebrate today our common values, the core of our European identity". He welcomed the fact it will become legally binding when the Reform Treaty comes into effect, with violations coming within the competence of the European Court of Justice. Amid a mix of applause and with some eurosceptic MEPs shouting "referendum", Portuguese PM José Sócrates took the floor and said he was honoured that his country was associated with such an event, which he said would reinforce subsidiarity and democracy. Commission President Barroso also praised the Charter and welcomed the fact that it will now be legally binding. The great majority of MEPs gave the signing ceremony a standing ovation - while small groups of eurosceptic MEPs held up signs saying "referendum" and chanted "referendum". MEPs debate preparations for EU Council/Reform Treaty On Thursday EU leaders will sign a new Reform Treaty in Lisbon and then go to Brussels a summit on Friday. Ahead of the meeting, MEPs debated job creation, the Schengen area, the fight against terrorism, the Bali climate change conference, Kosovo and the recent EU-Africa summit with representatives of the Portuguese Presidency of the Council and Commission President José Manuel Barroso. MEPs mostly welcomed the imminent signature of the Reform Treaty, and the inclusion of the Charter, seeing it as bringing increased democracy to the EU and underpinning the shared values of its members. However, some MEPs warned that while citizens are demanding more Europe, this does not mean more laws. For a full round up of the debate see the link below. Jordan's King Abdullah tells MEPs of "spark of hope" Jordan's King Abdullah was in Strasbourg with a delegation of leading Jordanian MPs to address MEPs. He told the House that the recent Annapolis peace conference has created "a new spark of hope" and that there was "growing hope" in the Middle East. He called on Europe to support the goal of peace negotiations. He defined this as "a final settlement, creating an end to conflict, security for both Palestine and Israel, a sovereign, independent and viable Palestinian state". In a bid to improve the situation on the ground, he stressed the importance of "tangible results" - using trade and aid to boost living conditions - particularly for Palestinians. The King, who addressed MEPs five years ago, reminded them that "Europe has a unique experience with post-conflict recovery and reconciliation". Mr Pöttering told the King that "in the search for peace, we are on your side". Extremism on rise, but EU committed to its values Following a statement from Commissioner Frattini, MEPs discussed the rise in extremism (terrorist actions, but also racism, xenophobia, islamophobia and other kinds of intolerance). Speakers stressed the fact that the EU is committed to combating intolerance (2007: European Year of Equal Opportunities for All, 2008: European Year of Intercultural Dialogue) and to respecting human rights like those enshrined in the Charter. Speakers also condemned manifestations of extremism - for example racism against Roma minorities. Earlier on Wednesday, MEPs agreed measures to fight against terrorism, including calls for the media to inform people about the dangers of "hate speech" and for the EU's Agency for Fundamental Rights to be given a "clear mandate" to investigate extremist groups. Key votes Car parts - MEPs backed plans to open Europe's market in spare car parts and other machinery, meaning companies other than motor manufacturers will be able to design and sell car parts, which could lead to lower prices for consumers. Wine reform - As the largest producer and exporter of wine, the EU industry is worth millions of euros a year and employs thousands of people. MEPs opposed the liberalisation of planting rights and want subsidies for "grubbing up" (taking vines out of commission) to be distributed over three years rather than the five proposed Results of votes Proclamation of Charter Charter - background MEPs debate the Lisbon Treaty and European Council King Abdullah II of Jordan addresses the European Parliament car design wine reform
Thursday in Plenary: EU Budget, textiles, extremism, human rights
MEPs and the people say "NO" to racism Thursday saw MEPs adopt the EU's budget for 2008 including EU funding for the Galileo satellite navigation system and the European Institute of Technology (EIT). MEPs also discussed the impact of Chinese textile imports on European companies and called for measures to ensure EU companies enjoy fair competition. The House also debated extremism and racism attacks in Europe. A resolution on the state of EU-China relations was also adopted.
Call for fair competition for textiles With a deal between Europe and China on textile imports due to expire on 1 January, MEPs debated the future of Europe's textile industry. The deal, agreed in 2005, protects certain types of European textiles and clothing from Chinese imports. In the debate French MEP Tokia Saïfi (EPP-ED) noted that "protecting our industry does not mean to be protectionist". For the Socialists Kader Arif warned of the "brutal competition we might be facing with China soon" and said that it is important "to make the European industry more competitive". Italian Liberal Patrizia Toia underlined the "need for careful checks and controls" on what is being imported to Europe from China, and urged the authorities "to ensure that the products are authentic". MEPs adopt jobs and growth budget for 2008 The European Parliament adopted on Thursday the 2008 EU budget. It amounts to €120.346.758.612, in payment appropriations, nearly 0.96% of the total GNI (gross national income) of the Member States. It secures the funding of key EU priorities including Galileo, the EIT and the EU's commitments in Kosovo. The budget will be signed on 18 December. The Parliament and the Council of EU ministers together constitute the Union’s "budgetary authority", which decides each year on expenditure and revenue. Combating the rise of extremism in Europe MEPs adopted a resolution showing its concern of recent racist and hate attacks and killings in several European countries. The main points are:
Condemnation of racist and hate attacks and solidarity with victims of such attacks and their families.
Fighting extremism while respecting fundamental rights and fundamental legal principles.
Withdrawal of public funding from political parties - or media businesses - that incite hatred of a group of people on the basis of their race, religion, handicap, sexual orientation or nationality.
Speeches coming from public personalities should be considered an aggravating circumstance.
Improvement of anti-racist laws and campaigns on information and raising awareness within media and education of young people.
Support NGOs and civil society organisations that promote democratic values, human dignity, social inclusion, intercultural dialogue and social awareness. Finally, MEPs called for an improved EU-China human rights dialogue Extraordinary Brussels plenary 18 December 2007 At an extraordinary plenary sitting, Tuesday 18 December at 1500 CET in Brussels, Portuguese Prime Minister José Sócrates, will report on the results of Friday's summit and present the conclusions of the Portuguese Presidency. Focus on budget Extremism Textiles
EN
1
PHOTO
20071211PHT14944.jpg
EN
2
PHOTO
20071211PHT14771.jpg
EN
8
LINK
/news/expert/default_en.htm
EN
9
PHOTO
20071211PHT14769.jpg
EN
14
PHOTO
20071212PHT15161.jpg
EN
15
LINK
/news/expert/tous_les_epvotes/default/default_en.htm
EN
22
PHOTO
20071213PHT15260.jpg
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A6-2007-0389 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071129BRI14111 ITEM-011-EN NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060927STO11034 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071129BRI14111 ITEM-010-EN NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A6-2007-0471 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210STO14629 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070906FCS10161 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070601FCS07344 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071129BRI14111 ITEM-013-EN NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071211IPR14801 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071127BKG13869 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071211IPR14795 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071211IPR14802 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071211IPR14794 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071211IPR14760 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061106FCS12347 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071211IPR14804 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071211IPR14814 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
