EP delegates endorse Bali roadmap, urge US to pick up the pace
Environment
2007-12-15 - 15:44
Representatives of the European Parliament at the Bali United Nations Conference on Climate Change welcomed the outcome of the meeting. They also expressed their hopes that the United States would adopt ambitious emission targets in the near future.
Following the approval of the Bali roadmap by the plenary session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), European Parliament Vice President Alejo Vidal Quadras and Climate Change Temporary Committee Chairman Guido Sacconi made the following joint statement on behalf of the EP’s delegation to the Bali conference:
"As you know, the European Parliament will be legislating, in the years to come, on decisions that emerge from the Bali roadmap process. With that in mind, let us remind you that in its November resolution the EP had called for the Bali mandate to include, among other things, the following element: Specific, binding targets for all industrialized countries: i.e., a commitment to reduce emissions "by at least 30% by 2020 and 60% - 80% by 2050 compared to 1990.
This resolution and these targets have been our key benchmarks for success. That said, from the European Parliament’s perspective, the text we now have before us – specifically, the lack of a direct reference to emission cuts by the Annex I (industrial) countries – falls somewhat short of the mark.
Most importantly, however, the EP applauds the Portuguese Presidency and the Commission for having secured the best politically viable outcome here at Bali. It welcomes, in that vein, the Bali roadmap as the opening of a process, which will lead us to, and beyond, 2012, with a global agreement to be reached by 2009. Moreover, it applauds the Kyoto signatories’ decision to recognize the target of a 25-40% cut in greenhouse gases (GHG) emissions by 2020 (compared to 1990 levels), as noted in the Fourth Assessment report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC).
Of course, important concessions have been made in comparison to the Parliament’s resolution. But none of them undermine the principles underlying the EP position. It is important to say, in this context, that the range of the required emissions reductions has been clearly placed within the framework of the IPCC report. We also consider important the fact that all the Parties will be involved in the process, thus overcoming the rigid distinction between Annex I and non-Annex I Parties.
We would also like to stress that the decision clearly identifies the issues to be tackled during the process starting in Bali: mitigation, adaptation, technology transfer and the corresponding necessary financial assistance. This is very important from our point of view, as is the decision to start pilot projects in the area of deforestation.
In light of these decisions, Europe is now called upon to show even more responsibility, to confirm its leadership role, and to underline its commitment to tackling climate change. The Parliament, for its part, will help lead the way by legislating on the instruments necessary to achieve the targets established by the Spring Council in March 2007: to achieve, at the very least, a 20% reduction of GHG emissions by 2020.
We are also pleased that the attitude of the US administration has evolved over the last few years – from a reluctance to enter into negotiations to, as is now the case, specific commitments. The agreement reached at Bali is the beginning of a process. Bearing that in mind, we hope – no, we expect – that in the very near future the US will join Europe in adopting the sort of ambitious emission targets, for which we have fought throughout.
In his speech on Thursday, Al Gore remarked that – at this stage – we need 'to pass the puck' to the United States: not to where it is, however, but to where it is going. Here, at Bali, we have made the pass. The eyes of the entire world are upon you, but we need you to skate faster. The ice is melting under our feet.”
2007-12-11 Delegation chaired by Alejo VIDAL-QUADRAS EPP-ED ES
20071211IPR14723
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
