Portuguese Presidency debated by MEPs
Institutions
2007-12-18 - 18:14
Josè Socrates back in the EP hemicycle to close the Portuguese presidency
In a plenary debate at the European Parliament in Brussels on Tuesday, 18 December, MEPs discussed with Council and Commission the achievements of the Portuguese Presidency over the past six months, which culminated with the signing of the Lisbon Treaty last weekend. Just before the debate, Parliament's President Hans-Gert Pöttering ceremonially signed the EU budget for 2008.
In connection with the signing of the budget, Mr Pöttering issued the following statement: "Today we sign the EU budget for 2008. During the negotiations Parliament achieved and agreed with Council the financing of the entire Galileo project and the European Institute of Technology (EIT) from the Community budget. On external policies Parliament secured financing for Palestine and for the CFSP through the mobilisation of the flexibility instrument and managed to safeguard the EU's other political commitments."
Introducing the debate on the Portuguese Presidency's term of office, Mr Pöttering described the signing of the new treaty as "a wonderful symbolic expression of our common values". He noted that Hungary had already become the first Member State to ratify the treaty and urged other states to follow this example.
The first speaker in the debate was Portuguese prime minister José Socrátes , on behalf the Council Presidency, who told the House "Europe and the Europeans have good reason to feel satisfied with political developments over the last six months. Europe is in better shape and more confident". He then described the achievements of his country's presidency in detail. Of its three priorities, the main goal - finalising the new treaty - had "resolved Europe's institutional deadlock" and would help it rise to its many future challenges. The EU-Brazil and EU-Africa summits had provided for strategic partnerships as key tools for dealing with the issues involving these two major areas of the world.
In addition, the Portuguese Presidency had made progress on freedom, security and justice, symbolised by the proclamation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights but also including the extension of the Schengen area to new Member States and efforts at international level to combat use of the death penalty worldwide. Positive moves had also been made on the social agenda, notably the agreement on "common principles of flexicurity", and on migration policy, with "the three pillars of integration, combating illegal immigration and cooperation with countries of origin".
On the economic front, the prime minister pointed to successes in adopting the Galileo project and the directive on a maritime environment strategy. He also highlighted the adoption of the EU strategic plan for energy technologies and the outcome of the Bali agreement as signs of progress on dealing with climate change. Lastly, Mr Socrátes turned to the future of the EU, mentioning the planned Reflection Group on the EU agenda to 2030, to be chaired by former Spanish prime minister Felipe González. In conclusion, he was "very proud of this presidency" and believed it had achieved all the goals set.
Commission President Jose Barroso began by saluting Hungary for its ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon "by an overwhelming majority". It is a "positive political symbol", he noted, "that a new Member State is the first to ratify the new Reform Treaty".
Quoting recent Eurobarometer opinion polls, Mr. Barroso observed that "overall support for the EU is now higher than at any time during the last decade". We must now prove, he told MEPs, "that we deserve that trust." The Commissioner also pointed to upcoming legislative proposals on issues ranging from migration to energy and climate change.
I am "proud" -- he said, turning to last week's UN Conference on Climate Change -- "that the EU spoke with one voice at the Bali conference". Some us may have wished for more, he acknowledged. The fact that we have achieved an agreement, however, is already "a success". "Let's be frank," he added: "This success would not have been possible without European leadership and European unity."
Mr. Barroso also referred to the lifting of Schengen border checks for new Member States as of the 21st of December. We must remind our citizens, he stressed, that "at the same time that we are lifting these [internal] borders, this comes with the reinforcement of security at our external borders."
Political group speakers
Referring to the signing of the Lisbon Treaty, Joseph Daul (EPP-ED, FR) said that "today, this parliament is celebrating a Europe on the move. The treaty would bring "a more cohesive Union: our integration process begun 50 years ago is continuing." The treaty would now "lift the Union out of the downward spiral." He emphasised that the European Parliament would be strengthened by the treaty. Listing many of the achievements of the EU, he said that "people want more Europe. [...] In this great globalised world a free for all is not the answer. We can only prosper by committing to integration."
Martin Schulz (PES, DE) highlighted three aspects of the Portuguese presidency: "Africa has been given back a bit of its esteem, something we withheld for a long time." Secondly, organising a summit with Brazil had shown that "Latin America must move higher up our agenda." Thirdly, "establishing a European day against the death penalty is a great achievement." In passing, Mr Schulz criticised Commission president Barroso for unveiling a draft directive on cross-border health services before the Christmas holidays. If this was an attempt to try to circumvent the agreed framework of the services directive, he could "count on opposition of the socialist party."
Graham Watson (ALDE, UK) also praised the Portuguese Presidency that "by resurrecting the treaty we all thought dead and buried, you have shown the improbable is indeed possible." With the treaty, "Europe gave itself the tools to make globalisation work for us, not against us." Watson praised the Presidency for its leadership in Bali, an excellent agreement on next year's budget and for enabling a common policy for Kosovo. But he also found critical words: "What happened to the great debate on flexicurity, where is the blue card for migration or greater labour mobility?" he asked.
For the UEN group, Brian Crowley (IE) congratulated the Portuguese presidency on reaching an institutional settlement, saying "The treaties that were there before didn't fit". However, the presidency's greatest achievement had been its "perseverance with the Africa summit". Although "one person in Africa was abusing rights and freedoms", it was wrong to condemn the whole continent. It was more important "to help the countries in Africa that have been successful to lead the way".
Monica Frassoni (Greens/EFA, IT), on behalf of her group, said of the Lisbon Treaty that she would have preferred "a less defensive approach, rather than leaving the ground to the sceptics". She also described Gordon Brown's behaviour in not attending the official signing ceremony as "scandalous". On the summits with Brazil and Africa she voiced doubts, wondering what real contributions had been made to dealing with these regions' problems.
For his group, Francis Wurtz (GUE/NGL, FR), said he had '"just heard a large amount of self-congratulation". The European Council should also be an opportunity for self-analysis. "We have a spiralling financial crisis, a major dispute over global warming and a log jam in a fundamental peace process". On climate change "our objectives are all very well but what is happening with current heavy lobbying from industry interests?" On Palestine, "it is good that we have such a large financial injection but where is our political commitment?"
On behalf of the IND/DEM group, Nigel Farage (UK) said he was "glad to see the signing of the 2008 budget today. Who knows? The auditors might even be able to sign the accounts this year!" He said he could not join in the congratulations of other speakers on the Lisbon Treaty, as it was "identical to the Constitution". Indeed, "It is nothing better than a giant deceit and an attempt to foist the Treaty on us". He added "If the Treaty is as good as they say it is, go out and sell it!"
For the non-aligned Members, Maciej Marian Giertych (PL) argued that the leaders signing the Treaty on Lisbon did not know what they were signing. "It is a document of cross-references to cross-references with 25 pages of explanatory notes in 3 columns. Total chaos". "How can such a document be called a Treaty?", he asked. "Portugal, are you not ashamed?"
British and Irish speakers
2008 is set to be a decisive year which will irrevocably shape the future said Mary Lou McDONALD (GUE/NGL, IE). This Treaty, she said, is not just about streamlining democracy, it is an ambitious document aimed at moving decision-making beyond the democratic reach of the citizens. Ireland, she said, will have the opportunity to vote in a referendum. Good Europeans should reject a bad treaty, she concluded.
Giles CHICHESTER (EPP-ED, UK) congratulated the Portuguese Presidency for its commitments on climate change and removing remaining barriers to the Single Market but he expressed concern about the move away from economic reform in the Lisbon agenda towards the social model. " Breathtaking political miscalculations " had been made by the British PM in Lisbon . Mr Chichester was also against the new Reflection Group which President Sarkozy says will define a new European dream. " We have just had three years of self-agonising with the Treaty " , he concluded.
Andrew DUFF (ALDE, UK) argued that experience had shown that "where QMV has been used, progress has been made". The Treaty of Lisbon extends QMV. " Let us show complete self-confidence in deploying it " . The Treaty of Lisbon and the Charter would endure as a lasting testament to a Portuguese Presidency managed with skill, efficiency and charm.
Avril DOYLE (EPP-ED, IE) thanked the Portuguese Presidency . Her personal belief was " the smaller the nation, the better the Presidency ". However, she warned, " there will be no Treaty until all 27 Member States have ratified it " . She added " There is a danger in our words, in the tenses we use that we are making assumptions. Ireland will have a referendum and likely the electorate will take the opportunity not to vote on the Treaty but to give the Irish government a mid-term kicking " . In the end " Nothing can be taken for granted ", she cautioned .
20071217IPR15646
EN
1
PHOTO
20071218PHT16367.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
