Signature of the European Consensus on Humanitarian Aid
Development and cooperation
2007-12-18 - 18:14
In a ceremony at the European Parliament today, EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering, Commission President José Manuel Barroso and the Presidency of the Council, Portuguese Prime Minister José Sócrates signed the proclamation of a European Consensus on Humanitarian Aid. This document defines a common vision, policy objectives and shared principles for the delivery of more effective EU humanitarian aid to third countries.
"Today we are adopting the first joint policy document at the EU level dealing with humanitarian aid," EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering said. "Humanitarian aid will become an EU policy in its own right after the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty. With the European Consensus on Humanitarian Aid we want to ensure the most effective implementation of EU humanitarian aid in the years to come."
EP Rapporteur Thierry Cornillet (ALDE, FR) said the "signature of the European Consensus on Humanitarian Aid is a historic moment: this consensus takes into account the fact that the EU is already the world's leading humanitarian aid donor, with over 2 billion euros per year. It will finally become an EU policy in its own right."
Background
The European Parliament adopted its own-initiative report outlining the EP's position on the "European Consensus on Humanitarian Aid" on 14 November of this year. In it, the House insisted that the Consensus needs "to be clearer and more specific in order to enhance European humanitarian policy" and also to ensure that the EU's potential as a humanitarian donor is fully exploited". The report stressed the need to clarify the relations between activities supported by the Commission via the Stability instrument for crisis prevention, management and resolution (such as disarmament, demobilisation, mine clearing, reintegration of displaced populations/refugees, etc.), and the concomitant activities carried out by DG ECHO, the Commission's humanitarian aid office.
20071218IPR16081 Press Release on Cornillet Report:
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109IPR12791 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
