Euro-Latin American Parliamentary Assembly opens its first ordinary session in Brussels
External relations
2007-12-18 - 23:47
Europe and Latin America need each other more than ever, especially in an era of globalisation, which is "not just economic, but a cultural process," as expressed by EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering. This was a common theme for the main speakers at the opening of the first ordinary plenary session of the Euro-Latin American Parliamentary Assembly (EUROLAT), which brings together MEPs and parliamentarians from Latin America.
President Pöttering said that while "Latin America could be inspired by the European Union model of integration, as well as learn from its mistakes," "it will need to find its own model of integration and define it on its own." Portuguese Foreign Minister Luis Amado echoed this sentiment, noting that "Europe has 50 years of experience, which makes it a reference point for other regions wishing to rise to the challenges of globalisation."
Parliamentary scrutiny and control
José Salafranca (EPP-ED, ES), one of EUROLAT's two co-Presidents, noted that together, EUROLAT members make up "1/3 of UN members, 25% of world GDP, and over 1 billion people." He said the crucial role of EUROLAT lay in providing "parliamentary control and scrutiny for this important EU-Latin American relationship."
EP Vice-President Manuel António Dos Santos (PES, PT) added that "a clear shared will to set this up from both sides is a qualitative leap" from earlier attempts at establishing this parliamentary dimension.
Growth, equality, immigration, climate change…
Jorge Pizarro (Chile), the other EUROLAT co-President, urged the EUROLAT committees to tackle the hard questions, such as issues of immigration and the "consolidation of the alliance between the EU and Latin America on climate change."
External Relations Commissioner Benita Ferrero-Waldner noted that although "over the past four years, Latin America has enjoyed stable economic growth," "braver taxation policy is required to ensure the fair distribution of wealth" in these countries.
The Lima Summit
The EU-Latin America Summit to be held on 16-17 May, 2008 was also alluded to by several speakers. Secretary-General of the Ibero-American Secretariat General Enrique Iglesias said "after the Santiago summit, which looked inward, the Lima summit will look outward," addressing questions of cooperation on a range of international issues. Matjaz Sinkovec, State Secretary in the Office of the Prime Minister of Slovenia, the holder of the upcoming EU Council Presidency under which the Lima summit will take place, echoed this, noting that his country will place emphasis on climate change, as well as creating "human ties" between the continents. Falla Lamadrid, Vice-President of the Committee on External Relations of the Congress of Peru added that "our citizens require us to find solutions that ticke down to reality," saying "they hope our summits that we organise will affect their lives and raise their standards of living."
Background
The Euro-Latin American Parliamentary Assembly (EUROLAT) brings together 120 Parliamentarians from the European Parliament, the Andean Parliament, the Central American Parliament and the Latin American Parliament, as well as national representatives from the Mexican and Chilean legislatures, and members of the joint parliamentary committee of MERCOSUR. It has three standing committees: Political, Security and Human Rights Affairs; Economic, Financial and Trade Affairs; and Social, Environmental, Educational and Cultural Affairs. These committees will hold meetings during the course of the day on Wednesday, and a full plenary session is to take place on Wednesday evening and Thursday morning.
A further press release will be published later in the week on the main events of the session.
20071217IPR15668 Full details of the Europe - Latin America Parliamentary Assembly on the EUROLAT website
EN
1
LINK
/intcoop/eurolat/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
