MEPs advocate punishing apologists for, and justifiers of, terrorism
Justice and home affairs
2007-12-18 - 20:17
MEPs today called on EU Member States to consider amending the definition of terrorist offences and applicable penalties so as to include "the apology and the justification of terrorism" in its scope, "in such a way as to secure freedom of expression". An own-initiative report adopted by the Civil Liberties Commitee on 18 December sets out recommendations to Council on how to prevent radicalisation and recruitment of terrorists.
Following the 9/11 terrorist attacks, the European Union adopted a framework decision urging Member States to align their legislation and setting out minimum rules on terrorist offences. The legsilative text also lays down the penalties that Member States must incorporate in their national legislation. Parliament's draft report, adopted in committee today with 30 votes in favour, 20 against and 1 abstention, encourages Member States to open discussions to include "the apology and justification of terrorism" in its scope, as "they are factors which contribute to violent radicalisation". Restricting the entry of certain immigrants? Committee members said that Member States, provided they duly respect the law as well as fundamental rights and legal guarantees, "have the right to forbid the entry and residence in their territories of any third-country national who actively contributes to promote violence despising through their speeches or actions the basic rules of democratic living". The report welcomes the recent adoption by Council of a mutual information mechanism on citizens from third countries who have been expelled in connection with terrorist activities. Support for victims The text, drafted by Jaime Mayor Oreja (EPP-ED, ES), urged the Commission and EU countries to provide "strong and specific support to the victims of terrorism". Global strategy MEPs believe that action must be taken to counter the terrorist phenomenon as a whole, from the recruitment of terrorists to support and protection of victims. A political strategy for neutralising the dissemination of messages instigating violence should include the education and social integration of individuals and better monitoring of the use of the internet for propaganda purposes, they say. Preventive measures must be based upon avoiding social isolation, building trust and confidence in society or promoting the U.N. concept of the alliance of civilizations, MEPs conclude.
2007-12-17 Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs In chair: Jean-Marie CAVADA ALDE FR
20071217IPR15665
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
