Tackling climate change through energy efficiency
Energy
2007-12-19 - 18:44
The Industry Committee gave its backing on Wednesday to the Commission's proposed Action Plan for Energy Efficiency and the establishment of a Global Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Fund when it adopted two own-initiative reports. It also said both the Commission and Member States need to improve their implementation of energy-efficiency legislation.
Drastic cuts in carbon emissions are necessary to prevent chaotic climate change, says the committee, and "the most immediate and cost-effective way of achieving them is to use energy more efficiently" - which is precisely what the Action Plan for Energy Efficiency intends to ensure. More efficient energy use, committee members note, would also reduce the EU's dependency on energy imports. MEPs unanimously backed the report from Fiona Hall (ALDE, UK), underlining their support for the Action Plan's aim of "improving energy efficiency by over 20% by 2020." The Committee also backed the Plan's scope and key objectives: to provide EU citizens with the most energy-efficient infrastructure, buildings, appliances, processes, transport means and energy systems, as well as to encourage citizens to use energy in the most rational manner possible.
Inadequate implementation by Commission and Member States
However, the committee criticised the fact that "of 21 Commission actions scheduled for completion in 2007 only three had been fully carried out by 1 September 2007." Member States, MEPs pointed out, have also failed "to prioritise full and prompt transposition of and compliance with energy efficiency legislation."
The committee proposed to "set minimum energy performance requirements for all transport modes"; to ensure that the proportion of structural and cohesion funding spent on improving energy efficiency of existing homes be raised from 3% to a minimum of 5%; and to include binding requirements regarding energy efficiency for all new buildings requiring heating and/or cooling.
The Global Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Fund
The committee also approved without opposition (with one abstention) the report from Claude Turmes (Greens/EFA, LU) on the Commission's proposal for a 'Global Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Fund', intended to encourage private sector investment in renewable energy technologies in the developing world. The Fund's objectives, it stressed, should be "the promotion of energy efficiency, energy saving and renewable energies," as well as the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions. Finally, it should help improve access to energy services in the poorest countries and ensure "the diversification of energy sources in the developing world."
The committee also stressed the need to focus on "small-scale projects for which it is most difficult to attract private sector investments." The eligibility threshold of €10 million for individual projects should be kept under regular review, it argued, and at least one third of the funds should be earmarked for small-scale projects costing less than € 1 million. The initial funding base is € 80 million.
The Industry Committee also insisted that all support for projects and choice of technology be made "conditional on the fulfilment of comprehensive sustainability criteria and a contribution to sustainable development", among other things.
Procedure: Own-Initiative report -- Plenary vote: Hall report - January I, Strasbourg; Turmes report - January II, Brussels
2007-12-18 Committee on Industry, Research and Energy In the chair Angelika Niebler EPP-ED DE
20071217IPR15673
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
