Surfing Parliament's news online in 2008
Institutions
2008-01-07 - 15:59
If you are reading this you are in the "News" area of the European Parliament website. This is where you can read the latest about what is going on in the EP. This part of the site aims to provide understandable and easy to read news. We do our best to avoid EU jargon and words, phrases and acronyms that confuse us - and maybe you. Depending on what you are looking for check out the two main parts of the "News" area: "Headlines" - where you are now, and "Press service".
What's the difference?
The differences between the headlines area and the press service are:
"Headlines": A minimum of two articles a day in 22 languages, about events in the Parliament. The aim is to set EP events within a wider context. The articles give an overview of the key issues and their likely impact for the public.
"Press service": in the pink bar next to headlines. This area is designed primarily to provide journalists and other media professionals with the information they need to cover Parliament. Short press releases and longer background notes set out the most important and interesting aspects of the main events and decisions, plus the details essential for reporters.
For example:
The vote by MEPs to bring down costs for mobile phones: The Headlines section focused on the benefits to consumers, while the press service explained the impact on the public and the industry, while also providing an analysis of the votes taken, the positions of the main players and background on the process as a whole.
Why 22 languages?
Because, it is designed to be read by people from all 27 EU countries so needs to be in the EU's official languages. We aim to give a Europe-wide view on European politics rather than a national view. On any day all the articles cover the same subject.
Who are we?
Headlines articles are written by a multilingual team of editors working for the information service of the European Parliament. Each editor is responsible for publication on the page in her or his language. The stories covered, which are researched and prepared by members of the team, are the same for each language, but each editor writes them up in his or her own style, doubtless familiar to our regular readers.
We choose our subjects according to those we think will have the widest interest amongst our readership. If you are a regular reader we would like to say "thank you"; if you are new to this site please take some time to explore it and learn more about your MEPs and your Parliament.
We are currently working on an upgrade to our news pages, which will give us scope for more varied and attractively formatted material from early spring this year. But our objective will remain the same: to inform our readers in a clear and accessible way about the daily activities of the European Parliament.
20080107STO17489
EN
1
PHOTO
20080107PHT17511.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
