Opening of the January 2008 Strasbourg plenary session: protecting freedom of speech at the EP
Institutions
2008-01-15 - 10:02
The first Strasbourg plenary session of 2008 was opened by the President of Parliament, Hans-Gert Pöttering, who made a number of announcements about events that had taken place over the last few weeks and about Parliament's work over the coming year. He announced that measures would be taken against MEPs who had disrupted the signing of the Charter of Fundamental Rights at the last session.
The entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty remains Parliament's main priority for 2008, said Mr Pöttering . He welcomed the extension of the Schengen area on 21 December 2007 to include the countries that joined the EU in 2004, as well as the fact that Malta and Cyprus had joined the eurozone on 1 January 2008. In addition, the President highlighted the fact that in the context of European Year of Dialogue between Cultures (2008), launched in Ljubljana on 9 January, the Grand Mufti of Syria will address the House tomorrow, Tuesday.
On the legislative front, key areas in 2008 would be, on the one hand, the environment and climate change, and on the other the safeguarding of Europe's competitiveness and jobs. "We must succeed together in finding a responsible balance between economy and ecology", he said.
Measures against MEPs who disrupted proceedings in December
On 12 December 2007 the presidents of the European Council, the Commission and the European Parliament had signed the Charter of Fundamental Rights. "For the citizens of the European Union and also the European Parliament, this was an important event", stressed Mr Pöttering. However, a number of MEPs had protested vociferously and even attempted to prevent speakers from speaking. This was an infringement of freedom of speech and a breach of Parliament's Rules of Procedure, said Mr Pöttering. Measures provided for under the Rules would therefore be taken against those Members. The same would apply to those MEPs who had treated Parliament's ushers "in an unacceptable manner".
Invitees in Year of Intercultural Dialogue
Sophia in 't Veld (ALDE, NL) asked why the Conference of Presidents, in approving the list of individuals to address the House as part of the Year of Intercultural Dialogue, had interpreted this exclusively as being an "inter-religious monologue". Could the list not be widened to include women and non-religious representatives? She proposed Asma Jahangir, UN Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Religion or Belief, as a possible speaker. Sarah Ludford (ALDE, UK) stressed that the Grand Mufti did not represent European Muslims and urged that a European representative of Islam be invited.
In reply, President Pöttering pointed out that the list of speakers had been approved by a large majority of the Conference of Presidents but that it was not final and other proposals could indeed be made. "With goodwill, the EP will be able to produce as balanced a list as possible", he concluded.
Agenda changes
The House agreed to postpone to a subsequent plenary session the joint debate and vote on the Demetriou report on a simplified regime for the border controls with Switzerland and Liechtenstein, and the Cashman report on a simplified regime for border controls with the ten countries that joined the EU in 2004, the reason being that the Council has not yet processed this legislation and the Slovenian presidency has therefore requested more time.
A request by the ALDE group, supported by the Greens/EFA group, that the debate on the situation in Pakistan on Wednesday be followed by the adoption of a resolution was rejected (68 votes in favour, 126 against, 12 abstentions).
The House voted to extend the debates on Wednesday afternoon from 5.30pm to 6pm. Question Time to the Council will therefore also be extended, to 7.30pm.
SELECTED HIGHLIGHTS FOR THIS WEEK'S PLENARY IN STRASBOURG INCLUDE:
Slovenian PM Janez JANŠA to outline presidency's priorities to MEPs
Grand Mufti of Syria and the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue 2008
Consumer credit directive - making cross-border loans easier and fairer
New rules for airport charges
Future of the automobile industry and CO2 emissions
Situation in Kenya / Pakistan
Waste in Naples and Campania
EU strategy on the rights of the child
Monday 14 January 2008 The first plenary session of 2008 opens with a report on the future of the automobile industry - CARS 21 . The report says that research funding needs to be increased to meet binding CO2 targets in the car industry. The Industry Committee adds that cars should be permitted to emit more CO2 if these emissions result from mandatory safety measures, and that intellectual property rights must be effectively protected worldwide. MEPs urge the Commission not to set any final mandatory targets for CO2 emissions for any date before 2015. From then on, however, an average target of 125g/km of CO2 emissions for new passenger cars should be achievable, says the report. MEPs will debate a legislative report on airport charges . The report that sets out common principles for levying airport charges at Community airports. The directive aims to prevent any abuse of a dominant position in the market by individual airports, thus contributing to the balanced development of the EU airport sector. The Transport Committee recommends increasing the threshold so only 67 airports in the EU are affected. The Commission's proposal would have affected some 150 airports. Tuesday 15 January 2008 Tuesday starts with a report by Glenis WILLMOTT (East Midlands, Labour, PES, UK) on health and safety at work . The non-binding report calls for better protection of healthcare workers from blood borne diseases. Besides, new and emerging risks e.g. from nanotechnologies had to be identified, and asbestos needed to be phased out. The legislative highlight of the week is a second-reading agreement on new rules on EU-wide consumer credit . Two out of three Europeans use credit to buy furniture, a washing machine or a car. Yet the market in consumer credit is still a national one. The EP Internal Market and Consumer Protection Committee is proposing a report at second reading on plans to stimulate the European market while still protecting consumers. The draft directive aims to harmonise consumer credit contracts in a number of areas, such as information provided to consumers before contracts are signed and when they are concluded, calculations of the total cost of a loan, the right to cancel and the right to pay off a loan early. At the time of publication, negotiations between the Council and the European Parliament are still ongoing in the hope of reaching an agreement. The vote takes places on Wednesday. At midday on Tuesday the Grand Mufti of Syria Ahmad BADER HASSOUN will address the House in a formal sitting. The Grand Mufti is the first speaker to address the EP as part of Parliament's programme of visits by eminent figures in the context of the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue (2008). Tuesday afternoon sees MEPs debating the EU strategy on the rights of the child . MEPs are expected to call for the strategy to include tougher measures to combat paedophilia on the Internet as well as steps to counter child sex tourism and enable suppliers of products manufactured with child labour to be prosecuted in Europe. Michael Cashman (West Midlands, Labour, PES, UK) will be presenting his non-binding report on the adoption of a Multiannual Framework for the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights for 2007-2012 . On Tuesday evening, Commissioner Dimas will make a statement of the " alarming situation regarding waste in the region of Campania ". The House will also vote on a resolution on this topic, Wednesday 16 January 2008 Slovenian Prime Minister Janez JANŠA will present the priorities of the Slovenian Presidency at 9am on Wednesday 16 January . Slovenia took over the six month rotating presidency on 1 January 2008, and is the first Member State from the 2004 enlargement to hold the Council Presidency. MEPs will debate the presidency's priorities and José Manuel BARROSO will respond for the Commission. In the afternoon, the European Parliament will debate the dramatic situation in Kenya . The EU has condemned the recent acts of violence in Kenya and urges political leaders of all sides to exercise maximum restraint and refrain from any action or comment which could provoke further violence. The people of Kenya exercised their right to vote in the elections on 27 December in a dignified way. They can now expect that their human rights are respected as the election results are disputed. MEPs will debate the situation in Pakistan . On 27 December 2007, Pakistani former Prime Minister Benazir BHUTTO was assassinated. Ms Bhutto - the first woman PM in an Islamic state - was leaving an election rally in Rawalpindi. The EU will send an election observation mission to the re-scheduled elections of 18 February 2008. Thursday 17 January 2008 Thursday morning sees MEPs debating the role of women in industry . The report encourages action to promote women’s position in relation to wage equality, working conditions, career opportunities, vocational training, with maternity and paternity being borne in mind as fundamental social values. The House also debate the results of the Internet Governance Forum (IGF) in Rio . The second meeting of the IGF was held in Rio de Janeiro on 12-15 November 2007. The forum founded in 2006 is a worldwide organisation which supports the United Nations in promoting multi-stakeholder policy dialogue on internet governance. Last year's Internet Governance Forum discussed issues such as critical Internet resources, access, diversity, openness and security. The next Internet Governance Forum will take place from 8 to 11 December 2008 in New Delhi, India. The session ends with three debates and votes on human rights issues around the world. The topics on the agenda are : 1. The arrest of Chinese dissident, Hu Jia, 2. The situation in the Democratic Republic of Congo and rape as a war crime 3. Egypt.
20080111IPR18239 Briefing - 14-17 January 2008 - Strasbourg plenary session Final draft agenda - 14-17 January 2008 EP Live - Live broadcasts from Strasbourg plenary session Rules of Procedure - Rule 147 : Penalties Guidelines for the interpretation of the standards of conduct of Members
EN
2
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?reference=2008-01&language=EN
EN
3
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/faces/live/live-video.jsp?language=en
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071213BRI15257 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT RULES-EP 20071128 RULE-147 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT RULES-EP 20071128 ANN-16-1 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
