MEPs set out new charges system for 67 EU airports
Transport
2008-01-15 - 12:13
The European Parliament adopted a legislative report that sets out common principles for levying airport charges at Community airports. The directive aims to prevent any abuse of a dominant position in the market by individual airports, thus contributing to the balanced development of the EU airport sector. The report was adopted with 613 votes in favour, 33 against and 51 abstentions.
The Commission had proposed that the new rules should apply to airports with an annual traffic of more than one million passengers, but the European Parliament is in favour of five million passengers as a threshold or which accounted annually for more than 15% of the passenger movements in the Member State where it is located. This reflects a concern that the Directive as drafted would capture smaller airports who are not in a potentially market dominant position. The European Parliament's decision means that 67 airports throughout the EU will be affected by the directive.
Under the new rules, all airports will be bound by common rules on provision of mutual information, transparency and the way airport charges may be collected. It is also planned to introduce national independent regulatory authorities to ensure that the directive is applied in full. This body, says the House, should establish procedures for resolving disagreements between the airport managing body and the airlines about changes to the level and structure of airport charges including relating to quality of service.
Pre-financing new infrastructure projects
Parliament introduces a new amendment saying: "The airport managing body may pre-finance new infrastructure projects by increasing airport charges accordingly, on condition that a) airport users are provided with transparent information on the extent and duration of airport charge increases; b) all additional revenue is used solely for the construction of the planned infrastructure; c) all official authorisations have been obtained."
Compromise amendments were adopted on the definition of airports charges, on airport networks, on the level of service quality to be provided by the airports managing body in return for the airports charge and the financing of new infrastructure projects.
The list of the 67 airports concerned is as follows:
Alicante, Amsterdam/Schiphol Athina/Eleftherios Venizelos, Barcelona, Berlin-Schoenefeld Berlin-Tegel, Birmingham , Bourgas, Bratislava, Bristol , Brussels/Brussels-National, Bucharest/Henri Coanda, Budapest/Ferihegy, Catania/Fontanarossa, Dublin , Düsseldorf, Edinburgh, Faro, Frankfurt/Main, Glasgow , Gran Canaria, Hamburg, Hannover, Helsinki/Vantaa, Iraklion/Nikos Kazantzakis, Kobenhavn/Kastrup, Köln/Bonn, Lanzarote, Larnaka/INTL, Lisboa, Ljubljana, London Gatwick, London Heathrow, London Luton, London Stansted Luxembourg, Lyon Saint-Exupery, Madrid/Barajas, Malaga, Malta/Luqa, Manchester , Marseille-Provence, Milano/Linate, Milano/Malpensa, München, Newcastle , Nice-Cote d´Azur, Pafos/INTL, Palma de Mallorca, Paris-Charles de Gaulle, Paris/Orly, Praha/Ruzyne, Riga, Rodos/Diagoras, Roma/Fiumicino, Sofia, Stockholm/Arlanda, Stuttgart, Tallinn, Tenerife Sur/Reina Sofia, Timisoara, Toulouse-Blagnac, Toulouse/CCER, Varna, Venezia/Tessera, Vilnius, Warszawa/Okecie and Wien/Schwechat.
Debate in Strasbourg plenary - 14 January 2008 - British and Irish speakers in the debate
Brian Simpson (North West, Labour, PES, UK) said: "I fully support the need for transparency in airport charges, with full consultation with the stakeholders. I fully support the need to ensure that airports in a dominant position do not abuse that situation and I fully support an open and transparent appeals procedure, provided that the rules of engagement and the remit of the arbitrator are clearly defined.
I am not against regulating airports that are in a dominant market position, but I think regulating the majority of airports to catch the big boys, based on an arbitrary passenger figure in a one-cap-fits-all regulation, is a flawed process."
Jim Allister (Non-attached, Northern Ireland, UK) said: "The Commission talks much about promoting competitiveness in industry and about cutting red tape, but its walk in these issues is often one that takes Europe in quite the opposite direction, and so it seems to me with its stance on air travel.
Having championed increased costs for air travellers through green taxes, we now have a proposed directive on airport charges which will inevitably drive up costs for the flying public. Regional airports are my particular concern. They have been a catalyst for progress in many regional economies: they have opened up markets; they have made the inaccessible accessible; they have been indispensable in economic transformation. And now, true to form, the Commission wishes, effectively, to stifle them with the heavy hand of bureaucracy, burying innovation under a mountain of reporting requirements for which the traveller will ultimately pay."
Kathy Sinnott (South IND/DEM, IE) said: "I think it is useful from time to time to remind the Commission that Ireland is an island and that we have a complete dependence on airports to be part of Europe and part of the rest of the world. The important issue for me is regional airports and that they get full support.
In many cases I keep hearing the argument that helping small airports will increase the carbon footprint but I do not think that is true. When all flights go out of Dublin, it just means that all the people who live near Cork Airport, as I do, or Shannon Airport or Waterford or Kerry, have to drive to Dublin or take a second flight – a shuttle to Dublin – and then go on. Whereas often these flights could reasonably, with support for regional airports, go from a regional area directly to where they need to go."
Jim Higgins (North West, Fine Gael, EPP-ED, IE) said: "The original European Commission proposal that this directive would apply to all airports with passenger numbers greater than one million per annum was extremely worrying, particularly from an Irish viewpoint, because if this approach had been adopted, then the directive would have applied to both Shannon and Cork airports, and possibly in due course to Ireland West Airport as it seeks to continue its expansion operations. What I have been arguing is that airports under the 5 million passenger per annum threshold are subject to much stronger market forces than larger airports, and to subject them to the terms of this directive would put an unnecessary stranglehold on regional airports."
Timothy Kirkhope (Yorkshire and the Humber Conservative, EPP-ED, UK) said: "This directive is the Commission’s attempt to bring a large number of Community airports under regulation, and it has seen fit to do this because it believes there could be an imbalance in the relationship between airports and their users, the airlines. In some cases they are right; the more sizeable airports in the EU, like London Heathrow and Paris Charles de Gaulle, should be regulated so they are not in a position to abuse their market dominance. But I believe the smaller regional airports of the EU should only be regulated when they are found to be operating anti-competitively.
Newcastle Airport in the UK, for example, with 5.2 million passengers, still has to compete with other airports all over the north of England to attract business. Why add burdensome and costly red tape to the smaller regional airports that do actually compete with each other and need to grow? That is why I want the possibility for national regulators to opt out their airports from this regulation."
Avril Doyle (Fine Gael, EPP-ED, IE) said: "I fully support the need for more transparency in airport charges. As charges at airports are not part of the operational costs of airlines but are part of the operational, development and maintenance costs of airports, I would like to know the Commission’s view on the compulsory need for airlines to refund airport charges if a passenger has to cancel a flight.
At the very least they should get full credit, if not an actual refund of any airport charges on a cancelled flight. I do not think it is acceptable for airlines to pocket airport charges if flights are cancelled. Some of them are doing that at the moment, others will refund after taking a hefty administration charge out of it, which makes it unworthy to pursue the actual refund itself."
20080111IPR18240 Airport charges Text, as adopted by the EP on 15 January, will shortly be available here
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5435842
EN
2
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
