Slovenia takes over EU presidency: prime minister addresses European Parliament
Institutions
2008-01-16 - 12:12
Janez Janša, Prime Minister of Slovenia and President of the EU Council, set out the policy priorities of his country's presidency in an address on Wednesday to MEPs. As Parliament's President Hans-Gert Pöttering pointed out, this was the first time that one of the central European countries who had joined the EU in 2004 was holding the presidency.
Mr Janša told the House of a time in 1988 when he was arrested for criticising the then Yugoslav regime, and how the popular protests which had ensued had "set in motion the beginnings of change". Now he stood before European Parliament as Prime Minister of Slovenia and President of the European Council. "If anyone had predicted such a possibility twenty years ago in my prison cell, I would not have believed one word of it", he said.
Turning to the priorities of his country's presidency over the coming six months, he highlighted the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty , saying "We hope that by the end of the Slovenian Presidency, the majority of the Member States will have followed in Hungary's footsteps. The Slovenian Parliament will decide on ratification before the end of this month. The goal is to have the Lisbon Treaty enter into force on 1 January 2009".
Mr Janša then highlighted economic reform and emphasised the next three-year cycle of implementation of the Lisbon Strategy. We must, he said, "continue in the same direction as we have so far, putting the investment in people, modernisation of labour markets, an increase of entrepreneurial potential, provision of affordable and reliable supplies of energy, and environmental protection at the top of the list".
"We must ensure that there will be no obstacles to the flow of ideas and knowledge", said the prime minister. "At the spring European Council, we therefore wish to add a fifth freedom ­– the free flow of knowledge – to the four existing freedoms of the EU". In addition, progress was needed on the internal market in services and innovations. He also promised "to bring about progress in liberalisation of the internal energy market".
On external policy , the presidency would continue accession negotiations with Croatia and Turkey. Mr Janša then emphasised the importance of the Western Balkans, starting with Kosovo. He said "the current status quo is unsustainable" and "the Kosovo issue demands a special solution". He promised that "the Presidency will be coordinating solutions enjoying the broadest support within the EU and at the same time guaranteeing long-term stability in the region".
Serbia, the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Albania, Montenegro and Bosnia and Herzegovina all needed assistance or special attention. In the case of Bosnia, he said, "We should not forget the refugees who have not yet returned home, or the serious crimes that have as yet gone unpunished".
Looking further afield, he wished to pursue or intensify the European Neighbourhood Policy, the Barcelona Process and Euro-Med. In addition, the Slovenian presidency would hold four summits: with the US, Russia, Japan and the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean.
Other key challenges facing the EU at global level were reform of the UN and the establishment of a new global order, combating poverty in developing countries, the fight against climate change, and intercultural dialogue.
Concluding, the prime minister said "It is our greatest wish to contribute to the increase in the number of satisfied Europeans. We wish that some day any person walking the EU streets will be able to answer without hesitation if asked whether he or she cares for the future of the EU: 'I care for Europe because I know that Europe cares for me'. "
European Commission President
Commission President José Manuel BARROSO began by addressing his first words to Slovenia, pointing out that Slovenia is a great example of success and that Slovenia and Slovenians are 'symbols of the struggle for freedom'. He stated that this enforces his 'full belief that [the 2004] enlargement is indeed one of the greatest achievements of the EU.'
The President then addressed three of the primary issues of importance for the EU during the months ahead - the Lisbon Treaty, the Energy and Climate Change Package and the Renewed Lisbon Strategy.
The President referred to the Lisbon Treaty as a 'credible and balanced Treaty' which 'leaves the Union in good shape to ensure that we can deliver on our political priorities.' He called on all EU Member States to ratify the Treaty.
Speaking about the energy and climate change packages, the President pointed out that this was a response to the call for precise and legally binding targets. The priorities in this area would focus on competitiveness, sustainability and security of supply. The President went on to say that the package would demonstrate 'our willingness to put our money where our mouth is' and that it would be 'a win-win situation.'
The President pointed out that the Lisbon strategy is working, but he gave a list of what Europe needs at this point - making the free movement of knowledge a reality, putting a Small Business Act in place to foster the growth of SMEs and developing active labour policies. The President stated that 'we need to offer priorities, not just for some ... but for all.' He went on to say that 'we must promote the entrepreneur spirit of Europeans'. The President expressed his confidence that 'our economic fundamentals are sound and solid' but concluded by stating that 'global conditions require that Europe continues its reform process.'
The President concluded by stating that with all three priorities above achieved, 'we will have in 2009 a more confident and better prepared Europe to face the future. […] a strong Europe, an open Europe, a Europe of freedom, solidarity and security.'
Political group speakers
"Your country works", and is in the "vanguard of making people feel they belong to Europe", said EPP-ED chairman Joseph DAUL (EPP-ED, FR) with feeling, as he pledged his group's support for the Presidency.
Since 2004, Slovenia has recorded "success after success", achieving in 10 years "what we could not do in 50", pursued Mr Daul, citing Slovenia's rapid transition to a strong market economy and relatively low unemployment, which had enabled it to adopt the Euro already, and its joining the Schengen group in 2007. Slovenia, the first new Member State to hold the Presidency, is also likely to be in the vanguard of countries ratifying the Lisbon Reform Treaty, introducing growth and competitiveness measures, and promoting intercultural dialogue, he predicted.
The EPP-ED group will support the Presidency's efforts inter alia to have the Treaty of Lisbon ratified quickly, so as to get Europe working before the 2009 European elections, enable it to prosper whilst protecting the environment, harness knowledge and innovation to enable it to compete worldwide, meet energy efficiency targets, support stability and co-operation in the Balkans, and foster multicultural and multi-faith dialogue, concluded Mr Daul, wishing the Presidency good luck.
"The Socialist group is willing to support the Presidency with all means at its disposal", said chairman Martin SCHULZ (PES, DE), adding that it deserves the support of all democrats, and that Slovenia's emergence from communist dictatorship had graphically demonstrated, yet again, that liberty and democracy always win in the end.
"We're already talking politics" noted Mr Schulz, approving the knowledge and expertise revealed in the Council President's statement. EU enlargement is not yet concluded, he stressed, noting that "we are still talking to Macedonia, Croatia and Turkey" and adding that he would particularly like to clarify the Presidency's view on the latter.
Mr Schulz welcomed the Presidency's view that EU institutions are strong enough to organize neighbourhood policy, despite possible rifts in the Council, and praised the demonstration of confidence in the free movement of people demonstrated by Slovenia's joining the Schengen area. He asked the Presidency to "check up" on claims that the transfer of Nokia's facility from Bochum to Romania was being "financed with EU money".
Mr Schulz concluded by noting that the EU was still far from the vision of first Commission President Walter Hallstein, whom, he said, had advocated Turkish membership.
Graham WATSON (ALDE, UK) said: "My Group comes to you with one simple message. 'Europe expects'. It expects 2008 to be a year of progress. We expect that progress to start now. And we expect your Presidency to rise to the challenge. "
Your programme speaks of the importance of internal dynamism and that Mr Schulz is the way to create jobs and to maintain jobs in this continent.
Progress in the Western Balkans is rightly one of your priorities and your experience and understanding of the area will be a bonus to our Union. Nonetheless, I suspect that maintaining as you do that the situation in Bosnia-Herzegovina is worse than that in Kosovo does not reflect majority opinion in the Union. Nor am I sure it is a good way to motivate the people of Bosnia-Herzegovina. If it is designed to appease Serbia, it will not work. Sweetening the pill of Kosovo's independence with a Stabilisation and Association Agreement may be a way forward.
But while Mr Djelic readies his pen to come to Brussels my Group reiterates – in the strongest possible terms – that there can be no Stabilisation and Association Agreement without Serbia's full cooperation with the ICTY.
Mr Serge Brammertz, the New Chief Prosecutor, has yet to see fresh evidence of cooperation. None of us Mr President-in-Office wish to see Serbia remain on Europe’s sidelines and your Presidency's courteous and constructive attitude may well bring it in from the cold and deliver Mr Radko Mladic.
But in the meantime as you say in Slovenia, ‘pray for a good harvest, but keep on hoeing’.
Brian CROWLEY (UEN, IE) speaking in Irish said that Slovenia was taking on the presidency of the EU at a "challenging time". The key challenges include, he said, the ratification of the EU Reform Treaty, the spotlight is on the Balkans, a new EU energy package and renewed effort to solve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Continuing in English, he said: "As has rightly been commented on by colleagues already, the list of what Europe needs to be done is endless. The range of topics and decisions and the areas of interest and of conflict that have to be dealt with are enormous.
Rather than give lectures to you on what you fail to do or others may fail to do in the future, I shall focus briefly on three areas.
Your experience, Mr Prime Minister, as a rebel in one sense, as an intellectual but, most importantly of all, as a democrat and as the voice of reason that could lead your country from the dark ages of Communism into the bright lights – sometimes dimmed because of energy crises – and future of the European Union, that kind of image and that kind of imagery is what is most important to the people of Bosnia, Serbia, Kosovo and, indeed, Turkey. I look forward to working with you and with your government. Despite the fact that you may be small as a country, not only are you big in spirit but there is also great quality there. As has already been proven by your own starting of this process, you are not afraid to stand up to the big boys when they try to bully you around the place. But, most importantly of all, what you bring is the moral certainty of where you have come from.
What the European Union needs today is new heroes – heroes who know what it is like not to have freedom; heroes who know what it is like not to have the freedom of speech, liberty and democracy. That is the best light that we can shine in the dark corners of the European continent today."
Monica FRASSONI (Greens/EFA, IT) said that "a low carbon economy is not a nuclear economy." She criticised "wasting time in a new form of nuclear power that doesn't exist yet or is dubious, like carbon sequestration." Real sustainable energy like sun and wind-energy should be pushed and encouraged. She criticised the lack of access to documents of negotiations of partnership agreements, stating the example of China: "The European Parliament has not yet received anything to tell us how things are going, everything is happening in total secrecy. The Parliament should be informed about what is going on."
Francis WURTZ (GUE/NGL, FR) stressed the need to debate social dumping and to address the erosion of purchasing power in parallel to rising profits. On Kosovo, he asked: "How can we explain that 2 billion euros aid of the international community has failed to lead to any growth, 50% unemployment, corruption, and deep rooted mafia groups?" This would have to be answered before any decision was taken. He also addressed the issue of illegal immigrants: "At the moment the Return Directive is really a shameful directive and human rights defenders haven't hesitated to call it so."
Jens-Peter BONDE (IND/DEM, DK) criticised Mr. Janša regarding the ratification of the Reform Treaty: "You are part in a political agreement among prime ministers to avoid referendums. This agreement is a violation of the treaty, the Commission should have protested it instead of supporting the attempt to avoid the peoples of Europe." He went on to say that "the Lisbon treaty was decided as closed as possible and so far away as possible from the voters. Now, it seems that only Ireland can save our European democracy."
"When I hear that an objective of Slovenia also consists of getting all of the former Yugoslav states into the EU, I think that is important and right. We should round off in territorial terms EU enlargement", said Andreas MÖLZER (NI, AT). "I think Croatia is the country in the region most ripe for accession." Concerning Kosovo, he stressed that both the Kosovo Albanian's and Serbs' view would have to be taken into account: "We need to make sure that Serbia is not driven into the arms of the Kremlin".
British and Irish speakers
Mary Lou McDONALD (GUE/NGL, IE) wished the Slovenian Presidency well on this historic day. There was no doubt in her mind of the capacity of Slovenia, a small Member State, to preside over a successful presidency.
If we are serious about having a Europe that really cares and puts the citizen at the centre, Ms McDonald said, then this requires a radical step change in our approach and in the content of our policy in this institution and across the institutions of the European Union.
Ms McDonald shared the concerns of a previous speaker at the fact that referendums will not be held in Member States on the issue of the Lisbon Treaty noting that she herself comes from a jurisdiction in which there will be a referendum and the people will have an opportunity to assess in a real-life way how they reckon this project is advancing and developing.
Addressing the President-in-Office, Ms McDonald stated that "in Ireland you caused something of a stir: you were reported in the media as saying that it is important not to launch some discussions that might cause problems in our country. This indicates to us that you propose postponing controversial or difficult issues. We would like to know what those issues are."
Concluding, Ms McDonald said "if we are serious about democracy in the Union, if we are serious about a Union that cares, we certainly have to ensure that full information on policy initiatives and direction are given to the people."
Giles CHICHESTER (EPP-ED, UK) warmly welcomed the Prime Minister of Slovenia to Parliament and wished him well in his period as President-in-Office of the Council. Mr Chichester felt sure that Slovenia would carry out the task ahead with great competence.
Mr Chichester welcomed the emphasis given to the next stage in the Lisbon Strategy. There remains much to be done to persuade Member States to reform their economies, he said, and he hoped that the Presidency will advocate greater liberalisation, reforms to labour markets and ensure European business benefits from globalisation. Europe, he said, needs to be more competitive, more focused on creating new jobs and less concerned with protecting a social model that hampers employment growth.
Mr Chichester said he wanted to see action on completing the internal market and in particular the telecoms sector. He welcomed the announcement by the Commissioner last year on further liberalising the telecoms market. We now, he said, have the opportunity to reassess the existing framework to get rid of bottlenecks and to map out a more competitive future for this crucial industry.
Mr Chichester looked forward to hearing how the Presidency intends to take matters forward and he also welcomed the commitment to pursue vigorously the energy and climate change agenda. The EU has established tough carbon emissions targets and it is now incumbent upon Member States to follow through with real action, and not just words, to ensure burden sharing does not just end up as load-shedding, he concluded.
Referring to the Prime Minister's moving account of his country and indeed his own history and his pride in Slovenia and his talk with some emotion of his experience in the prison cell, John BOWIS (EPP-ED, UK) said he hoped that those are the emotions he will bring to the Presidency – the belief in human rights and the determination that Europe shall have that pride too.
Mr Bowis highlighted two areas: One is on our environment, because alongside human rights and the Lisbon Agenda goes a clean environment, a healthy environment and indeed a healthy people. That environment needs to move on from Bali, which was a great talking shop. We now need the action. We need real action, realistic action, and that must start next week with our climate change package.
Secondly, in the health field, he said, we need legal certainty on cross-border health. There is a great new opportunity for Europe’s citizens. On this, Mr Bowis asked that particular attention be paid to mental health. If there is any criticism of Slovenia he had, it is the slowness with which it has enacted its mental health laws. Now, he said, you have an opportunity to lead on mental health following the Green Paper and he hoped that the Presidency will take that up. "You are a small country, a proud country and, Mr President, the small countries of Europe are usually the best Presidents of the European Union. I wish you success in that. I have confidence that Slovenia under your leadership will meet that pride in success and achievement by the time you finish in six months’ time."
Concluding, Mr Bowis said he read with concern in the press this week that some Member States are trying to undermine the EU agreement of last year on climate change and we will pay particular attention to see that the British Government lives up to the commitments it has entered into.
Avril DOYLE (EPP-ED, IE) joined her colleagues in welcoming the Prime Minister of Slovenia here today. It is true, she said, that the current Balkan situation represents unfinished business and to all of us peace in the region is very important. She thanked the Prime Minister particularly for his sensitive handling of the forthcoming Irish referendum needed for the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty.
"Perhaps in your concluding remarks, I could add your words to our referendum slogan when you said: ‘I care about Europe because Europe cares about me’. What better slogan for the Irish referendum! We can take nothing for granted – it will be hard to deliver – but believe you me the Fine Gael Party, of which I am a member, our leader and all the Members of the European Parliament will leave no stone unturned to ensure a ‘yes’ outcome to the referendum of the Lisbon Treaty in Ireland". We look forward to delivering it to you during your presidency, she concluded.
Responses to the debate
Replying to the debate, prime minister Janša stressed that while ratification of the Lisbon Treaty was a priority of his country's presidency it was up to each Member State to carry out its own ratification process and the presidency would certainly not interfere in that.
He also stressed the need for a balance between environmental, economic and social issues.
Regarding the Western Balkans, he warned against similar mistakes to those that were made over Bosnia and Herzegovina some years ago, when over 100,000 people died following hesitation over the exact legal basis for EU action.
European Commission President José Manuel BARROSO referred first to 'the very large consensus ..[evident from the interventions by MEPs].. supporting the priorities that were presented by the Slovenian Presidency.' He then went on to discuss the reactions to the Commission priorities he had outlined in his previous speech and stated that he 'was very encouraged by the support' but that it was 'very important that we now deliver on our targets.'
In answer to a question by German MEPs about the use by Romania of EU funding for delocalisation of industry within the EU, the President responded that he could 'confirm that no ERDF funding is implicated.' He went on to say that the Commission 'would consider it unacceptable.'
In conclusion, the President called on Member States to 'have the courage to explain the benefits of enlargement.' He pointed out that it is 'very important […] that we all explain that this enlargement of the EU is not only good for the new members but that it is also an opportunity for the Union as a whole.'
20080115IPR18585 Slovenian Presidency of the EU 2008 Audio, 33:35 - Slovenian PM Janez Janša - EN Audio, 12:44 - Commission President José Manuel Barroso - OR Audio, 36:03 - Extracts from the Plenary 16/01/2007 - Political group leaders - EN
EN
1
LINK
http://www.eu2008.si/en/
EN
2
MULTIMEDIA
20080116MLT18743.asf
EN
3
MULTIMEDIA
20080116MLT18751.asf
EN
4
MULTIMEDIA
20080116MLT18797.asf
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
