Rights of the child: the European Parliament set out its strategy
Justice and home affairs
2008-01-16 - 14:30
An EU strategy on the rights of the child won Parliament's backing with 630 votes in favour, 26 against and 62 abstentions. MEPs call for the strategy to include tougher measures to combat paedophilia on the internet as well as steps to counter child sex tourism and enable suppliers of products manufactured with child labour to be prosecuted in Europe.
The own-initiative report, drafted for the Civil Liberties Committee by Roberta Angelilli (UEN, IT), is Parliament's response to a Commission communication of 4 July 2006 titled Towards an EU strategy on the rights of the child.
The report restates Parliament's opposition to all forms of violence against children and calls for a specific budget heading for their rights, with which to fund work required by the strategy.
Hijab and headscarves paragraph deleted from final report
MEPs deleted a paragraph in the original report from the Civil Liberties Committee (200 in favour, 367 against and 134 abstentions) which stated: "I s concerned at the multiple violations of rights affecting girls from a migrant background. The committee had "urged Member States to ban headscarves and hijab at least at primary school, in order to anchor more firmly the right to be a child and to ensure genuine and unenforced freedom of choice at a later age."
Combating paedophile pornography and violence on the internet Among the European Parliament's many proposals, MEPs call for technical measures to combat the dissemination of paedophile content via the internet. They would also like to involve access suppliers, search engines and even banks, so as to block payment by would-be purchasers of illegal content. In addition, the House wishes to protect children by tightening up rules on the transmission of harmful content via the internet or multimedia messaging services and the sale of violent video games. It would like a uniform classification and labelling system to be created for such games, and for all audiovisual content. Children should be better informed of their rights via a dedicated internet site to be set up for this purpose, argues the European Parliament. Enforce ban on child labour Among other points, MEPs advocate a mechanism to enable the prosecution, in Europe, of suppliers of products that have been manufactured with child labour. The Commission is urged to check whether production lines comply with rules prohibiting child labour. Early warning system on child abductions and prosecution of sex criminals The House recommends setting up a European early warning system on child abductions and supports the Commission's plan to introduce a telephone help-line for children. It also urges the creation of a European strategy, and a single EU-wide set of extraterritorial criminal laws, to counter child sex tourism. Community instrument on adoption Pointing out that every child has the right to a family, MEPs suggest establishing a Community instrument to facilitate adoption. Lastly, the EU is urged to sign up to the UN and Council of Europe conventions on the rights of the child.
20080115IPR18582 Towards an EU strategy on the rights of the child Text, as adopted by the EP on 16 January, will shortly be available here Audio, 25:35 - Rapporteur Roberta Angelilli and others - EN
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5479632
EN
2
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
3
MULTIMEDIA
20080115MLT18691.asf
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
