Kenya: MEPs call for fresh presidential elections
External relations
2008-01-17 - 15:10
MEPs call for "fresh presidential elections" in case a credible and fair recount of the votes in the presidential election by an independent body proves impossible, according to a resolution adopted by the European Parliament. MEPs also ask for the freezing of further budgetary support to the government of Kenya until the current crisis is resolved. The joint resolution was adopted by a large majority in a show of hands.
The House deplores the fact that Mwai Kibaki - Kenya's incumbent President - appointed his cabinet unilaterally, which severely undermined mediation efforts.
MEPs call on Mwai Kibaki to respect his country’s democratic commitments enshrined in the country’s National Constitution and the guidelines of the African Charter of Human and People’s Rights relating to free and fair elections and to agree to an independent examination of the presidential vote.
Both sides should engage in tangible remedial action through negotiation, according to the resolution. Support is given to mediation efforts by a panel of African elders led by Kofi Annan, the former United Nations Secretary-General.
MEPs condemn the tragic loss of life and critical humanitarian situation.
Electoral process
MEPs call for fresh presidential elections should it prove impossible to organise a credible and fair recount of the votes in the presidential election by an independent body. The House calls for concrete measures to establish a "truly impartial Election Commission which will be better able to conduct free and fair elections in future".
Economic situation and budget support
The House is preoccupied by the social repercussions of the current economic crisis, detrimental to the country’s socio-economic development but likely to have consequences for neighbouring countries, which depend to a large extent on Kenya’s infrastructures.
The disbursement of EDF budget aid to the Kibaki government directly after the elections could be misunderstood as "politically biased", say MEPs. They ask for the freezing of further budgetary support to the government of Kenya until the current is resolved. Budget support is when a donor provides funds directly to a partner government's central exchequer in support of their programmes.
European Parliament involvement in the crisis
Alexander Lamsdorff (ALDE, DE) headed the EU EOM (European Union Election Observation Mission) to Kenya. Jan Mulder , Dutch Liberal, headed a four-strong delegation of MEPs to observe the elections. They were on the spot from the 26th to the 29th December. The other Member of the delegation were Valdis Dombrovskis (EPP-ED, LV), Horst Posdorf (EPP-ED, DE) and Johan Van Hecke (ALDE, BE).
British and Irish speakers in the debate - Wednesday, 16 January 2008
Speaking in the debate in Strasbourg on 16 January 2008, Glenys Kinnock (Labour, Wales, PES, UK) said: "We need to identify the fact that Kenya is a country where most people are actually subsisting on a couple of dollars a day.
There is massive discontent and deprivation; a whole army of discontented people, as we have seen, has been engendered by the situation there, because what they realise is that the gap between the haves and the have-nots in Kenya has widened – and that in the context of that 6% growth in GDP which others have mentioned."
I would add my voice to those that have said that the EU must suspend budget support to Kenya until a political resolution to the present crisis has been found. Of course, it is unacceptable that that EUR 40.6 million was sent the day after the election criticisms were made."
Finally, the perpetrators of those irregular election results that the observers have reported to us must be held to account and must not be allowed to get away with it."
David Martin (Labour, Scotland, PES, UK) said: "We now know that there is deep-rooted social and economic disarray in the country and that for years the Government has operated on a basis of corruption and economic mismanagement. The concept, as Mrs Kinnock rightly says, of good governance and respect for democracy are prerequisites for European Union aid. But, contrary to what other speakers have said, that does not mean that we should abandon the country. It means we should rechannel our aid through agencies and organisations that can get money to the poor, the neediest and the weakest in Kenya. Clearly, if the election results are not properly monitored and respected, we cannot continue to channel money through the Kenyan Government. We have to send a clear message: good governance is a prerequisite for assistance from the European Union."
Eoin Ryan (Dublin, Fianna Fáil, UEN, IE) said: "I think it is generally accepted that the recent presidential elections in Kenya were flawed. I think that is a great pity because Kenya is a country that has been politically stable for many decades. Sadly that has changed in the last two weeks and we have seen over 600 people killed and 250 000 people have been displaced. Unfortunately, again, that violence is ethnic in nature.
I think we all should remember – and particularly the Kenyan people and the politicians should remember – that history has shown, time and time again, that, where there is a political vacuum, that vacuum can often be filled by extremists, but the people of Kenya deserve better."
20080115IPR18586 Joint motion for a resolution on Kenya Text adopted by the EP on 17 January 2008
EN
2
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//TEXT MOTION P6-RC-2008-0024 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
