Encouraging the participation of women in the technology sector
Women's rights/Equal opportunities
2008-01-17 - 15:10
MEPs adopted a non-binding report on the role of women in industry which encourages action to promote equality and female entrepreneurship and the participation of women in the technology sector. The report was adopted by 508 votes in favour, 41 against et 24 abstentions.
Rejection of Norwegian quota system
MEPs narrowly voted in favour of deleting a paragraph (296 votes in favour to 294 against with 7 abstentions) in the original report from the Women's Committee which said: "Welcomes the Norwegian Government’s decision to implement measures to increase the number of women on the boards of public companies to at least 40% until 2003 and to impose by law a 40% quota of female representation on the boards of joint stock companies by the end 2005; calls on the Member States to follow the Norwegian example."
On average, around 14% of women in employment in the EU work in industry, but this figure rises to 25% in some countries; of that average 21% are employed on a part-time basis and women represent 65% of part-time workers in this sector.
The role of women in industry varies as a result of their variable representation in different sectors. Women are over-represented in some sectors, such as textiles, garments, cabling, electrical and electronic equipment and food but under-represented in cutting-edge technology sectors.
"It is necessary to pay attention to the situation of women in the different industrial sectors and to promote positive actions to guarantee equality", said rapporteur Ilda Figeuiredo (GUE/NGL, PT).
Technology sector
MEPs regret the low proportion of women in the advanced technology sector and stress the importance of operational educational and training programmes in science and technology, guaranteeing the quality and diversification of training opportunities for women in the Member States and the promotion of scientific and technological studies for girls. They call on the Member States and the Commission to develop and implement strategies to address discrepancies in the work environment and the career development of women working in science and technology.
The report also stresses the need for the Commission to promote professional training policies and programmes aimed at women, in order to increase their participation in various sectors of industry.
Promoting equality and female entrepeneurship
The report highlights the role of women in industry and encourages action to promote women’s position in relation to wage equality, working conditions, career opportunities and vocational training.
The House calls on the Commission and the Member States to urge large companies to draw up and introduce their own-negotiated equality programmes on a compulsory basis and also to encourage small and medium sized undertakings to do likewise.
The European Parliament encourages Member States to promote female entrepreneurship in the industrial sector and to provide financial support for women setting up companies.
MEPs also ask the Commission and the Member States to encourage a balanced representation of women and men on the management boards of companies, particularly where the Member States are shareholders.
Combating exploitation
The House urges Member States to take all the necessary measures effectively to combat the exploitation of women at work, which is most common in sectors such as the textile industry.
MEPs call on the Commission and the sectoral social partners to define high standards for health protection at work that take account of the gender dimension, and in particular maternity protection, at the level of research, control and preventive measures.
Finally, according to the report, Community aid should not to be granted to companies which, after benefiting from such funding in a Member State, transfer their production to another country without fully implementing contracts concluded with the Member State concerned.
20080115IPR18589 Role of women in industry
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5531412
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
