Slovenia's Janša ready to solve Kosovo impasse
Institutions
2008-01-17 - 10:14
A smiling Janez Janša at Parliament yesterday
Wednesday morning saw Slovene Prime Minister Janez Janša outline to MEPs the key aspects for his country's 6-month Presidency of the EU. He said that job creation and resolving the impasse over the status of Kosovo would be among his main aims. He contrasted the freedom and position the people of Slovenia now enjoyed with his persecution in Communist Yugoslavia. While he was in Strasbourg, we interviewed Mr Janša exclusively for the Parliament's website.
Slovenia's Janša ready to solve Kosovo impasse
Wednesday morning saw Slovene Prime Minister Janez Janša outline to MEPs the key aspects for his country's 6-month Presidency of the EU. He said that job creation and resolving the impasse over the status of Kosovo would be among his main aims. He contrasted the freedom and position the people of Slovenia now enjoyed with his persecution in Communist Yugoslavia. While he was in Strasbourg, we interviewed Mr Janša exclusively for the Parliament's website.
What can a small and young country bring to the office of Council Presidency?
Slovenia can contribute ambition, energy and the willingness of the generation which consciously decided to live in the EU and to build a European future together. This enthusiasm - which shows also the results of the Slovene referendum in entering the EU - is very big in the new member states, especially as we are aware of the alternative to the EU. We know that it is much worse. Therefore we are ready to do a lot to maintain, strengthen and develop the EU.
There are also concrete things. Since its independence, Slovenia has developed many good practices that other countries could emulate. For example during a discussion today in which about 50 MEPs took part, I was pleased that some Slovenian good practices were mentioned. I was very happy to see that MEPs from different countries know some of our products, our anthem, our history and so forth. This fills us with a special enthusiasm right at the start of the presidency.
A priority of your Presidency is to strengthen the relationship between the EU and Western Balkans. With many eyes on that region - especially in relation to Kosovo - what are your predictions?
I believe that during the following months we will move from the deadlock, which doesn't mean we will get a final solution. But we will begin to solve this issue, especially the question of status and the internal consolidation of Kosovo as well as the consolidation of the situation in the wider region of the Western Balkans.
Slovenia can contribute a lot to this - we are ready for that what is coming and ready to solve the problems of Kosovo - which is a part of Europe. The Thessaloniki Declaration ensured the Western Balkans a "European perspective". Kosovo is part of the Western Balkans. What we need to do now is to work on the basis of these two basic principles and take the necessary steps to ensure that the region is stabilized and the EU stays united.
20080111STO18361 Slovenian Presidency of the EU Janez Janša
EN
1
PHOTO
20080115PHT18704.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.eu2008.si/en/index.html?
EN
3
LINK
http://www.eu2008.si/en/The_Council_Presidency/The_Slovenian_Government/Prime_Minister/CV_Jansa.html
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
