Pervez Musharraf promises "free, fair, transparent and peaceful" elections in Pakistan
External relations
2008-01-21 - 20:01
"Pakistan is not a banana republic," said President Pervez Musharraf on Monday to a joint meeting of the Foreign Affairs Committee and the Delegation for relations with South Asia. He assured MEPs that the upcoming elections in the country would be free and fair, that fundamental rights were being respected, and that the recent assassination of opposition leader Benazir Bhutto would be solved by a Pakistani investigation.
Foreign Affairs Committee Chair Jacek Saryusz-Wolski (EPP-ED, PL) asked the President for his assessment of the upcoming elections, which are to be held on 18 February of this year. Véronique De Keyser (PES, BE) said she saw "a danger for democracy" in the recent events leading up to these polls, especially the mass arrests of lawyers. Annemie Neyts (ALDE, BE) echoed this, stating that "all political prisoners need to be released before the elections," while South-East Asia Delegation Chair Robert Evans (PES, UK) emphasised that "MEPs will want assurances that you'll do all you can to ensure a free and fair election, especially with relation to media freedoms."
President Musharraf replied by stating that "there are no political prisoners in Pakistan today," only people who have been "arrested for breaking the law." He added that he acted "in accordance with the law of Pakistan and its constitution" when he initiated steps to remove the Chief Justice from his post in November last year, whom he described as "politicised, inept, corrupt and nepotistic." He said Pakistan's media was as free as any Western country's, and assured MEPs that the upcoming elections will be "free, fair, transparent and peaceful."
Bhutto assassination
José Salafranca (EPP-ED, ES) wondered "what were Bhutto’s assassins trying to achieve?" and asked whether President Musharraf was in favour of an international investigation into the case. The President replied that the aim of any such attack could only be the destabilisation of Pakistan, and he rejected "all conspiracy theories concerning the involvement of the intelligence services or the government" in Ms Bhutto's death. He said the Pakistani security "performed its duties well" in protecting Ms Bhutto, and added that a Pakistani investigation (with some forensic help from Scotland Yard) was capable of uncovering who had been behind the assassination.
"War on terrorism"
President Musharraf stressed to MEPs that Pakistan was "in the forefront of fighting terrorism and extremism," and asked the EP to "help us, instead of attacking us and criticising us." Francis Wurtz (GUE/NGL, FR) noted that the 'war on terrorism' was one that was chosen by US President George Bush, but the President replied that " we are fighting this war for our own interest, not anyone else’s." Cem Özdemir (Greens/EFA, DE) asked about the financial aid that Pakistan is receiving for its contributions in fighting terrorism, quoting reports that some of it was ending up in terrorist hands. President Musharraf denied this claim, saying that the majority of funds his country received was for services and logistics provided.
2008-01-21 Committee on Foreign Affairs In the Chair Jacek Saryusz-Wolski EPP-ED PL Delegation for relations with the countries of South Asia In the Chair Robert Evans PES UK
20080121IPR19237 Committee on Foreign Affairs homepage
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=AFET
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
