MEPs call for sharper focus on jobs and growth potential of cultural industries
Culture
2008-01-22 - 14:47
A new task force on Culture and the creative economy, a programme to support the culture industries, less VAT and a sharper focus on training and mobility are proposed in an own-initiative report by Guy Bono (PES, FR), approved by the committee on 22 January, on the cultural industries' potential to contribute to the Lisbon growth and jobs strategy .
Cultural industries account for 2,6 % of the EU GDP (2003) and over five million Europeans work in the sector (2004). The cultural sector is growing faster than others, and thus has an important role in attaining the Lisbon strategy growth and jobs targets, says the report.
In the report MEPs welcome the readiness of the Commission and Council to acknowledge the central role of culture and creativity in promoting European citizenship and bringing the arts closer to the European public, as well as achieving the Lisbon strategy aims.
More support needed
MEPs make concrete proposals to the Commission and Member States, including setting up a task force on culture and the creative economy to look more closely into the relationship between culture, creativity and innovation in the EU policies.
They stress that adequate funding for the creative industries and communities is essential, and recommend mixed methods of funding and promoting a regulatory and fiscal framework that favours the cultural industries, specifically tax credits and reduced rates of VAT for all cultural products, including on-line works.
MEPs also ask the Commission to consider setting up a MEDIA- like programme that could support digital libraries, music, theatre and publishing, as well as the transnational distribution of works.
Intellectual property: consumers should not be criminalised
MEPs urge the Commission to rethink the issue of intellectual property in order to assure solutions that are equitable for both big and small actors and strike a balance between the respect of intellectual property and the access to cultural events and content. The committee underlines that on the battle against digital piracy, the solution should not be to criminalise consumers who do not intend to make profit out of their actions. Furthermore, MEPs suggest campaigns to educate consumers and raise awareness of their responsibilities.
Mobility and qualifications
The Committee also highlights the importance of cross-border mobility, especially for artists, and the need for better statistics to enable countries to learn from each other and formulate policies. MEPs stress the need to improve qualifications, apprenticeship and training systems, and provide students in the arts with training that will better prepare them better for professional life and encourage synergies between businesses and schools. Finally, the committee suggests that culture should be better integrated in the Union's external policies.
2008-01-21 Committee on Culture and Education In the chair Pál Schmitt EPP-ED HU
20080121IPR19245 Committee on Culture and Education
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=CULT
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
