ECB chief Trichet briefs MEPs on Europe's economic position
Economic and monetary affairs
2008-01-23 - 17:57
ECB Chief Trichet (foreground) met MEPs and MPs on Wednesday
Wednesday morning saw the EU's chief banker, Jean-Claude Trichet, meet MEPs and national MPs in the European Parliament. A wide range of issues were discussed - from the turbulence in the financial markets to the state of Europe's economy. The European Central Bank President said the role of the ECB is to hold down inflation which will help prevent further market volatility. Here is a snapshot of some Mr Trichet's comments on the economy and MEPs' reactions.
His visit to the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee came just after the US Federal Reserve cut interest rates. When asked if the ECB would follow suit he said the ECB's mandate: "is to deliver price stability for citizens, over the medium term, and be credible in this, so inflationary expectations remain anchored".
Following are some of the issues raised during the meeting along with Mr Trichet's replies:
On European Central Banks and their ability to react to crises: "Central banks may take actions aiming at restoring liquidity". However, "the effectiveness of crisis management and resolution depends largely on the existence of an effective supervisory Central bank framework able to identify and react at an early stage". He went on to say that "the main role of national central banks is "safeguarding financial stability".
On the Euro system: "it provides for an extremely strong and effective decision-making in the area of central banking".
On the European economy: "potential disturbances have EU-wide effect (and) the EU financial stability framework should therefore be able to detect any crisis with a cross border dimension".
On inflation: it must be kept under control "in all circumstances" but even more "in demanding times of significant market correction and turbulences when central banks are "responsible of solidly anchor inflation expectations".
On recent turbulence in the financial markets: "there will be very important lessons to be learned by credit institutions in terms of risk management....the experience of the turbulence has highlighted that some categories of risks have been underestimated by banks".
Mr Trichet went on to say that "it is still too early to draw any definitive conclusions" as the present market correction is "complex". The "turbulent episodes that we are observing are a vivid reminder of how a disturbance in a particular sector can propagate across many markets and many countries".
ECB Chief gets mixed reactions from MEPs
French Socialist Pervenche Berès said that Mr Trichet "did not give an answer to the current issues at hand, but he has been rather precise reaffirming that the policy of the ECB is centred in price stability and he was clear asking those responsible for setting prices and the social partners to respectively look at the risk of inflation and constant pressure on salary negotiation".
Spanish MEP José Manuel García-Margallo (EPP-ED) said "Trichet was very generic in his intervention about the supervision system or cooperation between national banks...it was not what we expected".
Mr Trichet did not answer the "doubts and preoccupations" of people and MEPs over the banks intentions, he said. "We still do not know what the ECB wants to do concerning the monetary policy, or whether to introduce some measures like the US just did. To me it looks like the orchestra of Titanic still playing while the vessel is sinking".
German Liberal Wolf Klinz was more upbeat and positive about the ECB Chief's remarks: "I did not expect any further revelation today like interest rates developments, monetary policy or whatsoever". He went on to say that Mr Trichet underlined that "crisis management depends on the existence of an efficient supervisory and central banking framework".
On the need for pan-European cooperation to deal with financial issues he agreed with Mr Trichet that "cooperation between supervisory authorities will have to go further".
20080123STO19499 Trichet: anchoring inflationary expectations is essential for financial stability Economic and Monetary Affairs ECB Trichet at EP 13 September 07 MEPs look for lessons from turbulence on world's money markets
EN
1
PHOTO
20080123PHT19460.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do;jsessionid=45CD67AEB6E0F27A9C98F3C758E7A1A5.node2?language=EN&body=ECON
EN
4
LINK
http://www.ecb.int/ecb/orga/decisions/html/cvtrichet.en.html
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080121IPR19247 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070913STO10347 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823STO09819 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
