Prepare for demographic change, says Employment Committee
Employment policy
2008-01-23 - 14:47
Measures to prepare for demographic change should include cutbacks in early retirement, pension bonuses for parents, a guaranteed right to infertility treatment, easier adoption procedures for abused children, and sanctions against employers of clandestine immigrants, says an own-initiative report on the demographic future of Europe, approved by the Employment Committee on 23 January.
The EU's average birth-rate of 1.5 is "abnormally low", says the report, drafted by Françoise Castex (PES, FR). It stresses that although "maternity choices are very private decisions of women and men which must be respected", birth-rate curves can be positively influenced by "a material and psychological environment favourable to families and children". The committee recommends inter alia that Member States provide tax breaks for company crèches and take measures against employers who directly or indirectly discriminate female workers who wish to have children.
Cut back on early retirement and promote progressive alternatives
MEPs call for a "reform of career management for senior employees" aged 50 and older. They advocate "a cutback as soon as possible in companies resorting to early retirement". However, for older workers who do not wish to continue working due to the hardness of their work, "an innovative form of progressive retirement" should be considered, such as part-time work, tele-working and "job-sharing". Committee members also say that rules and conventions should be established to promote a voluntary prolongation of working life beyond the age of 65, with fiscal and social benefits for both workers and employers.
Additionally, Member States should provide specific employment advice for older workers, e.g. on interview techniques, confidence building and CV writing.
Pension bonuses for parents
Member States should ensure that "work breaks for maternity and parental leave cease to constitute a penalty when women's pension entitlements are calculated", say MEPs. They suggest adding bonuses to pensions on the basis of the number of children parents have raised.
Guaranteed right to infertility treatment and easier adoption of abused children
The committee is concerned about the growth in infertility, which now occurs in about 15 % of couples. Member States should guarantee couples a universal right of access to infertility treatment and medically assisted procreation, it says, adding that the costs of treating infertility medically and psychologically should be covered by social-security schemes.
As an alternative to infertility treatment, couples should be offered adoption, say MEPs, who also call on Member States to facilitate the fostering and adoption of abused children without parents and those raised in specific institutions. Member States should also raise the age limit for legal adoption, says the report.
Promote fathers' rights
The committee says that EU paternity law needs to be improved and urges the Commission to propose specific recommendations for an entitlement to paternal leave. Fathers' rights regarding the upbringing and care of children, particularly in case of separation or divorce, should be promoted, it adds.
Fight xenophobia and clandestine work
Europe needs "a clear and reasoned approach to immigration in order to counter xenophobic and racist remarks and acts and to promote full and effective integration of migrants into society", say MEPs. Immigrants needed to be better integrated into the formal economy and must receive legal and social security, including pension entitlements. Member States should fight "resolutely" against human trafficking and clandestine channels, by penalising employers who employ or exploit undocumented workers, says the report, but should not criminalise clandestine migrants.
Finally, the committee favours giving family members accompanying immigrant labour residence permits and, where appropriate, work permits.
2008-01-22 Committee on Employment and Social Affairs In the chair Jan Andersson PES SE
20080121IPR19248 Committee on Employment and Social Affairs
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=EMPL
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
