Trichet: anchoring inflationary expectations is essential for financial stability
Economic and monetary affairs
2008-01-23 - 15:22
Jean-Claude Trichet stressed on Wednesday the European Central Bank's duty "to solidly anchor inflationary expectations to avoid additional volatility in already highly volatile markets." The ECB President, along with Slovenian Finance Minister Andrej Bajuk and Alexandre Lamfalussy, architect of the EU's financial market supervision system, was speaking to the MEPs from the Economics Committee and their counterparts from national parliaments.
The closing session of the two-day meeting centred on how to improve European financial supervision and crisis management on financial markets.
Invited by one participant to follow the interest-rate cutting example of the US Federal Reserve in response to what the ECB President had called a "very significant correction" in financial markets, Mr Trichet stressed the ECB's mandate: "This is to deliver price stability for citizens, over the medium term, and be credible in this, so inflationary expectations remain anchored." He warned again all those involved in setting prices and wages of the need to avoid second-round effects from current inflation.
Improving risk management
On the wider issue, Mr Trichet said banks themselves needed to draw lessons about their own risk management mechanisms, and that the Basel II framework might need refinement. All players in the 'originate to distribute' model of credit securitisation needed to check that the right incentives were in place to assess and monitor risks. Public authorities should, he said, focus on promoting sound risk management practice. He also made the point that recent experience had confirmed the ECB's view that "a close institutional link between central banks and banking surveillance authorities is extremely important."
"Mind-boggling complexity" of financial products
Alexandre Lamfalussy, who chaired the committee which devised the current EU financial supervision arrangements, said the "mind-boggling complexity" of some financial instruments had increased opacity: average citizens could not possibly understand them, and experts within financial institutions who did, "were not always able to carry their message to senior management." This had led to an over-reliance on the credit rating agencies, with "market participants not doing their homework."
Mr Lamfalussy asked whether the failure of some banks to manage risks properly was a result of poor internal systems, problems with communication or remuneration systems which "blunted risk awareness." The crisis prevention ability of authorities needed to be enhanced, he said, and central banks needed the type of privileged information on what happens inside banks that only financial supervisors could provide.
Financial euphoria from excess liquidity?
Finally, he stressed the role that excessive global liquidity had played in creating "financial euphoria" which led markets to ignore risk. "We would be well advised to seek policy instruments allowing authorities to control market liquidity," he said, arguing that the prime cause of the excess liquidity had been the long period of low US interest rates in the aftermath of the internet bubble.
Slovenian Finance Minister Andrej Bajuk said - echoing a point made by Mr Trichet - that the Level 3 committees (of national supervisors of banks, insurers and pension funds) needed to be strengthened, and that faster progress was needed in the work already underway before the summer's turmoil on crisis management. The Council would try in April to simplify and accelerate the various "road maps" involved. But like the other two speakers, he warned against jumping too quickly to conclusions.
"Stay calm and keep on course"
He added that "we expect a slowing of growth in European economy, but there are no signs so far of a major effect [of the financial market turmoil] on the real economy. Europe has engaged in reform, has increased its resilience and is in a better position than some parts of the world. We should stay calm and keep on course."
Co-chair of the meeting for the Slovenian Parliament Milan Cvikl emphasised the need for coordination between supervisors, and said that the Solvency II directive (on prudential requirements for the insurance industry, currently going through its first reading in Parliament) "will need to ask who ultimately bears the burden in a financial crisis."
The other co-chair, Pervenche Berès (PES, FR), Chair of the Economics Committee, said it would be best for key decisions, like minimum capital requirements, to be made in the primary legislation on Solvency II (Level 1), rather than seeing them as mere technical details. On strengthening the Level 3 committees, she asked the Minister to help persuade the Commission that legislation was needed to achieve this.
2008-01-23
Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee meeting with National Parliaments Co-chair: Pervenche Berès (PES, FR), Chair of the EP Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs Co-chair: Bojan Starman, Chair of the Slovenian Parliament Committee on Finance and Monetary Affairs
20080121IPR19247 Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs Full text of Mr Trichet's opening statement on the ECB website Audio file, 24 minutes Audio file, 24 minutes
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?body=ECON&language=EN
EN
2
LINK
http://www.ecb.eu/press/key/date/2008/html/sp080123.en.html
EN
3
MULTIMEDIA
20080123MLT19418.asf
EN
4
MULTIMEDIA
20080123MLT19425.asf
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
