New technologies for active ageing and longer independent living
Industry
2008-01-24 - 11:33
Helping older people to stay healthier and to live independently for longer is the aim of a new research programme on "Ambient Assisted Living" (AAL), in a co-decision report unanimously approved by the Industry Committee on 24 January. It will develop new information and communication technology (ICT), to enable more elderly people to access public services more easily, but these services must nonetheless respect their privacy and dignity, say MEPs.
As the baby-boom generation retires, the number of people aged 65 and older will rise by nearly 40% between 2010 and 2030 (European Commission estimate). But "innovative solutions are emerging to help counteract problems related to memory, vision, hearing, mobility, loss of independence which are more prevalent with age", noted EP rapporteur Neena Gill ( PES , UK), adding that since "Ageing is a global phenomenon, a strong base of ICT-enabled solutions in Europe could be the start of export opportunities worldwide".
The results of the AAL programme, which brings together researchers in several EU Member States, Israel, Norway and Switzerland, could also be used by other groups, such as people with disabilities, says the amended co-decision proposal.
Respect privacy and dignity
MEPs added several criteria that the AAL programme should take into account when selecting projects. The new technology must be adapted to the needs of older people, such as so-called "smart homes", but at the same time, services must respect their privacy and dignity.
In order to support (near) market-ready products and services, every project should be co-financed by the private sector, and especially by small and medium-sized enterprises, says another criterion added by the committee.
Equitable access for all through cost-effective solutions
The AAL programme will aim to develop cost-effective solutions that facilitate equitable and simplified access to new products services across Europe, but especially for older people in rural and peripheral areas.
MEPs propose that AAL funding be used inter alia for "conversion projects" that transform former military or industrial installations into housing projects adapted to older people.
EU to invest €150 million
The Seventh Research Framework Programme will co-finance the AAL programme to the tune of €150 million for 2008-2013. To ensure success, participating countries should jointly contribute at least the same or possibly a higher amount, says the text. Each participating country is expected to allocate at least 20% of its national research funding to AAL-related activities. MEPs say that if the programme is implemented inadequately, partially or late, the Community will reduce or terminate its financial contribution.
The amended proposal also emphasises that overlaps with existing national and other Community programmes should be avoided.
2008-01-23 Committee on Industry, Research and Energy In the chair Angelika Niebler EPP-ED DE
Procedure: Co-decision, first reading
Plenary vote: March 2008
20080121IPR19252 Committee on Industry, Research and Energy
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=ITRE
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
