Climate change committee calls for urgent review on EU biofuels policy, welcomes Bali roadmap
Environment
2008-01-24 - 18:51
The EP's Climate Change Committee, in a resolution adopted on Wednesday, welcomes the Bali roadmap 2009 deadline for the conclusion of an international agreement on climate change, but also calls for an urgent review of EU biofuels policy and warns that EU participation in US-led meetings of major CO2 emitters should be conditional on commitments from all involved to reduce their CO2 emissions.
The resolution stresses the need for industrialised countries to cut emissions by at least 30% by 2020 and 60-80% by 2050 compared to 1990. Though satisfied that the Bali Action Plan contains "a clear timetable" for reaching agreement, MEPs in the committee regret "that it was not possible to make unambiguous references to science in relation to the necessary greenhouse gas reductions." They welcome, however, the Kyoto Protocol parties' recognition of the need for industrialised countries to cut emissions by 25-40% (compared to 1990 levels) by 2020.
EU biofuels policy: urgent review is necessary
MEPs in the committee, aware of the biofuels targets included in the newly proposed "climate change package", also call "for an urgent review of EU biofuels policy, with particular emphasis on the lifecycle sustainability of each biofuel in terms of greenhouse gas reductions". The committee also underlines that developing and implementing biofuel strategies "should fully account for and safeguard against any associated negative environmental, social and economic impact".
Major emitters' meetings: EU presence conditional on US emission reductions?
Noting the initiative taken by the US administration to convene a series of meetings of the world's major emitters, the committee calls for the Commission and the Member States concerned "to make their participation conditional on concrete proposals from the hosts for short-term emissions reduction targets which are consistent with the aims and objectives of the UNFCCC".
Greening of EU development policy
MEPs also lay emphasis on technology transfer, welcoming the pledge to up investment in "development, transfer and deployment of both mitigation and adaptation technologies to developing countries."
"A greening of the EU development policy and aid is necessary and urgent", the committee says, criticising "very slow progress in this area".
The resolution will now be put the vote at the Brussels plenary of 31 January.
Procedure: Draft resolution --
Plenary Vote: January II, Brussels
2008-01-23 Temporary Committee on Climate Change In the chair Guido SACCONI PES IT
20080124IPR19608
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
