The Week Ahead 28 January - 3 February 2008
Institutions
2008-01-25 - 09:42
Plenary session and committee meetings – Brussels
Plenary session. MEPs will hear the CFSP High Representative, Javier Solana, on the situation in Iran before debating the US anti-missile defence system with the Council and the Commission. Among the texts to be put to the vote are the second reading of the postal services directive, two first-reading co-decision reports on the extension to Bulgaria and Romania of the simplified system of EU external border controls, a report on co-operation among Member States' special intervention units and a report on the energy efficiency action plan (Wednesday and Thursday).
Middle East. EU special representative for the Middle East peace process Marc Otte, Israel's Deputy Minister of Foreign Affairs Majalli Whbee, and Palestinian Legislative Council political committee chairman Abdellah Abdellah, will be received by the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly's political affairs and security committee (Monday).
Ukraine. Ukraine's Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko will be received first by the Foreign Affairs Committee, then by President Pöttering, with whom it will hold a press point (Monday).
Climate. Commissioner Dimas returns to the Environment Committee to discuss the legislative package proposed by the European Commission (Monday), whereas the EP temporary committee will hold a hearing on the impact of climate change on sustainable development (Tuesday).
Telecoms. The European Commission will present the "Telecoms package" to the Industry Committee, and MEPs will hold a preliminary debate on it (Tuesday).
Women in prison. The Women's Committee will vote on a report dealing inter alia with the family and social impact of the imprisonment of mothers (Monday).
Yemen. President Pöttering receives Yemen's President Ali Abdullah Saleh in Brussels on Thursday.
20080125IPR19630 For details of all the week's events, see The Agenda
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080500AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
