Euromed Assembly: focus on Gaza
External relations
2008-01-29 - 09:54
Differing views on the situation in Gaza dominated the meeting of the Committee on Political Affairs, Security and Human Rights of the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly (EMPA) held in Brussels on Monday.
"We disengaged unilaterally from Gaza; we are not going to make the same mistake elsewhere", said Majalli Whbee, Israel's deputy foreign minister, referring to the situation in the Gaza strip and the dismantling of Israeli settlements in the territory. "You see what has happened", he continued. "Gaza could have become the Hong Kong of the Middle East but today it's more like Somalia", added Mr Whbee, who is also vice-chair of the EMPA Political Affairs Committee.
According to the chair of the political affairs committee of the Palestinian Legislative Council, Abdellah Abdellah, "Israel is multiplying the obstacles to peace". He also criticised the Israel for attributing too much importance to the rockets launched from Gaza. "Only two people have been killed on the Israeli side compared to 437 Palestinian casualties" from the air raids of Heyl Ha Avir. Palestinian MP Zuhair Sanduka maintained that "Gaza has become a giant prison" and spoke of the plight of hundreds of thousands of Palestinians suffering from the food and petrol blockade.
EP Vice-President Luisa Morgantini (GUE/NGL, IT) said "the Annapolis final document (November 2007) speaks only of the United States, with the European Union just paying for what has been destroyed". She also spoke of the differing approaches to the peace process within Ehud Olmert's coalition. "Ehud Barak is more a minister of war than a minister of defence", argued the Italian MEP.
"The breaking down of the wall to go and fetch water and food marks the entry of Palestinian civil society into the conflict. It breaks down the blockade imposed by the Israelis, who should take note and lift the siege of Gaza", argued Hélène Flautre (Greens/EFA, FR). She also called on Hamas to stop firing rockets against Israel.
EP Vice-President Rodi Kratsa (EPP-ED, EL) suggested drawing up a list of all the peace plans "to see why our governments have failed so far".
Tokia Saïfi, chair of the Committee on Political Affairs, announced that the Egyptian delegation had decided not to attend, "thereby showing its disapproval of the urgent resolution adopted by Parliament" at its Strasbourg plenary session in January. "I hope the Egyptian delegation will attend the EMPA plenary so we can discuss it with them", added Ms Saïfi. An adviser from the Egyptian embassy was present at Monday's meeting.
CFSP High Representative Javier Solana will make a statement on the situation in Gaza at this Wednesday's plenary session in Brussels.
2008-01-28 Delegation to the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly Chair Tokia SAÏFI PPE-DE FR
Committee on Political Affairs, Security and Human Rights of EMPA
20080128IPR19750
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
