“I am totally persuaded of the European future of Ukraine,” says Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko
External relations
2008-01-28 - 18:52
“We are historically a European country, and although we have wasted some time, and not always done our homework, this new government will do its best to make up for lost time,” promised Ukrainian Prime Minister Yulia Tymoshenko in a 28 January joint meeting of the EP Foreign Affairs Committee and EP Delegation to the Joint Parliamentary Committee with Ukraine. She replied to MEPs' questions on her government’s reform plans, relations with Russia, and Ukrainian domestic politics.
Foreign Affairs Committee Chairman Jacek Saryusz-Wolski (EPP-ED, PL), reiterated that the EP’s latest report “strongly advocates Ukraine’s integration into the EU,” and Evgeni Kirilov (PES, BU), added that “you’ll find enough support in this Parliament for Ukraine’s eventual accession to the EU.” Ms Tymoshenko said “you are our best partners; I cannot imagine that we cannot make it with such support.”
Bronislaw Geremek (ALDE, PL), asked “what can the EP do now to send the right kind of message to the Ukrainian public, so the orange revolution’s spirit is strengthened?” Ms Tymoshenko replied that the key point is the elaboration of the enhanced agreement, which is being negotiated right now, and the political part of which “should be finalized before the end of this year.” “The EP has a very clear-cut position on this, and I ask you to maintain it,” she said.
Russia and energy
Charles Tannock (EPP-ED, UK), asked about energy relations with Russia, especially the idea of bypassing intermediaries for energy purchases. Ms Tymoshenko replied that she will travel to Moscow on 21 February to “negotiate and solve the issues of non-transparent intermediary linkages for energy purchases.” She added that her government will “do its best to have the best relations with Russia, but always with Ukrainian national interests upfront.” She said she wished to see Ukraine’s energy sources diversified, and that the country’s accession to the WTO (which she said was likely to be announced on 5 February), was another important step towards establishing international economic ties.
Asked by Nickolay Mladenov (EPP-ED, BU) whether she will “take up the challenge to explain to the people that joining NATO wouldn’t be a step against Russia,” Ms Tymoshenko said NATO posed ”a hard question.” “Our society within last decades has had a grotesque idea of what NATO is, so we need public education and discussion on this topic.”
Domestic politics
The Chair of the EP’s Delegation to the Joint Parliamentary Cooperation Committee with Ukraine Adrian Severin (PES, RO), said “a very urgent need exists for the dramatic improvement of the democratic and constitutional checks and balances in your country.” Véronique De Keyser (PES, BE), added that the social consequences of all of the economic reforms would also have to play a central role for a successful transition. Milan Horacek (Greens/EFA, DE) said “one of the most pressing problems is to ensure a corruption-free administration, judiciary and police force.”
Ms Tymoshenko replied that the parliamentary opposition is set to receive much bigger powers than previously, in order to ensure that a viable constitutional reform can be achieved. She also listed several legislative proposals (from pension reform to increasing the rights of minority stakeholders in companies), to alleviate the growing income gap between citizens. On transparency and anti-corruption efforts, she asked MEPs to “follow the process, and every time it halts, I want you to give it support.”
Personal ambitions
Inese Vaidere (UEN, LV), asked about Ms Tymoshenko’s relationship to Ukrainian President Viktor Yushchenko. “Do you feel that the President is an ally of yours, or do you see yourselves as rivals for the 2010 presidential elections?” she asked. “If our co-operation with the President is harmonious and balanced, and demonstrates a joint approach and policy towards important matters, there’ll be no necessity for the democratic forces to field two candidates,” replied Ms Tymoshenko.
2008-01-28 Committee on Foreign Affairs Co-chairs: Jacek Saryusz-Wolski EPP-ED PL Delegation to the EU-Ukraine Parliamentary Cooperation Committee Adrian Severin PES RO
20080128IPR19726
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
