Opening of the Brussels plenary: Pöttering welcomes Slovenian and Maltese parliaments ratification of Treaty of Lisbon
Institutions
2008-01-30 - 15:40
Opening the plenary session in Brussels, the President of the European Parliament Hans-Gert Pöttering welcomed the fact that the Slovenian and Maltese parliaments have now ratified the Lisbon Treaty, following on from Hungary. He pointed out that the Maltese parliament had done this unanimously.
Mr Pöttering welcomed the rapid ratification recalling that the Treaty should be implemented by 1 January 2009. President Pöttering recalled that Slovakia had delayed its ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon "for internal reasons" and underlined that all Slovakian politicians have a responsibility in this matter.
New debate on the situation in Gaza - vote on a resolution in February
MEPs voted in favour of adding a debate with statements by the High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy and by the Commission on the situation in Gaza. The House will vote on a resolution on this topic during its plenary session 18-21 February 2008.
The debate will take place immediately after the debate today on the situation in Iran, already scheduled.
The House will no longer debate the report by Umberto GUIDONI (GUE/NGL, IT) on the European research area: new perspectives. The vote will take place on Thursday (31 January).
Highlights of Brussels plenary session
Wednesday 30 January 2008
The first Brussels plenary session of 2008 opened today (Wednesday, 30 January) at 3pm with MEPs debating the situation in Iran with statements from Javier SOLANA , High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy and by the Commission. On 22 January, in Berlin, the permanent members of the UN Security Council agreed on a draft resolution that would strengthen (and possibly add new) sanctions on Iran for refusing to halt uranium enrichment. This resolution is supposed to be submitted to the Security Council in the coming weeks. The EP will vote on a resolution on the situation in Iran on Thursday.
In a point added to the agenda, MEPs will also debate the Gaza-Egypt border crossing with Javier Solana. The House may also vote on a resolution on this topic during the plenary session in February.
The House will also debate the US anti-missile defence system following on from the debate on Iran. Poland and the Czech Republic have recently said that they are in no hurry to conclude negotiations on the controversial US missile defence project.
The European Parliament will then debate the most important legislative topic of the plenary which is the accomplishment of the internal market in postal services. The Transport Committee recommends confirming that remaining postal service monopolies should expire by 2011 - or 2013 for some Member States. In a second reading deal with Council, the committee recommends sticking to the compromise already endorsed by the Council on the opening up of EU postal services to competition. The rapporteur Markus FERBER (EPP-ED, DE) will hold a press conference immediately after the vote on Thursday.
Fiona HALL (ALDE, North East, UK, Liberal Democrat) will present her own-initiative report on an action plan for energy efficiency. It says both the Commission and Member States need to improve their implementation of energy-efficiency legislation. The Industry and Energy Committee considers that a target of improving energy efficiency by over 20% by 2020, in addition to any improvements due to autonomous structural or price effects, is entirely feasible technically and economically, and calls on the Commission and the Member States to ensure that this objective as well as the climate change targets are met.
Late on Wednesday, MEPs debate the reduction in unwanted by-catches in European fisheries. According to MEPs in the committee, the most sensible way to proceed is by choosing a number of pilot fisheries, based upon the quantity of discards produced or on the conservation status of the species involved. Two possible candidates would be the various beam trawl fisheries and those fisheries that catch and discard cod. Scotland already has a system in place for reducing unwanted catches.
Thursday 31 January 2008
On Thursday, the House will debate freedom, security and justice in its annual debate based on oral questions to the Commission and the Council. The questions include the issue of the UK opt-outs in this area negotiated from the Lisbon Treaty. MEPs will also focus on the programme of the Slovenian Council Presidency. Since Slovenia is completing the EU's first "trio presidency" (with Germany and Portugal), its programme largely consists of the follow-up to the goals set jointly by these three countries.
The House will vote on a resolution on A European Roma strategy following the debate took place in Strasbourg on 16 January 2008.
MEPs will vote on a legislative report from Michael CASHMAN (PES, UK West Midlands, Labour) for the Civil Liberties Committee on a simplified regime for the control of persons at EU's external borders. The new system will enable Bulgaria and Romania to recognise unilaterally certain documents issued by Schengen zone countries for individuals making visits of less than five days.
20080129IPR19895 Briefing - 30-31 January 2008 (Brussels plenary session) Final draft agenda - 30-31 January 2008 EP Live - Live broadcasts from the EP plenary in Brussels President Pöttering welcomes the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty in Slovenia President Pöttering congratulates Malta on ratification of Lisbon Treaty
EN
2
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?reference=2008-01-2&language=EN
EN
3
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/faces/live/live-video.jsp?language=en
EN
4
LINK
/president/press_releases/en/files/cp0161.htm
EN
5
LINK
/president/press_releases/en/files/cp0162.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080122BRI19370 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
