Statistics on aquaculture production to be improved in the EU
Fisheries
2008-01-31 - 11:23
In a world in which fish stocks are declining and world demand for fish and seafood is constantly rising, aquaculture is becoming increasingly important. MEPs adopted a co-decision report with 599 votes in favour, 9 against and 17 abstentions drawn up by its chairman, on a proposal aiming to replace the current Community legislation on the submission by Member States of statistics on aquaculture production, which has been in force for more than ten years.
The rapporteur supports the Commission’s proposal, suggesting, however, some amendments to improve the clarity and coherence of the text, take account of the problems faced by some Member States and make provision for information and regular updates for the European Parliament and the Council concerning the application of the legislation.
Mr Morillon considers that the changes introduced should enable the submission of annual data on the volume of aquaculture production to be improved, and that they will improve the accessibility of the requisite information.
According to the European Parliament, in order to ensure a smooth transition, this regulation should allow for a transitional period of up to three years to be granted to Member States where its application to their national statistical systems would require major adaptations and would be likely to cause significant practical problems.
MEPs also add that within three years of this regulation coming into force, and every three years thereafter, the Commission shall submit an "evaluation report" to the EP and to the Council on the statistics compiled and, in particular, on their relevance and quality. This report should undertake a "cost-effectiveness analysis of the system introduced to collect and draw up the statistics" and indicate best practices to lessen the workload for Member States and enhance the usefulness and quality of the data.
Context
The Community legislation on statistics on aquaculture has been in force for more than ten years. It provides for Member States to submit annual data on the volume of aquaculture production to the Commission. Since Regulation (EC) 788/96 was approved, there has been a considerable increase in aquaculture.
"The current situation in the sector plays an important socio-economic role in several European regions by enabling the development of a processing industry with a promising future", says the rapporteur. "The need for a broader range of data has, therefore, become an urgent one, if there is to be rational development and management within the Common Fisheries Policy".
The need for wide-scale collection of statistical data on aquaculture stems from the importance of having an accurate and comprehensive overview of aquaculture businesses, their cultivation techniques and the different production environments, adds Philippe MORILLON.
The aquaculture sector in numbers
The EU’s aquaculture sector totals 1.3 million tons of fisheries products per year, representing some 3 billion euros. This corresponds to around one third of the total value of production in the EU’s fisheries sector and roughly one fifth of its volume. In some Member States the value of farmed products is higher than that of products landed. In others, aquaculture represents a significant proportion of total production. In Greece, for example, 100 000 of every 200 000 tons of fish are produced by aquaculture.
As well as encompassing important sources of products for European consumers, the aquaculture sector is also a substantial source of employment in regions dependent on fishing. European aquaculture provides more than 80 000 full and part-time jobs, which is the equivalent of 57 000 full-time jobs.
20080129IPR19929 Submission by Member States of statistics on aquaculture Text, as adopted by the EP on 31 January, will appear here
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5428882
EN
2
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
