MEPs call for withdrawal of patio heaters from the market in energy efficiency report
Energy
2008-01-31 - 11:42
MEPs back the Commission's proposed Action Plan for Energy Efficiency in adopting an own-initiative report. It says both the Commission and Member States need to improve their implementation of energy-efficiency legislation. MEPs urge the Commission to establish timetables for the withdrawal from the market of all the least energy-efficient items of equipment, appliances and other energy-using products, such as patio heaters.
The report was adopted with 592 votes in favour, 26 against and 30 abstentions. MEPs back the report from Fiona HALL (ALDE, UK Liberal Democrat North East), underlining their support for the Action Plan's aim of "improving energy efficiency by over 20% by 2020."
Speaking in the debate in Brussels on 30 January Fiona Hall said: "On appliances, Parliament’s report welcomes the proposal to put in place minimum energy performance requirements coupled with a dynamic system of energy labelling, to keep up with advances in technology. But our report calls on the Commission to come forward with a one-watt performance requirement for standby, and to carry out an analysis of the potential energy savings to be made from eliminating standby altogether. Our report also urges the Commission to set a timetable for taking completely off the market some very energy-inefficient items of equipment, such as patio heaters."
Avril Doyle (Fine Gael, East, EPP-ED, IE) said: " Parliament's report has been rightly critical of both the Commission and Member States for not doing more to implement existing energy-efficiency legislation. This pressure has resulted in the Commissioner augmenting his staff in the area of energy efficiency; underscoring the priority the Commission is finally giving to energy efficiency in order to contribute to a reduction of our CO 2 emissions and to help tackle the critical issue of climate change. "
The European Parliament considers that a target of improving energy efficiency by over 20% by 2020, in addition to any improvements due to autonomous structural or price effects, is entirely feasible technically and economically, and calls on the Commission and the Member States to ensure that this objective as well as the climate change targets are met.
Major points from the report, which were adopted in plenary by the European Parliament's, include:
The need for speedy adoption of energy performance standards for key products already agreed, such as air conditioning, boilers, TV set-top boxes;
A call for phasing out of inefficient light bulbs, and of patio heaters. Also the introduction of a 'one-watt' stand-by performance requirement and the ending of non-essential stand-by mode;
Criticism for EU governments which have yet to implement the existing Energy Performance of Buildings Directive (only 5 out of 27 countries implemented it in time);
A call for all new and renovated buildings to be included in a revision of the Buildings Directive from 2009 (rather than keeping the existing 1000m2 threshold);
Criticism for EU Member States which have still to present their Energy Efficiency National Action Plans.
The House also notes with grave concern that implementation by Member States of existing legislation on energy efficiency is incomplete and behind schedule.
Drastic cuts in carbon emissions are necessary to prevent chaotic climate change, says the House, and "the most immediate and cost-effective way of achieving them is to use energy more efficiently" - which is precisely what the Action Plan for Energy Efficiency intends to ensure. More efficient energy use, MEPs note, would also reduce the EU's dependency on energy imports. The House also backs the Plan's scope and key objectives: to provide EU citizens with the most energy-efficient infrastructure, buildings, appliances, processes, transport means and energy systems, as well as to encourage citizens to use energy in the most rational manner possible.
Inadequate implementation by Commission and Member States
However, MEPs criticise the fact that "of 21 Commission actions scheduled for completion in 2007 only three had been fully carried out by 1 September 2007." Member States, MEPs point out, have also failed "to prioritise full and prompt transposition of and compliance with energy efficiency legislation."
Parliament wants to "set minimum energy performance requirements for all transport modes"; to ensure that the proportion of structural and cohesion funding spent on improving energy efficiency of existing homes be raised from 3% to a minimum of 5%; and to include binding requirements regarding energy efficiency for all new buildings requiring heating and/or cooling.
20080129IPR19924 Action Plan for Energy Efficiency: Realising the Potential Text, as adopted by the EP on 31 January, will shortly be available here
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5484562
EN
2
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
