You've got mail...
Free movement of services
2008-02-07 - 11:20
While going through our post box last weekend we came across a letter from one of the Parliament's postmen to his second cousin in Tallinn, also a postman. We had intended to write an article about a vote by the European Parliament on new legislation that will affect Europe's postal services. However, we found this letter summed up everything that we wanted to say, so we thought that with his permission we would publish it...so read on dear reader, read on...
The Hemicycle Chamber
European Parliament
Rue Wiertz
Brussels
Belgium
Dear Pat,
Sorry I haven't written for so long, I think the last time we saw each other was at Uncle Fred's wedding two years ago...the last I heard was that Fred is on wedding No2...
Anyway, I am just writing to let you know about events here at the European Parliament in Brussels last Thursday 31 January.
As you may have heard, MEPs have voted to open up Europe's postal systems to competition. This means that any letters we send under 50 grams - like to Grandma for Christmas or Uncle Peter's birthday - will be included.
Some Members of Parliament were worried about what this would mean for the 5.2 million people - yes 5.2 million people! - employed in the postal business. What is for sure is that there will be a lot of interest in the business - they say that across the European Union it is worth €88 billion. Europe's postmen deliver 135 billion letters a year - we postmen work for our crust, that's for sure!
You are probably worried that our distant cousin in the Shetland Islands will get fewer deliveries or will have to pay more as they are so far away? Fortunately, someone has thought of that and MEPs voted to ensure that 5 daily deliveries a week will still take place no matter where you live. They also want stamps for towns and countries to cost the same too.
I heard the man who actually wrote Parliament's report on this new law, Markus Ferber of the European People's Party and European Democrats, and he put my mind at rest last December. He said that "under the new rules, we will still be able to send letters to remote places, and be sure they get delivered." Finally, and this will interest you for sure, Members want the working conditions of those employed in the postal industry to be protected.
The debate in Parliament was quite interesting with some MEPs thinking it a good idea and others against. Brian Simpson, a British Labour Member said that it would help the post offices compete against other technologies as well as each other. (Even I send emails these days, though you can't beat a real letter can you?) A Green MEP, Eva Lichtenberger from Austria, was worried about what would happen to those who lived in the country, in the mountains or on the borders of Europe.
What else can I tell you - oh yes, when is this all going to take place? Well, those nice people in the European Commission wanted it to happen by next year but those other nice people you voted for in 2004 want it to take place by 2011. Twelve countries will wait until two years after this to prepare their postmen and women for the change.
Our Auntie Lena in Stockholm and cousin Christian in Munich may not notice much difference as they live in some of the five countries who already have competition in their postal services.
And finally, just to let you know that the big Christmas presents you sent arrived safely, thank you very much (big Christmas presents are always nice!). The parcel arrived with the company "Break-pack" as big items can already be sent via private companies.
I hope this reaches you soon. The weather here is not too bad although there is no sign of spring yet!
Yours sincerely,
Alfredo
(Your cousin at the European Parliament's postal service)
p.s. Don't forget to post your Valentine day cards soon!
20080204STO20430 Press info: Focus on the reforms Ferber interview
EN
1
PHOTO
20080206PHT20606.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080130IPR20129 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070703BKG08766 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070705STO08854 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
