The Week Ahead: 11-17 February 2007
Institutions
2008-02-08 - 12:35
Meetings of committees and political groups - Brussels
Preparing for the plenary. The EP's political groups will devote most of the week to preparations for the Strasbourg plenary session of 18-21 February. Key points on the agenda include the adoption of the EP's opinion on the Lisbon Treaty , votes on several reports designed to facilitate the free movement of goods within the EU while boosting consumer confidence in the "CE" mark, as well as debates on Kosovo and economic policy . MEPs will also hear the views of Swedish Prime Minister Fredrik Reinfeld on the future of Europe and will hold a formal sitting with John Agyekum Kufuor, President of Ghana and President of the African Union.
Hans-Gert Pöttering in New York. During a visit to New York, Parliament's President will take part in a meeting at the United Nations on climate change and give a speech at New York University. On his return Mr Pöttering will make an official visit to the Belgian authorities (Wednesday) .
Climate change/Prince Charles. During a visit to Brussels aimed at focusing attention on climate change, the Prince of Wales will address an audience of MEPs and have a private meeting with EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering (Thursday) .
Fundamental rights. Members of the Civil Liberties Committee will hold hearings of the final two candidates for the post of director of the EU Fundamental Rights Agency, Dario Carminati and Morten Kjaerum (Monday) .
Lisbon Strategy. The internal market, research, globalisation and the labour market will be among the issues discussed at the fourth parliamentary meeting on the Lisbon Strategy being held in Brussels by the EP and the Slovenian presidency (Monday) .
Space and defence. A workshop organised by the Subcommittee on Security and Defence will look into ways of using the satellites of the Member States for operations carried out under the EU security and defence policy (Monday) .
Pakistan. A delegation of MEPs led by Robert Evans travels to Pakistan to observe the parliamentary elections taking place on 18 February (from Friday) .
Intercultural film festival. As part of European Year of Intercultural Dialogue, the European Parliament is hosting a film festival, starting on Wednesday, showing films dealing with the topic of intercultural dialogue from all the Member States.
20080208IPR20711 For details of all the week's events, see The Agenda
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080700AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
