Joint Parliamentary Meeting on Lisbon Strategy calls for free movement of knowledge
Economic and monetary affairs
2008-02-12 - 16:11
Free movement of knowledge, cutting red tape, investment in education and the labour markets, and more support for SMEs were among the things MEPs and national MPs recommended at Tuesday's closing session of the fourth Joint Parliamentary Meeting on the Lisbon Strategy to promote competitiveness, growth and jobs.
At the start of Tuesday's meeting the three working group rapporteurs reported back to the assembly on progress achieved within the Lisbon process and on steps that need to be taken in the future.
Responding to globalisation through research and development
Malcolm Harbour (EPP-ED, UK), rapporteur for the working group on responses to globalisation through research and development, pointed out that high regulatory compliance costs due to administrative burdens take away "money that could actually be spent for research and innovation". He added that tax incentives should be considered "to leverage public investment to get more private investment". Mr Harbour also stressed that small businesses are "the key engine of creating jobs" and should be encouraged to grow. He warned against the phenomenon whereby companies prefer "to stay small because there are many more incentives for SMEs".
Investing in people and the labour market
"We need to invest more in human resources", said Ilda Figueiredo (GUE/NGL, PT), summarising the conclusions of the working group on labour market measures. The only way of "preventing the demographic deficit getting worse", she said, is to "stop some six million people from leaving school earlier" and to involve disabled people more extensively in the labour market. She was also worried about the "almost 40% of the total number of unemployed who are young people" and the 25 million low-wage earners. Finally, Ms Figueiredo called for more investment in training for farmers and more support for family farms.
Measuring progress towards the Lisbon goals
Slovenian MP Franc Horvat, rapporteur for the working group on measuring the implementation of the Lisbon Strategy, pointed to research and development, energy security and poverty as "problematic areas" where indicators show deficits in implementation and performance. He called for the implementation of a "Fifth Freedom", the free movement of knowledge. "Budgets need to be adapted both on national and EU levels" and brought into line with the Lisbon Strategy, said Mr Horvat. He concluded that the Lisbon Strategy had to be flexible enough to adapt to the different levels of development in the various Member States.
Create a "Fifth freedom" of knowledge
"We should seek to provide as soon as possible the Fifth Freedom - an open, common research area including a European institute of Innovation and Technology", said France Cukjati, President of the Slovenian National Assembly (Državni zbor). He added that a common energy policy should "bring incentives for research and development of new technologies thus turning Europe into a world model and leading player in the fight against global warming".
Mr Cukjati was backed by Slovenian Minister for Growth and Development Žiga Turk, who said that "we need a scientific breakthrough to change into a low-carbon economy; we should enter global markets with new, innovative products and services". The minister concluded that "we need more high-innovative and creative SMEs and we should provide them with better access to knowledge, research infrastructure and capital".
Lisbon Strategy should not become another bureaucratic exercise, says Barroso
"Our major challenge is to ensure that the Lisbon Strategy does not become another bureaucratic exercise", said European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso. For this reason, he stressed, the Commission had proposed in its strategic report "a series of flagship actions", including a Small Business Act, "to foster the performance of SMEs who create 9 out of 10 new jobs" , a reduction of the number of early school leavers and the improvement of basic reading skills, a new generation of world-class research initiatives, the promotion of high-speed internet use, and improved energy efficiency.
No tax rate harmonisation
Hans Eichel, of the German Bundestag, agreed with President Barroso that the Commission should not seek to impose tax rate harmonisation. Mr Eichel said, however, that the way in which taxes are levied should be harmonised because "the 27 different corporate tax regimes are an incredible obstacle for SMEs". "We can't have the same tax", agreed José Albino Silva Peneda (EPP-ED, PT), "but we could reduce the charges on labour, especially social security charges".
Investments in education
President of the French National Assembly Bernard Accoyer reported that France had already launched an "ambitious reform programme" within the Lisbon process which included reforming the French universities and a tax programme to promote research and SMEs. Silvia-Adriana Ticau (PES, RO) stressed that in particular "post-university and post-doctoral education should be boosted".
"The key thing is the balance between all sectors - the economic, the environmental and the social sector on the one hand and the regional aspects on the other", concluded EP Vice-President Rodi Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou.
2008-02-11 Co-chair Rodi Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou EP Vice-President GR Co-chair France CUKJATI President of the Slovenian National Assembly
4th Joint Parliamentary Meeting on the Lisbon Strategy
20080211IPR20875
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
