Opening of Strasbourg session: Kosovo in the spotlight
Institutions
2008-02-18 - 18:11
Opening this week's Strasbourg plenary session, EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering made a statement on the unilateral declaration of independence by Kosovo at the weekend. Mr Pöttering said the decision "was expected and reflects the will of the people of Kosovo".
Stressing that Kosovo "does not set a precedent" because its situation as a UN protectorate is "unique", the president called for calm on all sides.
The European Union, said Mr Pöttering, had a duty "to encourage policymakers in Kosovo to be responsible and create democratic political institutions that respect the rights and freedoms of all citizens in the framework of a multiethnic Kosovo" seeking to live on good terms with its neighbours. The dispatch of the EU's Eulex Kosovo mission to assist with legal and police work was welcomed by Mr Pöttering, who underlined the European Union's commitment to contributing to lasting stability in the Balkans.
Concluding, the EP president said "the countries of the western Balkans have a European perspective". Therefore, "we must help the people of both Serbia and Kosovo to overcome their differences through the angle of European integration, as has already been done in other parts of Europe".
MEPs will debate the situation in Kosovo on Wednesday afternoon in Strasbourg.
Climate change committee's mandate extended
The House agreed to extend the mandate of Parliament's Temporary Committee on Climate Change by nine months, from 10 May. An interim report will now be produced by May, pending the committee's final report.
Request for postponement of vote on Lisbon Treaty rejected
For the IND/DEM group, Jens-Peter Bonde (DK) proposed that the vote on the Lisbon Treaty, scheduled to follow Wednesday's debate, be postponed to a later session since a full consolidated version of the treaties was not available for MEPs to consult. The House voted by 220 votes to 24, with 11 abstentions, against this request, after hearing from rapporteur Richard Corbett (PES, UK) that the vote was not on theconsolidated treaties but on the Lisbon Treaty.
Highlights of the Strasbourg plenary session 18-21 February 2008
Monday 18 February 2008 With some 439 MEPs having signed the written declaration on investigating and remedying the abuse of power by large supermarkets operating in the European Union, the President will officially announce the written declaration adopted. The declaration requests the Commission to propose appropriate measures, including regulation, to protect consumers, workers and producers from any abuse of dominant position or negative impacts identified in the course of this investigation. A press conference will be held at 5.30pm on Tuesday 19 February. MEPs will debate a report from the Budgetary Control Committee on transparency in financial matters which suggests that each institution should adopt rules of professional ethics for its Members dealing (depending on the specific nature of each institution) including financial interests and assets and activities of spouses. The European Parliament will also debate a report on the fight against fraud (2005-2006) which states that: "The House of Lords estimates lost national VAT receipts in the United Kingdom for 2005 to 2006 at between GBP 3,500 million and GBP 4,750 million, which is at least GBP 9.6 million per day; cites the report which states: "The current mechanism for intra-Community VAT transactions is not sustainable." Bill Newton-Dunn (Liberal Democrat, East Midlands, ALDE, UK) will be presenting his report on the application of the law on customs and agricultural matters. The first-reading deal with Council brings the existing Council Regulation (EC) 515/97 of 13 March 1997 in line with the new Community powers in the area of customs cooperation, while at the same time strengthening the cooperation and data exchanges between Member States and between them and the Commission. Parliament also debates a report on factors favouring support for terrorism and the recruitment of terrorists . MEPs are calling on EU Member States to consider amending the definition of terrorist offences and applicable penalties so as to include "the apology and the justification of terrorism" in its scope, "in such a way as to secure freedom of expression". An own-initiative report proposed by the Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs Committee sets out recommendations to Council on how to prevent radicalisation and recruitment of terrorists. Tuesday 19 February 2008 Tuesday starts with a joint debate on the marketing of products with three legislative reports being debated. The free movement of goods within the EU is expected to speed up following a legislative package being put forward by the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection. The reports relate to 3 Commission proposals on mutual recognition and market surveillance. MEPs want to make the sale of goods within the EU easier while boosting consumer confidence in products bearing the "CE" label. At the time of publication, a first-reading agreement with Council had just been agreed. A press conference with the three rapporteurs will be held after the votes on Tuesday. The vote takes place on Thursday 21 February. As part of its long-term debate on the future of Europe, Parliament is holding a debate with the Prime Minister of Sweden, Fredrik Reinfeldt on Tuesday, 19 February at 3pm . This debate - which follows those already held with the prime ministers of Belgium, Ireland, Italy, The Netherlands, Spain and Portugal - takes place as the Treaty of Lisbon ratification processes go on. This will be Prime Minister Reinfeldt's, leader of Sweden's Moderate Party, first address to the plenary. EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering and the Prime Minister will hold a press conference at 4.30pm on Tuesday . On Tuesday afternoon MEPs will debate the Lisbon Strategy – the project to boost competitiveness in the EU economy and thereby create more jobs and growth – with the Council and Commission. The debate will also focus on a report from the Economics Committee on the Broad Economic Policy Guidelines – the EU’s main tool for coordinating economic policy – which are due to be renewed this spring. Wednesday 20 February 2008 On Wednesday morning, Richard Corbett (Yorkshire and the Humber, Labour, PES, UK) and Íñigo Méndez de Vigo (EPP-ED, ES) will present their report on the Treaty of Lisbon . The Lisbon Treaty will enhance the European Union's democratic accountability, better protect citizens' rights and improve the functioning of EU institutions. Member States should ratify it by the end of this year, to pave the way for the June 2009 European elections, says the Constitutional Committee in an own-initiative report. Members nonetheless voice some concerns, notably about exceptions made for some countries. A press conference with the two rapporteurs will be held on Wednesday after the votes. The House will vote on first-reading deal on population and housing censuses . The aim of the regulation is to establish common rules for the decennial provision of comprehensive data on the population and on housing. The agreement says that each Member State should determine a date to which its data refer (reference date). This reference date shall fall in a year specified on the basis of this regulation (reference year). The first reference is 2011. In the agreement with the Council, the criterion on "consensual union" has been removed from the text. On Wednesday afternoon, MEPs will debate the situation in Kosovo . Kosovo is expected to declare independence around 17 February 2008 . Serbian President Tadic has warned of an escalation in conflicts if Kosovo declares independence as expected. Mr Tadic said he could not accept the dismemberment of his country and called for renewed talks on the issue. Slovenian Minister of Foreign Affairs Mr Dimitrij RUPEL for the Council will speak in the debate. On Wednesday evening, the House will debate a report on the demographic future of Europe which says that measures to prepare for demographic change should include cutbacks in early retirement, pension bonuses for parents, a guaranteed right to infertility treatment, facilitating the fostering of abused children, and sanctions against employers of clandestine immigrants. Thursday 21 February 2008 MEPs debate and vote on two reports from the Regional Development Committee on cohesion policy . Should EU regional development policy aim to enhance competitiveness, cohesion, or both? An own-initiative report assesses the rival merits of using regional development money to further the "Lisbon" (growth and jobs) strategy, or to reduce development disparities within and between regions. The second report focuses on an integrated approach to regional and town planning is needed to enhance the ability of regions and cities to improve their adaptability to economic change. By harnessing local talent and assets to drive spatial development, this approach should help remedy problems such as rural depopulation, urban sprawl, and high energy consumption, more effectively, says an own-initiative report. The House will vote on a resolution on the situation in Gaza following the debate held in Brussels on 30 January 2008. As usual, the session ends on Thursday with three debates and votes on human rights issues around the world. The topics on next week's agenda are: East Timor , Belarus and North Kivu (Democratic Republic of Congo).
20080215IPR21447 Briefing - 18-21 February 2007 Final draft agenda - 18-21 February 2007 Watch the plenary live from Strasbourg European Parliament temporary committee on climate change
EN
2
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?reference=2008-02&language=EN
EN
3
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/faces/live/live-video.jsp?language=en
EN
4
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=CLIM
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080129BRI19893 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
