Monday in Plenary: Kosovo, supermarket dominance
Institutions
2008-02-19 - 13:04
Sunday celebrations in Kosovo's capital Pristina
European Parliament President Hans-Gert Pöttering opened the February plenary session by saying that Kosovo's declaration of independence reflects the "will of the people". Also Monday, Parliament adopted a written declaration, signed by over half of MEPs, expressing concern about the dominant position of Europe's supermarkets and particularly the impact they have in forcing prices down for suppliers.
Kosovo: situation is "unique"
Sunday 17 February saw Kosovo proclaim independence to the jubilation of ethnic Albanians, the trepidation of the Serb minority and condemnation by Belgrade. Mr Pöttering said "the decision expresses the will of Kosovo's citizens to take their fate into their own hands."
In March last year MEPs accepted the conclusions of the report by UN envoy Martti Ahtisaari on the future status of Kosovo. Mr Pöttering told MEPs that the case of Kosovo is not a precedent: "The situation in Kosovo is unique; it is a special case which cannot be compared with others." He appealed for reason and calm. "I'm convinced that Serbs and Kosovars will try to bring about peace and reconciliation in the region." The President welcomed the Council's decision to send a police and administrative mission to Kosovo to help with a smooth transition in the region.
Abuse of market dominance by large supermarkets
A written declaration tabled by five MEPs and signed by 439 Members was adopted since it has received majority support. "Consumers, providers and employees of the big retail chains have to be better protected against the unfair trade terms imposed by hypermarkets," the resolution says. In particular it criticises the practice by retail giants of imposing excessively prolonged payment conditions that jeopardise producers' cash flow.
"Consumers potentially face a loss in diversity of products and cultural heritage," it says. Rises in retail food prices do not bring any extra income to the producers.. "Evidence from across the EU suggests big supermarkets are abusing their buying power to force down prices paid to suppliers."
MEPs therefore ask the European Commission to examine the effect of the current retail concentration on the functioning of the European internal market and to propose measures to counteract any infringement of EU competition law.
Written declarations
MEPs can use written declarations to start or prompt a debate on a subject that comes within the EU’s remit. To be formally adopted. it must be signed by over half of the 785 members. The text is then forwarded to the President, who announces it in plenary and it is then forwarded to the institutions named.
Other examples of adopted written declarations:
more publicity for the European "112" emergency number
an end to testing on primates
Also on Monday
During the day's other debates, MEPs turned their attention to transparency in financial matters and the fight against fraud and EU market access for European companies.
MEPs also discussed a report from the Civil Liberties Committee on how to prevent radicalisation and the recruitment of terrorists.
Watch Tuesday's debates and votes by clicking below.
20080215STO21487 Watch Plenary live Written declaration on investigating and remedying the abuse of power by large supermarkets
operating in the European Union Audio, 03:22
EN
1
PHOTO
20080219PHT21662.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/faces/live/live-video.jsp?language=en
EN
4
MULTIMEDIA
20080218MLT21591.asf
-//EP//TEXT WDECL P6-DCL-2007-0088 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
