MEPs in Islamabad watch as Pakistan counts and waits
External relations
2008-02-19 - 09:52
"The world is holding its breath as the results are tallied in these crucial elections," said Robert Evans, Chair of the European Parliament's Election Observation Delegation in Pakistan. He is leading a mission of 7 MEPs in the country, who observed the polls throughout election day on Monday.
The Delegation arrived on 15 February, and has held meetings with President Pervez Musharraf and all the major political parties participating in the elections. Members have also met local and international election observers, as well as representatives of civil society.
"This has been a comprehensive mission that has observed every aspect of the election in fine detail," said Mr Evans. "We are now watching the counting and compilation processes in order to see if the announced results are in line with the votes cast and that the process is carried out transparently and accurately."
EU Election Observation Mission: in for the long haul
The European Union has deployed a team of over 130 observers up and down the country to cover these elections, under the leadership of another MEP, Chief Observer Michael Gahler (EPP-ED, DE). Many of them are long-term observers, who have been in Pakistan for almost two months, observing the campaign, the media environment and the performance of the entire election administration. The Parliament's delegation has closely cooperated with this mission, and the overall findings will be presented at a joint press conference on Wednesday at 16.30 in Islamabad.
The full list of members of the EP delegation are: Robert Evans (PES, UK - Chair), Ivo Belet (EPP-ED, BE), Lilli Gruber (PES, IT), Jo Leinen (PES, DE), Marianne Mikko (PES, ET), Nickolay Mladenov (EPP-ED, BU) and Baroness Emma Nicholson of Winterbourne (ALDE, UK).
2008-02-18 Chair Robert Evans PES UK
Ad-hoc delegation for observation of the elections in Pakistan
20080218IPR21585
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
