Kosovo: a special case say MEPs
External relations
2008-02-20 - 17:30
Kosovo declares independence - MEPs debate Europe's newest country
On Wednesday afternoon MEPs held a debate with the Council and Commission on the implications of Sunday's unilateral declaration of independence by Kosovo. Opening the debate for the Council, Slovenian foreign minister Dimitrij RUPEL reminded the House that under the Thessaloniki Agenda 2003, the EU had announced that the western Balkan countries would eventually become EU members. "Now is the time to recall our commitments", he said, and do something for all the countries of the region.
The EU-Western Balkans Forum to be held in Slovenia in March would be an important step, dealing with regional cooperation in various areas. The gradual abolition of visa requirements for the region was a key issue, in his view.
On Kosovo, the minister said the EU had already announced the ESDP mission, although the establishment of relations with Kosovo would be a matter for individual Member States. Regarding Serbia, he said "The EU needs Serbia and Serbia needs the EU". Moreover, "If negotiations are exhausted, the opportunities for dialogue are not. The time has come for true dialogue between the Serbs and the Albanians in Kosovo, between Serbia and Kosovo, between Serbia and the EU."
Case of Kosovo is "truly unique"
Mr Rupel took pains to emphasise that "The case of Kosovo is truly unique, because the international community had to step in to protect it on humanitarian grounds, and it became a protectorate for nine years". A new formula had to be found, since Serbia had had no authority in the province since 1999, while the Kosovo population had suffered ethnic cleansing, oppression and a humanitarian disaster prior to that. Thus, Kosovo's uniqueness meant that it did not call into question the general principle of state sovereignty.
The EU too was a unique community, said the minister, but it included respect for diversity. He then summarised the main points of the Council's common position just adopted on Kosovo, which included noting that Kosovo's independence declaration committed it to respect for the Serb minority and cultural heritage. The Serb people, heritage and culture in Kosovo "form a valuable element of the European cultural mosaic", he said.
Concluding, Mr Rupel described the EU as one of the most successful peacemaking organisations in the world, one based on tolerance and understanding for other people. His final words were a plea "to keep open the doors and windows for the Western Balkans and Kosovo".
Enlargement Commissioner Olli REHN informed Parliament of his institution's standpoint on Kosovo. He began by saying "Kosovo's Assembly declared independence last Sunday in a climate of dignity. In its declaration, Kosovo committed itself to fully respect extensive rights to Kosovo Serbs".
Celebrations in Kosovo had taken place "in a joyful but responsible manner". However, there had been acts of violence in Belgrade and North Kosovo. "We condemn the use of violence, and call on all leaders and people of the region to remain calm and maintain peace and stability", said the Commissioner.
The EU foreign ministers on Monday had responded with a common position, which was essential "to enable the EU to successfully steer the ongoing stabilisation in the Western Balkans and to help bring the Kosovo status process to conclusion". Like Mr Rupel, he stressed that Kosovo was a special case. Several Member States had recognised Kosovo and Mr Rehn expected others to do so, albeit at their own pace.
The Commission, he said, was preparing to play its part and on 5 March would propose concrete measures for the broader region "in order to advance its European aspirations".
In Kosovo itself, many areas were in need of development. It was important "to help Kosovo stand on its own two feet as quickly as possible". The Commission was working on organising a Donors' Conference, to take place before the summer, to help alleviate the most pressing financial problems.
"I know this is a difficult moment for Serbia" added Mr Rehn. "I am very conscious of Kosovo's historical importance to the Serbian people. However, I believe the time has come to turn the page on the past, and to look to the future. And Serbia's future is in Europe. Serbia and the whole region has a prospect of membership of the European Union". This was the way "to keep countries on a peaceful, reformist track".
Lastly, said the Commissioner, he was counting on the European Parliament's support to ensure that "the citizens of this region can fulfil their aspiration of becoming, one day, part of the European Union".
Political group speakers
Doris PACK (EPP-ED, DE) began by referring to the inevitability of Kosovan independence but expressed her concern about the solution which had been found. She emphasised that "this is certainly not an attack on Serbia" but also stated that "I am convinced that there will be problems ahead." She pointed to the importance of the rule of law in the future of Kosovo and of efforts to fight criminality. Mrs Pack made reference to the award of the European Parliament's Sakharov prize for the freedom of thought to Ibrahim Rugova and concluded by stating that the situation in Kosovo "is not a precedent - it is a sui generis case."
Jan Marinus WIERSMA (PES, NL) pointed out that although there has been intensive debate within his Group on this issue, "we've had to simply accept the reality on the ground." He agreed that the recognition of Kosovo "is a matter for Member States" but referred to the role of the European Parliament in the future of a multi-ethnic Kosovo.
Annemie NEYTS-UYTTEBROECK (ALDE, BE) began by stating that "any country which wants to go its own way ..[..].. is going to damage the territorial integrity of that group of countries." She pointed to the example of the Belgian situation and encouraged the Foreign Minister of Serbia to look at this example. Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck expressed her sadness that the Foreign Minister repeated "the traditional Serbian position without any glimmer of understanding." She concluded by pointing to the €3 billion invested by the EU in Kosovo to date and the need for more. She expressed her hope that the citizens of the region will soon be "able to enjoy normal relations."
Konrad SZYMAŃSKI (UEN, PL) said that recognition of independence for Kosovo was particularly important. The EU should support and build up Kosovo's institutions. There was a risk of ethnic conflict, he said, and history must not be repeated. "Europe has a vested interest in Kosovo and Kosovo has a vested interest in Europe", he concluded.
Joost LAGENDIJK (Greens/EFA, NL) said that "what happened was the unavoidable, inescapable consequence of what happened in 1999 when tens of thousand of Kosovars were murdered in UN presence." He went on to say that "we have seen how angry Serbia is, how angry and aggressive the Serbian foreign minister is - one can understand that, provided it is non-violent." "After initial euphoria the Kosovars will wake up to their responsibility. Proper relations with minorities must not exist on paper alone." One must recognize that "the future Kosovo lies within an EU framework."
Francis WURTZ (GUE/NGL, FR) said "the Union in principle aims to contribute to a better world government and many of its Member States have or will dangerously weaken the future credibility of international law by supporting the unilateral declaration of the province of a state." Countries of the EU were opening Pandora's box by recognizing power relations rather than then legal relations. This will "feed nationalism rather than shrinking its sources. The Union has alienated the Serbian People, without them there is no regional policy possible in that part of Europe." "The new challenge which the EU has just given itself could make it dizzy - we are now heading for a new protectorate and no satisfactory analysis has been brought on the protectorate coming to an end."
Bastiaan BELDER (IND/DEM, NL) asked Minister Rupel about how exactly the internal chain of command would be regarding the EU-mission? He went on to stress the importance of cooperation between Serbs and Albanians: "The Serb and Albanian mafia bands and gangs have been working hand in hand for years - I hope that because of the European mission in Kosovo this will gave way to genuine interethnic cooperation because that is the only way that Kosovo will have the kind of European perspective we want them so much to enjoy."
Slavi BINEV (NI, BU) categorically opposed the independence of Kosovo declared last Sunday. "It sets an inadmissible precedent." Kosovo's assembly had had no right to declare independence. He spoke of ethnic cleansing committed by Albanians: "the fact that ethnic cleansing and destruction of thousands of orthodox churches took place under the eyes of the forces of NATO and UN is despicable and revolting." "We appeal to the EU not to accept Kosovo's independence and to abide by decisions of the UN Security Council."
British and Irish speakers
Sarah LUDFORD (ALDE, UK) agreed with Commissioner Rehn that the message to Serbia must be that the time has come to turn the page. She hoped that Prime Minister Thaci will make it absolutely clear to his compatriots that the protection of the Serb minority and other minorities in Kosovo is an absolute priority, because violence will not be tolerated. The important thing now, she said, is economic development. There is, she said, 40% unemployment in Kosovo, as well as massive unemployment in Serbia as well. "Let us move on towards rapid integration in the EU, moving via visa liberalisation, which I hope will come very soon", she concluded.
Seán Ó NEACHTAIN (UEN, IE) ( speaking in Irish ) wholeheartedly welcomed Kosovo’s Declaration of Independence. Nine years have passed since the Milošević regime ordered the terrible bombing of Kosovo. Kosovans have a right to independence and, in a way, the events of the last nine years have helped them on that road to independence. However, he said, it is imperative that the civil and political rights of the Serbian minority are still respected in Kosovo.
The EU, he said, must support the Kosovan Government in promoting the economy of the state. The problem of unemployment in Kosovo, now at 40%, must be addressed. Mr O Neachtain hoped that this is a fresh start for Kosovo and that the EU will support the rebuilding of this new state in the years to come. He also hoped that this will lead to reconciliation as well as exemplifying the goodwill of the EU in bringing people and families together.
Richard HOWITT (PES, UK) accepted that this is a test of credibility for the European Union, and any failure to respect the Serb population’s rights in the new Kosovo would be a victory for ethnic cleansing in reverse. We should, he said, emphasise that Serbia, as well as Kosovo, will be equal partners as future members of our European Union.
But, he continued, "let not the ghost of Slobodan Milošević stalk this decision or this Chamber. The entrenchment of peace, the precursor of reconciliation, the platform for a whole region – as the fall of the Berlin Wall was for Eastern Europe, so let independence for Kosovo be for former Yugoslavia."
Charles TANNOCK (EPP-ED, UK) warned that we have now managed successfully to injure a Serbia trying to forget Milošević and build a democratic future. Its loss, he said, may fan nationalist sentiments and drive Serbia towards Russia, which, in turn, may apply the precedence of the Kosovo situation in frozen conflicts ranging from Transnistria to Abkhazia. Russia will, interestingly, now claim the moral high ground in international law – perhaps for the first time in recent history.
Mr Tannock expressed considerable sympathy with Cyprus, which has refused to join the majority of EU Member States in recognising Kosovo. Already, he said, Mr Talat, the leader of the so called ‘breakaway republic of Northern Cyprus’ claims Kosovo as a precedent for his territory.
Not surprisingly, Spain is concerned about the Basque Country and Catalonia, and Slovakia about its Hungarian minority. Curiously, although the Organisation of the Islamic Conference (OIC) has welcomed an independent Kosovo as a potential new member, Azerbaijan, although in the OIC, is wary over Nagorno-Karabakh claiming independence and refuses to recognise Kosovo.
Concluding, Mr Tannock said that whatever the EU and the US are saying about this issue being sui generis, clearly not all the countries of the world agree.
20080219IPR21734 Council Conclusions on Kosovo - 2851st EXTERNAL RELATIONS Council meeting - Brussels, 18 February 2008 Press Release 05.02.08 - The future of Serbia and Kosovo lies in the EU - Saryusz-Wolski (Polish MEP) Audio, 17:59 -political group speakers - EN Audio, 17:44 - - Council and Commission - Slovenian Foreign minister Dmitrij Rupel, Commissioner Olli Rehn - EN
EN
1
PHOTO
20080219PHT21666.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.consilium.europa.eu/ueDocs/cms_Data/docs/pressData/en/gena/98807.pdf
EN
4
MULTIMEDIA
20080220MLT21943.asf
EN
5
MULTIMEDIA
20080220MLT21939.asf
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080204STO20426 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
