Combining competitiveness and cohesion
Regional policy
2008-02-21 - 13:31
Should EU regional development policy aim to enhance competitiveness, cohesion, or both? An own-initiative report by Ambroise Guellec (EPP-ED, FR), adopted by Parliament assesses the rival merits of using regional development money to further the "Lisbon" (growth and jobs) strategy, or to reduce development disparities within and between regions.
This report builds on the European Commission's fourth report on progress in achieving EU economic and social cohesion policy aims, including the methods used in Member States to achieve them. The fourth report focuses on the 2000-2006 programming period, but also assesses preparations for 2007-2013.
Competitiveness
The Guellec report notes that regional competitiveness largely depends on productivity, market accessibility and qualifications, plus "institutional factors such as a business culture that facilitates co-operation, enterprise and efficient public administration.
It shares the Commission view that cohesion policy can further the Lisbon strategy, by directing public investment towards projects that "favour the creation of a more dynamic, growth-generating, innovation-stimulating economic fabric".
In 2007-2013, "earmarking" of appropriations will direct 64% of "convergence" resources and 80% of "regional competitiveness and employment" resources towards innovation, notes the report, which nonetheless points out that making (good) use of this money hinges on the ability of less-developed regions to manage research, development and innovation projects of sufficient number and quality to ensure they are used.
and cohesion
However, cohesion policy cannot be confined to meeting the Lisbon strategy aims. Strict earmarking would favour already dynamic regions, says the report, which notes that the Lisbon Treaty, would make "territorial cohesion" (e.g. between urban centres and peripheral areas) a fundamental objective of the Union (alongside economic and social cohesion) (E) and that together these would "go beyond" the Lisbon strategy.
The report calls for the Lisbon strategy to be broadened to include the territorial dimension, so as to take account of regions' specific characteristics, encourage trans-European synergies and co-operation, and support broad-based innovative activities.
To this end, it stresses the importance of real partnership and genuinely multi-level governance, involving national, regional, local and Community players, in defining and implementing regional development aims.
Getting the policy mix right
In fact, achieving territorial cohesion by means of action under the convergence objective is a precondition for the long-term competitiveness of regions says the report, which notes that convergence among countries often masks widening gaps, within and between regions, e.g. in jobs, productivity, income, education and innovation capacity. The cohesion policy objectives of Convergence (1), Regional competitiveness and employment and European territorial co-operation should therefore be treated as complementary in future, it says.
The report also advocates an "integrated approach" that identifies synergies between cohesion policy and major sector-specific policies such as transport, agriculture, fisheries, rural development, environment and energy, and research and technology
Territorial disparities breed Euro-scepticism
There is clear link between rising Euro-scepticism and growing territorial disparities within and between regions, says the report, that demonstrates the need for economic, social and territorial cohesion so as to strengthen convergence and confirm the EU's legitimacy by making regional policy visible on the ground. (Recital C).
Preventing polarisation around cities
The report notes that "uncontrolled urbanisation" can create demographic, economic, social, transport and environmental imbalances within a restricted area and lead to depopulation of rural areas far from towns (14). It recommends better interlinking of urban and rural issues and proposes giving priority to policies that serve a genuinely polycentric development of territories, such that pressures on capital cities are lessened and the emergence of secondary poles is encouraged.
Cohesion policy funding should match adjustment needs
Finally, the report says cohesion policy will need sufficient financial resources at Community level to enable it to deal with new challenges that have an important territorial impact, such as demographic change, urban concentration, migratory movements, energy supply and adjusting to globalisation and climate change. It calls for the revision of the financial framework to be used to define the budgetary resources needed to meet all EU cohesion policy challenges
20080219IPR21740 4th report on Cohesion Text, as adopted by the EP on 21 February, will be available here
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5498472
EN
2
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
