Post-Briefing - 18-21 February 2008 - Strasbourg plenary session
2008-02-25 - 14:10
Opening of Strasbourg session: Kosovo in the spotlight
Opening the Strasbourg plenary session, EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering made a statement on the recent unilateral declaration of independence by Kosovo. Mr Pöttering said the decision "was expected and reflects the will of the people of Kosovo".
Kosovo: a special case say MEPs
On Wednesday (21 February) MEPs held a debate with the Council and Commission on the implications of Kosovo's unilateral declaration of independence. Opening the debate for the Council, Slovenian foreign minister Dimitrij RUPEL reminded the House that under the Thessaloniki Agenda 2003, the EU had announced that the western Balkan countries would eventually become EU members. "Now is the time to recall our commitments", he said, and do something for all the countries of the region.
Ratify the Lisbon Treaty this year says the European Parliament
The Lisbon Treaty would enhance the European Union's democratic accountability, better protect citizens' rights and improve the functioning of EU institutions. Member States should ratify it by the end of this year, to pave the way for the June 2009 European elections, said the European Parliament in an own-initiative report adopted with 525 votes in favour, 115 against and 29 abstentions. MEPs also expressed their concerns, notably about exceptions made for some countries.
Swedish Prime Minister argues for a "strong Europe" and no halt to enlargement
Opening a debate on the future of Europe, Swedish Prime Minister Fredrik Reinfeldt told the House "today's Europe needs a clear vision", involving "strong European cooperation to prevent fanatical nationalism as well as religious fanaticism". Indeed, said the Prime Minister, "it is not a strong Europe we should fear but a weak one".
Enhancing Europe’s economic performance
MEPs say sound economic policies would help to restore confidence following the financial market turmoil. Two texts adopted on Wednesday recommend a series of measures to boost Europe’s long-term growth potential in what is a wide-ranging assessment of EU economic policy.
Resolution on Lisbon Strategy
The plenary also adopted a resolution on the Lisbon Strategy, in which MEPs emphasise the need for a “vigorous” implementation of the strategy, stressing its importance for Europe’s future prosperity. They say Europe needs to improve its growth rates and to overcome insufficient domestic demand, which must be achieved via increases in revenues linked to increases in productivity and employment.
Goods package: MEPs clarify CE marking and importer rules
Parliament has adopted at first reading a key legislative package on the internal market in goods. The legislation cover a large proportion of products marketed in the EU in more than 20 industrial sectors, including electro-technical products, machinery, radio/telecoms equipment, toys, medical devices, construction products and high speed rail systems. MEPs clarify what is meant by the CE mark and insist that importers must be responsible for the safety of goods they import.
Situation in the Gaza Strip: policy of isolation has failed, say MEPs
In a resolution adopted by plenary, MEPs believe that the policy of isolation of the Gaza Strip has failed at both political and humanitarian level. MEPs reiterate a call to all parties to fully respect international law, and notably international humanitarian law. The EP reiterates "its deep concern at the humanitarian and political crisis in the Gaza Strip" but also expresses "its deepest sympathy for the civilian population affected by the violence in Gaza and southern Israel". ( Debate took place on Wednesday, 30 January 2008 ).
MEPs call on better use of Community law infringement procedures against Member States
More resources, a better use of the infringement procedure and increased involvement of Parliament's committees are main proposals put forward by the European Parliament in its report on the monitoring the application of Community law. The report by Monica Frassoni (Greens/EFA - IT), evaluates the Commission's report on monitoring of the application of Community law in 2005 and its communication on "A Europe of results - Applying Community law", recently adopted.
Transparency in financial matters - rules of professional ethics
Parliament adopted an own-initiative report on transparency in financial matters. The House believes that each institution should adopt rules of professional ethics for its Members, depending on the specific nature of each institution, based on its current practices relating to all relevant financial interests. MEPs call upon the Commission to conduct a thorough review of the composition of its expert groups before the end of 2008.
Fight against fraud - 2005-2006 - MEPs point to diverse national structures
Parliament adopted an own-initiative report on the fight against fraud 2005-2006. The report welcomes the fact that the reports on the protection of the Communities’ financial interests and, in particular, the report concerning the financial year 2006, have become more analytical.
EU's strategy to deliver market access for European companies
Parliament adopted an own-initiative report on the EU's strategy to deliver market access for European companies. The House urges the Commission to ensure that the European Union's legitimate trade interests are defended against the abusive or unfair trade practices of third countries. It takes the view that, when third countries unjustifiably restrict access to their markets by European Union companies, the European Union should react rapidly and firmly.
An EU strategy for Central Asia - MEPs concerned about slowness of implementation
Parliament adopted an own-initiative report on an EU strategy for Central Asia. While the report welcomes the EU's increased focus on Central Asia, of which the adoption of the Central Asia strategy is the clearest expression, it notes, however, the slowness of implementation of the projects for the five countries of the region.
MEPs call for increased involvement of African scientists in R&D
In adopting a joint resolution on the importance of supporting measures to improve international scientific cooperation with Africa, the European Parliament underlines the need to increase the involvement of African scientists in international collaborative science and R&D projects in order to keep and develop R&D knowledge in Africa, in particular in specific sectors such as food, health and energy.
Human rights: Timor-Leste, Belarus, Congo
In three human rights resolutions adopted at the end of the week's plenary session, the European Parliament condemned the assassination attempt on the president and prime minister of Timor-Leste (East Timor), drew attention once more to the lack of democracy and human rights in Belarus and highlighted the appalling violence in the North Kivu region of the Democratic Republic of Congo.
Resolution on seventh session of UN Human rights Council
Parliament adopted a resolution giving a mandate to a seven-member delegation of MEPs who on 17-19 March will accompany a Council and Commission delegation to the seventh session of the UN Human Rights Council (UNHRC) in Geneva. The EP sees the seventh session of the UNHRC (which superseded the UN Human Rights Commission in 2006) as a crucial one, since it will examine a range of issues under new working methods and will fine-tune the Universal Periodic Review (UPR) mechanism.
MEPs reject report on factors favouring the support for terrorism and recruitment of terrorists
MEPs rejected a report on factors favouring the support for terrorism and recruitment of terrorists. A lack of consensus among the main political groups regarding the best instruments to fight radicalisation led to MEPs rejecting the report as a whole with 241 votes in favour 332 against and 87 abstentions.
Law on customs and agricultural matters - deal reached with Council
MEPs adopted a legislative report on mutual assistance between the Member States for application of the law on customs and agricultural matters. Ahead of the vote, the rapporteur Bill NEWTON DUNN (ALDE, UK) said: "This is an important measure to counter cross-border crime in the light of technological developments and of enlargement of the Union. I am glad that objections about sovereignty by several member states in the Council have been overcome and we are able to agree on first-reading."
Combining competitiveness and cohesion
Should EU regional development policy aim to enhance competitiveness, cohesion, or both? An own-initiative report by Ambroise Guellec (EPP-ED, FR), adopted by Parliament assesses the rival merits of using regional development money to further the "Lisbon" (growth and jobs) strategy, or to reduce development disparities within and between regions.
Tailoring spatial development planning to foster local talent
An integrated approach to regional and town planning is needed to enhance the ability of regions and cities to improve their adaptability to economic change. By harnessing local talent and assets to drive spatial development, this approach should help remedy problems such as rural depopulation, urban sprawl, and high energy consumption, more effectively, says an own-initiative report by Gisella Kallenbach (Greens/EFA, DE), adopted by the European Parliament.
Tackle demographic change, say MEPs
Measures to prepare for demographic change should include cutbacks in early retirement, pension bonuses for parents, a guaranteed right to infertility treatment, and sanctions against employers of clandestine immigrants, says an own-initiative report on the demographic future of Europe, approved by the European Parliament.
Population and housing census - agreement with Council
MEPs adopted a legislative report by Ona JUKNEVIČIENĖ (ALDE, LT) on population and housing censuses. There is now a first-reading agreement with Council. The controversial criterion on "consensual union" has been removed from the text. The report was adopted with 579 votes in favour 41 against and 18 abstentions. ( Debate took place on 10 December 2007 in Strasbourg plenary).
MEPs call for supermarkets to be regulated to protect consumers, workers and producers - written declaration adopted
With some 439 MEPs having signed the written declaration on investigating and remedying the abuse of power by large supermarkets operating in the EU, the EP President officially announced the written declaration adopted. The declaration requests the Commission to propose appropriate measures, including regulation, to protect consumers, workers and producers from any abuse of dominant position or negative impacts identified in the course of this investigation. 20080215BRI21439
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Opening of Strasbourg session: Kosovo in the spotlight
2008-02-25 - 14:10
Opening the Strasbourg plenary session, EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering made a statement on Kosovo's unilateral declaration of independence. Mr Pöttering said the decision "was expected and reflects the will of the people of Kosovo". Stressing that Kosovo "does not set a precedent" because its situation as a UN protectorate is "unique", the president called for calm on all sides.
The European Union, said Mr Pöttering, had a duty "to encourage policymakers in Kosovo to be responsible and create democratic political institutions that respect the rights and freedoms of all citizens in the framework of a multiethnic Kosovo" seeking to live on good terms with its neighbours. The dispatch of the EU's Eulex Kosovo mission to assist with legal and police work was welcomed by Mr Pöttering, who underlined the European Union's commitment to contributing to lasting stability in the Balkans.
Concluding, the EP president said "the countries of the western Balkans have a European perspective". Therefore, "we must help the people of both Serbia and Kosovo to overcome their differences through the angle of European integration, as has already been done in other parts of Europe".
The debate on Kosovo took place on Wednesday afternoon (21 February).
Climate change committee's mandate extended
The House agreed to extend the mandate of Parliament's Temporary Committee on Climate Change by nine months, from 10 May. An interim report will now be produced by May, pending the committee's final report.
Request for postponement of vote on Lisbon Treaty rejected
The House voted by 220 votes in favour to 24 against and 11 abstentions, against the proposal by Jens-Peter Bonde (DK), on behalf of the IND/DEM group, to postpone the vote on the Lisbon Treaty to a later session since a full consolidated version of the treaties was not available for MEPs to consult. The House voted against this request after hearing from rapporteur Richard Corbett (PES, UK) that the vote was not on the consolidated treaties but on the Lisbon Treaty. The vote took place immediately after the debate on Wednesday and the report was adopted.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Enhancing Europe’s economic performance
2008-02-25 - 14:10
MEPs say sound economic policies would help to restore confidence following the financial market turmoil. Two texts adopted on Wednesday (20 February) recommend a series of measures to boost Europe’s long-term growth potential in what is a wide-ranging assessment of EU economic policy. In a report on the Broad Economic Policy Guidelines, Parliament says that growing imbalances, aggregate demand and global inflationary pressure may become a significant challenge for monetary policy, as could exchange rate volatility and financial market uncertainty.
Enhancing growth potential
Europe, says the report, needs to enhance its growth potential to increase employment. The report warns that the high levels of the euro exchange rate harm competitiveness and reduce the margin of manoeuvre for monetary policy; it also defends the independence of the ECB in setting monetary policy. It says that in most countries consolidation of public finances would help long-term fiscal sustainability, while modernisation of public administrations could help in this regard. MEPs add that the rise in productivity should go hand in hand with a fairer distribution of the benefits of growth and a strengthening of social cohesion.
EU and the world economy
The report says the EU should aim to shape globalisation rather than merely passively adapt to it – transatlantic relations are particularly important for this purpose. It says measures to combat protectionism both within and outside the EU are needed. Protectionism, the committee argues, undermines rather than defends consumers’ and citizens’ rights. Promoting growth and cooperation with third countries, and further economic openness of the EU are vital to properly managing migration flows and fighting illegal immigration.
Growth and the environment in synergy
MEPs say that environmentally-friendly technologies can help enhance synergies between environmental protection and economic growth, while market based instruments should be used to help meet the European Council’s target to make Europe into an energy efficient, renewables-based economy. Shifting the tax burden from labour to environmental degradation is an effective approach.
Economic growth boosting measures
While respecting financial consolidation stimulation of private investment and public-private initiatives could help meet transport, communication, energy and environmental challenges, says the report. There should be an accelerated integration of the services market. The delivery of effective public services, at affordable prices has, says the committee, an important role to play in a competitive and dynamic economy. Opening up of network industries to competition is a necessity.
A coordinated fiscal framework is needed. It should be favourable to companies, in particular small and medium sized enterprises, and geared to renewing growth and generating employment.
The EU's economic policy coordination process
These recommendations come in an own-initiative report based on a draft by Margarita Starkevičiūtė (ALDE, LT). It also proposes a number of specific changes that could be made to the existing Broad Economic Policy Guidelines in order to take the recommendations into account.
The Council is due to adopt a new set of Broad Economic Policy Guidelines for the next three years this spring, following the EU summit of 13-14 March. These guidelines are the main instrument for coordinating economic policies in the Member States in the context of the Lisbon Strategy, which aims to make the EU economy more competitive. Together with the Employment Guidelines, they form the “Integrated Guidelines for Jobs and Growth.” This is the second cycle of guidelines to be adopted since the Lisbon Strategy was relaunched and refocused in 2005.
Resolution on Lisbon Strategy
The plenary also adopted a resolution on the Lisbon Strategy, in which MEPs emphasise the need for a “vigorous” implementation of the strategy, stressing its importance for Europe’s future prosperity. They say Europe needs to improve its growth rates and to overcome insufficient domestic demand, which must be achieved via increases in revenues linked to increases in productivity and employment.
Re-evaluate financial market oversight
Parliament warns that the European economy’s progress is not immune to crises, and points to the overriding importance of safeguarding the stability of financial markets. The recent sub-prime crisis shows, says MEPs, the need to develop oversight measures - they call for an evaluation of the current system of prudential supervision in close cooperation with Parliament.
Research, development and climate change
The resolution stresses the "extreme importance" of boosting research and development, especially given the "huge opportunities afforded to the European economy" from new technologies and services involved in the "decarbonisation" of the global economy. The goals of energy supply security and reasonably priced sustainable mobility and energy for Europe's citizens can be met by the same strategy as ambitious climate protection. Galileo is welcomed as a key EU project in industrial and research policy. MEPs also welcome Commission plans to establish a "fifth freedom" - free movement of knowledge - to go alongside free movement of goods, services, people and capital which already underpin the internal market.
Helping small businesses
MEPs highlight the role of small and medium sized enterprises and "strongly endorse" the Commission's proposed "Small Business Act." They call for more progress on "better regulation" and reducing the bureaucratic burden on businesses, without compromising consumer protection, but express "deep concern" that significant legislative proposals have been put forward by the Commission without prior impact assessments.
External and trade policy
A new comprehensive external and trade policy, is needed, say MEPs, focusing on worldwide convergence of rules, standards and regulatory cooperation. AM 3The House calls for all EU bilateral or regional trade agreements under negotiation to include "enforceable provisions on the implementation of core labour standards and other aspects of decent work, as well as of multilateral environmental standards." Access to the EU internal market for third countries should be "accompanied by a similar openness to EU investors" by those countries.
Tackling unemployment, eliminating poverty
MEPs say that Europe cannot afford current high levels of unemployment, and call for reforms of labour markets and welfare systems to strengthen incentives and opportunities to work. Such action requires trust between enterprises and workers, so social dialogue should intensify to ensure the "flexicurity" principle is implemented in a comprehensive and balanced way for both employees and employers.
It is unacceptable, says the resolution, that people still live below the poverty line, and calls for a comprehensive approach towards eliminating poverty in the EU by 2010. This requires an "ambitious social agenda" to which Member States should commit themselves at the Spring Summit.
Parliament call on Member States to provide for regulations such as minimum wages or other legal and generally binding arrangements – or collective agreements in accordance with national tradition – that enable full time workers to make a decent living from their earnings.
Best achievements and measures of success
Parliament points out that those countries which are open to external competition, implementing reforms and pursuing budgetary balance, as well as high-quality public and private investment, are the ones that have grown the most and created the most employment. MEPs call again for a better involvement of social partners, national parliaments, local and regional authorities and civil society in the Lisbon strategy.
The House also wants to look beyond GDP and GNI figures as a measure for success. It therefore welcomes Commission work to develop new qualitative indicators, to include the social dimension and the environment. Texts adopted 20.02.2008
-//EP//TEXT TA 20080220 TOC NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
MEPs call on better use of Community law infringement procedures against Member States
2008-02-25 - 14:10
More resources, a better use of the infringement procedure and increased involvement of Parliament's committees are main proposals put forward by the European Parliament in its report on the monitoring the application of Community law. The report by Monica Frassoni (Greens/EFA - IT), evaluates the Commission's report on monitoring of the application of Community law in 2005 and its communication on "A Europe of results - Applying Community law", recently adopted. The 2005 Annual report
MEPs noted that the accession of the 10 new Member States had no impact on the number of infringements of Community law, as it may have been the case. Therefore, Parliament asks the Commission to provide reassurance that this is not due to a lack of registration of the complaints or of internal resources or "to a political decision to be more indulgent towards those Member States"
As far as human resources are concerned, Parliament backed the call by the Commission Directorates-General for an increase of the budget in this field. MEPs also supported the practice of sharing of best practices between Member States. Finally, fact-finding missions to various Member States should also be encouraged, according to the approved text.
Communication on "A Europe of results – Applying Community law"
The adopted resolution also analyses the communication on "A Europe of Results", adopted by the Commission in 2007. In fact, the communication includes the proper application of Community law to ensure full realisation of Treaties' objectives as one of its priority objectives.
According to MEPs, the main obstacle to the effectiveness of the infringement procedure (articles 226 and 228 of the EC Treaty), designed to oblige Member States to implement EU law properly, is its length and the limited use of Article 228.
According to article 228, the Commission has power to act against a Member State that does not comply with a judgement of the European Court of Justice, by issuing a series of written warnings. The article then allows the Commission to ask the Court to impose a financial penalty on the concerned Member State.
Therefore, the Parliament called on the Commission to be more firm in applying this procedure so to ensure that judgments of the Court of Justice are properly implemented.
The role of the European Parliament and national parliaments
MEPs propose to involve more Parliament’s committees in monitoring the application of Community law. Therefore, they suggested that, wherever possible, Parliament’s rapporteurs for a particular file should play a continuing role in the ongoing review of Member States' compliance with Community law.
Finally, Members called for increased cooperation between national parliaments and the European Parliament to promote effective scrutiny of European matters at national level. Text adopted on monitoring the application of Community Law
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0060 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Treaties
Ratify the Lisbon Treaty this year says the European Parliament
2008-02-25 - 14:10
The Lisbon Treaty would enhance the European Union's democratic accountability, better protect citizens' rights and improve the functioning of EU institutions. Member States should ratify it by the end of this year, to pave the way for the June 2009 European elections, said the European Parliament in an own-initiative report adopted with 525 votes in favour, 115 against and 29 abstentions. MEPs also say that they are aware of concerns, notably about exceptions made for some countries. European Parliament President Hans-Gert Pöttering said immediately after the vote: "I welcome this overwhelming majority supporting for the Treaty. The vote represents the free will of the people you represent. This Treaty gives the EU the possibility to function properly and improves democratic structures." Referring to protests in the House, he said: "We in the European Parliament defend European values. We will never let volume and noise prevail over a democratic Europe."
If all Member States ratify the new treaty by the end of this year, citizens could vote in the June 2009 European elections with full knowledge of the new institutional framework, said the MEPs who approved the report by Iñigo Mendez de Vigo (EPP-ED, ES) and Richard Corbett (PES, UK)
More democratic accountability
The Lisbon Treaty would give the European and national parliaments a bigger role in the decision-making process, and thus raise the EU's democratic profile, says the report.
In fact, with just a few exceptions, it would place the Council and the European Parliament would on an equal footing as lawmakers, notably in the budgetary procedure and in justice and home affairs. National parliaments would gain the right to object to a proposal if they felt the subsidiarity principle had not been respected, noted MEPs.
Moreover, the President of the Commission, proposed by the European Council on the basis of the European election results, would be elected by the European Parliament.
More rights and clarity for citizens
The report also welcomes the fact that the Lisbon Treaty would strengthen citizens' rights. For example, the binding nature of the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights offers greater certainty that citizens' rights will be fully respected, because any action taken by the EU institutions would have to pass this test.
Introducing a right of initiative for EU citizens, by enabling them to put proposals to the Commission, would step up their participation in the EU decision-making process.
Finally, the new treaty would also improve clarity and allow citizens better to understand the EU's role and functions. MEPs believe that the Lisbon Treaty provides adequate guarantees that the EU will not become a centralised "superstate" - it points out that new provisions confirm the specificity of the Union, whose powers are conferred by the Member States, and reaffirm the obligation to respect national identities.
Greater effectiveness
Members also welcome the provisions that seek to improve the Union's ability to act, noting that greater use of qualified majority voting, replacing unanimity, would facilitate agreements in the Council, and that the new European Council President and High Representative for foreign policy High Representative should improve the coherence of EU action.
Abolishing the pillar structure and better defining EU aims in the fields of climate change, children's rights, energy, space, tourism, sport, public health and civil protection would also enhance the EU institutions' capacity to deliver and address people's concerns, said the House.
Concerns on national exceptions
Members nonetheless voice some concerns about the new Treaty. First, they regretted that the "constitutional approach" had been abandoned, whilst acknowledging that this had been necessary to secure agreement among Member States. They also criticise the special arrangements made for some Member States in the field of police co-operation and criminal law and the Charter of Fundamental Rights.
Need to inform citizens
MEPs reiterate their appeal to Member States to guarantee maximum political commitment to ensure that the new treaty enters into force well before the EP elections in June 2009.
Finally, the report calls on national authorities and EU institutions to do their best to inform citizens about the Lisbon Treaty's aims and content. To this end, the EP asked that a consolidated version of the treaties be published as soon as possible.
Explanatory statement of the report - New powers for the European Parliament explained
The explanatory statement of the report provides a comprehensive and detailed explanation of the new Treaty - below is the part on the European Parliament
(1) The Treaty of Lisbon substantially enhances the role of the European Parliament, the only European institution directly elected by citizens:
- its role as a co-legislator is fully recognised, thanks to the general application of the existing codecision procedure, which is elevated to the rank of the ordinary legislative procedure, but also thanks to an increase in Parliament's participation in special legislative procedures. In future the public will clearly be able to see that European legislative acts are adopted by the chamber which represents them and by the chamber which represents States; in parallel, in the field of international agreements its approval will also be required as a general rule;
- it acquires a concurrent right of initiative for revision of the Treaties and participates in that procedure through its involvement in the Convention convened to prepare the revision (its approval is required for the Council to decide not to convene the Convention);
- its budgetary powers, which it shares with the Council on an equal footing, now extend to all Union expenditure;
- its powers of political scrutiny are enhanced, particularly by means of the election of the President of the Commission;
- various decisions which are of great importance in the life of the Union and which hitherto have rested solely with the Council are now also subject to approval by Parliament: the decision to initiate enhanced cooperation; the use of the flexibility clause enabling the Union to take measures not provided for in the Treaties in order to attain ends for which they do provide; decisions on the use of the general ‘bridging clauses’ (‘passerelles’) substituting qualified majority voting for unanimous voting or replacing special legislative procedures with the ordinary legislative procedure; certain decisions making it possible to extend the scope of legal bases provided for in the Treaties, such as those concerning the European Public Prosecutor's Office or judicial cooperation in criminal matters;
- even in the field of the common foreign and security policy, where it has no decision-making powers, the European Parliament acquires a general right to be informed and consulted.
(2) In conclusion it may be said that, although it might have been possible to go further in certain areas, the European Parliament acquires powers of codecision in virtually all areas of Union policy. Basically, this is a matter of putting into practice the twofold legitimacy of the EU as a Union of States and of citizens, which, despite the lack of any explicit recognition of its importance in the new Treaties, is the basis for the European integration process. The Treaty of Lisbon thus undeniably represents a significant enhancement of the democratic dimension of the Union.
(3) The number of Members of the European Parliament is limited to 751. The amended TEU does not state how the seats are to be distributed among Member States, but instructs the European Council, acting on the initiative of the European Parliament and with its assent, to decide, before the 2009 elections, what its composition should be, on the basis of the principle of 'degressively proportional' representation, with a minimum of six and a maximum of 96 seats per Member State.
Debate preceding the vote
MEPs debated the Lisbon Treaty ahead of a key vote on the report prepared by Richard CORBETT (PES, UK) )and Íñigo MÉNDEZ DE VIGO (EPP-ED, ES). The larger political groups spoke in favour of the Treaty and the report as a great improvement on the current Treaties while the smaller groups called for more referenda and spoke out against the new powers for the EU and a lack of democratic accountability. The House will vote on the report at midday.
Co-rapporteurs
Opening Wednesday's debate on the Treaty of Lisbon, Richard CORBETT (PES, UK), the first of the two joint rapporteurs, stressed that the new treaty would improve the current treaty by making the European Union more effective and more democratic.
Firstly, it would be "increase democratic accountability". EU legislation will in future be subject to prior scrutiny of national parliaments before coming before the Council of Ministers and the European Parliament. "This is a level of scrutiny that exists in no other international structure", said Mr Corbett. The EP's powers would be enhanced in other areas too, enabling it to elect the president of the European Commission and giving it full power over the budget and agriculture. "This treaty, if nothing else, is a massive increase in democracy in Europe", Mr Corbett argued.
Secondly, the new treaty enshrines the Charter of Fundamental Rights, which will ensure "that EU law does not violate basic standards of human rights". Thirdly, the treaty will make the EU more effective, for example by extending the use of qualified majority voting and rationalising the size of the Commission.
Concluding, Mr Corbett reiterated his main point, that the new treaty would make the European Union "more democratic, more effective and more friendly to citizens".
The second joint rapporteur, Íñigo MÉNDEZ DE VIGO (EPP-ED, ES) acknowledged that the loss of the Constitutional Treaty had been a disappointment to some, saying "some of us were more ambitious than the Lisbon Treaty" but he saw the new treaty as "a political solution" to achieving ratification by all the Member States.
Endorsing Mr Corbett's description of the new treaty, Mr Méndez de Vigo, said it had preserved "the essential points" of the Constitution, in that it was "more democratic, more effective and gives added value for citizens".
Turning to the broader purpose of the EU, he argued that the situation in Kosovo showed that "Europe must provide an outlet for the aspirations of other peoples". And other issues, such as climate change, immigration and nuclear proliferation, could be better tackled thanks to the Lisbon Treaty, which "gives us the instruments to do these things". We still need the political will but at least with this treaty we will have the tools", he stressed.
European Council
"We agree with the rapporteurs' positive assessment of many elements of the treaty, and that improving effectiveness and democratic accountability is the right response long-standing challenges within Member States and on the international scene", said Slovenia's State Secretary for European Affairs Janez LENARČIČ for the Council.
Among the treaty's advantages, Mr Lenarčič listed safeguarding efficient functioning, simplifying decision-taking, enhancing transparency and democracy and bringing the Union closer to citizens. He acknowledged that the treaty's ratification is the sovereign preserve of Member States, but hoped that it would proceed smoothly, so that the treaty can take effect at the start of 2009.
He looked forward to the simplified decision-taking arrangements that the treaty would bring, and to co-operating with the EU's future presidencies. Many elements of the treaty will need to be worked on with Parliament and the Commission, which must assume their respective responsibilities, he concluded.
European Commission
"It's important to do the right things, but also to do things right", said Commission Vice-President Margot WALLSTRÖM, citing policies in areas such as climate change, energy and agriculture.
She welcomed the treaty as a "positive step towards making the Union more effective, transparent and democratic", noting that it would not only enhance the European Parliament's role in budgetary and other matters, but also step up the involvement of national parliaments in policy making.
The loss of constitutional symbols, and the extension of national "opt-ins", was "the price we had to pay for agreement", said Ms Wallström, who nonetheless warned that although the ratification is under way, there is "no inevitability" about it.
During the ratification period, communication with citizens would be vital, she said, stressing that the Commission will work closely with national authorities and the European Parliament's national offices to inform citizens about the treaty and EU policies in areas that they care about, such as climate change, growth and jobs, and the EU's global role.
At the same time, the Commission is preparing proposals on how to help the EU to "connect with citizens", she said.
Committee speaker
Speaking for the Foreign Affairs Committee, Andrew DUFF (ALDE, UK) said that one of the strongest features of the Lisbon Treaty will be the coming of age of the Common Foreign Security and Defence Policy. The radical change will be the upgrading of the High Representative for Foreign Policy to Vice-President of the Commission and Chair of the Council. It was paramount, he said, that these new arrangements come into force immediately following the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty, otherwise it would lead to cynicism amongst public opinion and confusion from third countries.
Political group speakers
Speaking on behalf of the EPP-ED group, Joseph DAUL (FR) first pointed out that five Member States had already ratified the Lisbon Treaty and that Poland had announced it was starting the process. He believed the new treaty was "very important for relaunching Europe's momentum" and providing "more democracy, more visibility and greater influence at home and abroad". He listed in more detail the benefits of the treaty - highlighting among other things the right of Europe's citizens, if a million people sign a petition, to ask the Commission to take action - before calling for speedy completion of the ratification process so that it can enter into force by 2009.
For the Socialists, Martin SCHULZ (DE) believed the key question was "What is the purpose of this exercise?" or "Why do we need the treaty?". After comparing the situation in Europe and the world today with that obtaining at various points over the last 100 years, he then asked "where will be in 25, in 50, in 100 years from now?". The rise of India and China and the fact that "the world is now a global village" raised the question "How can we contribute?" but above all it was clear that "we cannot go it alone". It was thus on the basis that "unity is strength" that his group gave its backing to the treaty.
Speaking for ALDE group Andrew DUFF (UK) said the world waits for the EU with a stronger capacity to act on the world stage. Mr Duff said that, given the work completed at the Convention and the Intergovernmental Conference, quarrels over institutional wrangling should have been settled "for a substantial amount of time". He looked forward to an improved quality of legislation flowing from Brussels and Strasbourg. Mr Duff said that there were those that wanted to turn the clock back to the 19th century including the British Conservative Party. The UK government, he said, was "too frightened" to stand up for the full Treaty as the UK opt-outs had demonstrated.
For the UEN group Brian CROWLEY (IE) (speaking in Irish) said, that the Lisbon Treaty represented progress for the European Union. It will lead to a stronger economic performance and improve the lives of the citizens o f the EU. The Irish people, he said, would have the opportunity to vote on this very soon. (Speaking in English) Mr Crowley said that the single market had been extremely important for the economy over the last 30 years. Any organisation that started with six members and has grown to 27 would need to change its rules. Ireland, he said, had seen huge development from infrastructure to peace and those that criticised the EU were ignoring the reality on the ground.
Johannes VOGGENHUBER (Greens/EFA, AT) said the Treaty "is the foundation of the first supranational democracy in history". We are "building a European social union with its own legal personality." This means that it would have to become a responsible actor. However, the treaty was "below our aspirations". The aim had been to "devise new solutions, we wanted to be able to have a new start every day, a new dawn every day, and that has been much weakened by the reactionary position of the chancelleries - they did not want to see this brave new voice." "As we look to the future, we have to fulfil the spirit of the treaty and make a union of people and not of states", he concluded. One should "assert a strong new identity based on citizens."
Mary Lou MCDONALD (GUE/NGL, IE) spoke of a "fear of referendums" in all Member States except Ireland. "The Lisbon Treaty commits us to more military spending and increased support of armaments.... Why do we keep on emulating the USA?" she asked. "This treaty is not about reform or efficiency, it is a carte blanche for further eroding democracy." She called it a "charter for further privatization." There is "nothing new on the protection of workers rights and nothing new on the environment. Would people of Europe support such a treaty?" she asked. "I believe not! That's why they are not being asked." "The Lisbon treaty is a bad deal for Ireland, a bad deal for Europe, and a bad deal for the wider world."
"What the EP is engaged in here in today's debate is nothing less than a massive exercise of deceit" said Nigel FARAGE (IND/DEM, UK). Compared to the failed Constitution, the Lisbon Treaty "is virtually identical in every regard, and it is constitutional because it gives the EU a full legal personality and the ability to amend itself" without having to call an intergovernmental conference. "The truth is that you are too chicken to have a referendum. Now you resort to totalitarian means to get this treaty through." The Lisbon Treaty "gives the EU the ability to legislate over every aspect of our lives." "I hope that the people of Ireland send a large resounding NO. You may be complacent today, but you are increasingly being held in contempt."
"I reject this report and the treaty it supports", said Jim ALLISTER (NI, UK). "Before the Dutch and French referendums we heard much talk in this house abut the will of the people." In their arrogance, the EU political elite had thought that the people would be persuaded with their propaganda, he said. That is why the "key focus of the last 3 years was on hatching an intergovernmental conspiracy to foist this treaty on Europeans without having to ask them." This constitution was all about transferring more and more national power to Brussels.
British and Irish speakers
Ian HUDGHTON (Greens/EFA, UK) stated that much is made of the new right of national parliaments to intervene, but this of course does not apply to the devolved, national Parliament of Scotland or indeed to other stateless nations.. Secondly, he said, "the treaty process failed to address the issue of a single seat for the European Parliament, leaving us with the indefensible situation of trekking between Brussels and Strasbourg." Thirdly, Mr Hudghton said that he could not support the inclusion of the common fisheries policy (CFP) as one of only four exclusive competences of the Union listed in the Treaty. He feared that this could seriously impede progress towards radical reform and change in fisheries management, by preserving the over-centralised failure which the CFP has become.
Stating that his party favoured a referendum on the Constitution, Mr Hudghton said that while this Treaty may be different in legal status, in substance it is the same. Therefore, he said, the SNP is simply being consistent by supporting a referendum on this Treaty. "We are not afraid of a public debate on Europe. On the contrary, forging a new relationship between Scotland and the EU is central to our vision." Mr Hudghton said he wanted to see Scotland joining the family of European nations and playing a constructive part in decision-making as a Member State, not as an observer from the sidelines.
Timothy KIRKHOPE (EPP-ED, UK) stated that from the start, he has made it clear that this Treaty or Constitution is not the best way forward for Europe at this time. Conservatives, he said, support a Europe of independent states working closely together to meet the challenges of globalisation, global poverty and global warming, as has already been stated by others. These are the priorities, and it must be done in a cooperative fashion. I do not believe that what we have before us will help us particularly in that great challenge. "
Concluding, Mr Kirkhope said that while "our eloquent rapporteurs who quote Shakespeare in their advocacy of haste, should, I think, also note King John, Act V, Scene II, where a supplicant said, ‘According to the fair play of the world, let me have audience’. Well, perhaps, in the UK, the Prime Minister should note that, and he should then allow his citizens to have their say on this undoubtedly vital matter."
Kathy SINNOTT (IND/DEM, IE) objected to a report on the Lisbon Treaty being rushed through the House before Members are given the Treaty in a readable, contextual form. Coming from Ireland, where a referendum is taking place, and as news of this spreads, she said she is receiving requests for the Treaty every day. "When I have to tell people there is no readable version, they are incredulous. But when I tell them that this is by decree of the Intergovernmental Conference, they are angry."
Concluding she said "Our citizens are intelligent, thoughtful and well capable of playing their democratic role in their own governance. And what we are doing here today, and throughout this Lisbon process, is a betrayal of our citizens, the very citizens whose cooperation and hard work we will need to further the European project.. I warn you: do not be surprised if, some day, these same long-suffering citizens refuse that cooperation."
Ashley MOTE (NI, UK) asked if the Lisbon Treaty is such a good thing, why is it so inaccessible. Like the last Treaty, he said, this one gives the EU a permanent right to seize more powers without any future agreements – "an outrageous power grab." Such undemocratic powers, he said, are illegal in the United Kingdom, because no British Parliament can bind its successors. "Mrs Wallström said the word ‘constitution’ was being dropped to avoid trouble with the Brits – too right! We should leave, taking our EUR 2 million an hour with us, and we would all be better off."
Supporting the Treaty, Marian HARKIN (ALDE, IE) said that, while it is not perfect, it is, as Commissioner Wallström has said, a compromise, but it is going in the right direction.
In Ireland, Mrs Harkin said, one of the arguments used by supporters of a ‘no’ vote is to suggest that Lisbon is a self-amending Treaty, yet Article 48(4) states quite clearly that any amendments to the Treaty will enter into force only after being ratified by all Member States in accordance with their respective constitutional requirements. That is the very essence of subsidiarity, she said.
The Lisbon Treaty, she said, upholds the sovereign right of Member States and that is just one of the very many reasons why she is supporting it.
Later in the debate "catch the eye" Mrs Harkin noted that she did not hear anybody comment on Article 49, which states that, if Lisbon is ratified, any Member State can decide to withdraw from the Union in accordance with its own constitutional requirements. That means, she said, that all of those who believe that they should not be in Europe can advise their citizens to withdraw from the Union after we ratify the Lisbon Treaty. Therefore, they have no excuse not to wish to see this Treaty passed.
Roger HELMER (NI, UK).stated that in his country, opinion polls show that some 75% of the British people want a referendum and two thirds of them would vote ‘no’. Today, Mr Helmer said, the European project is abandoning any claim to democratic legitimacy. "Today, we will vote through the renamed Constitution in an act that shows monstrous contempt for European citizens and democratic values. In 2005, the voters of France and Holland decisively rejected the constitution."
Mr Helmer expressed astonishment at the bare-faced effrontery of European leaders, who have changed the packaging but are now bringing back the substance in defiance of public opinion. Most French and Dutch MEPs will support this report, he said. " I do not know how they will face their voters. I do not know how they will sleep at night."
In the UK, he said, the Labour Government has broken its solemn promise of a referendum, yet in postal polls conducted by campaign groups, more than 80% of voters vote ‘yes’ to a referendum. "By forcing this measure through in the teeth of public opposition, you are hacking at the very foundations of the Europe you are seeking to build." We must listen to the people. They demand a referendum, he concluded.
Proinsias DE ROSSA (PES, IE) said that the weapons of those who pedal fear is the big lie, "eloquently demonstrated here today by Ms McDonald and Ms Sinnott". They, he said, wearily turn truth on its head to claim that elected representatives of more than 80% of the people of Europe are about to crush democracy, are about to deny people ever again having a say in the construction of Europe. Before polling day in Ireland, all these big lies will have been shown up for what they are: the nightmares of parties which have learned nothing from their history and are bent on condemning the people of Europe to repeating it. Mr De Rossa was confident that Ireland’s decision will be to stay at the heart of Europe.
Avril DOYLE (EPP-ED, IE) stated that all the Irish parties, including her own (Fine Gael), with the exception of Sinn Fein, will be supporting the Irish Government and working hard to ratify this Treaty and to get the message across. However, Mrs Doyle warned that "while your goodwill and support is most welcome, a gentle word of warning – please do not be tempted in your eagerness for a positive outcome of our referendum, to tell the Irish electorate how to vote." In conclusion, addressing the Commission, she stated " please stop picking rows with Ireland on administrative and other issues such as the REPS, which can be misrepresented, deliberately or otherwise, by the Treaty naysayers."
Andrew DUFF (ALDE, UK) questioned those colleagues who oppose the Treaty to explain precisely what is it they mean when they speak about a ‘self-amending’ treaty. Having not seen in the Treaty himself, he asked could they bring him the clause that provides for this sort of protean development? Mr Duff said that the fact is that a single change requires the unanimous agreement of all the prime ministers and national parliaments of all the Member States, and important changes that confer fresh competences upon us in the EU require the procedure of a convention, an intergovernmental conference and formal ratification in all Member States.
On the role of national parliaments, Mairead MCGUINNESS (EPP-ED, IE) said " let national parliaments take the power this Treaty will give them and let the ordinary decent citizens of the countries force them to use that power effectively." Responding to Mr Duff, she said, "there is falsehood being peddled in Ireland on the ‘self-amending’ Treaty: it is the invention of a negative mind. It is not true and it is not so."
Concluding, Ms McGuinness said that, contrary to the naysayers, this Treaty is a good deal for Ireland, a good deal for the EU, a good deal for Europe, and she urged citizens in Ireland to vote ‘yes’!
Colm BURKE (EPP-ED, IE) said that a ‘yes’ for the Lisbon Treaty is a ‘yes’ for the Charter of Fundamental Rights. While the Charter, he said, does not establish any new powers for the EU, it does make it easier for citizens to find out what their rights and responsibilities are under European law.
The Charter, Mr Burke said, was only a political declaration when it was initially agreed in 2000. If the people of Ireland vote ‘yes’ to the Lisbon Treaty, they will also be conferring legally-binding treaty status on the Charter of Fundamental Rights, to the benefit of all Irish and EU citizens.
Gay MITCHELL (EPP-ED, IE) questioned what sort of referendum do those who argue for a referendum want? "Do they want a referendum in which 50% or more of people across the European Union make this decision for them, in which case it will be the big states, or a mixture of small and big states, which will decide for everybody? Or do they mean that it must be over 50% in each Member State, in which case each Member State gives up its right to make the decision to every other Member State! Where is the rationality in that?
Winston Churchill used the phrase ‘terminological inexactitudes’. I will say nothing more than that in respect of the yellow-bellies on my right, but they certainly are disingenuous at best!"
Bairbre DE BRÚN (GUE/NGL, UK) (speaking in Irish) stated that Article 10(a) of the Treaty provides for "the removal of restrictions on international trade bit by bit" and it is, she said, a guiding principle that it will interact with states which are not EU Member States. Since October 2006, she said, the EU has been trying to remove obstacles to developing countries, obstacles such as environmental regulations, regulations for consumer protection and health regulations, regardless of the implications of these actions. Putting those two elements together, she concluded, this gives us a significant sign about the step backwards in the EU approach to combat world poverty and inequality.
Responses to the debate
Summing up for the Council, Mr Lenarčič stressed that patience and determination would be required to deal with who represents the Council, with the operation of foreign policy, and with justice and home affairs issues. On ratification, he stressed that things must be done in the right order, and that in any event, Member States have the final say. "There is nothing wrong with parliamentary ratification", he said, noting that all Member States are parliamentary democracies, and that the European Parliament is the "embodiment of European parliamentary democracy".
Ms Wallström also stressed that it is for Member States to decide what ratification procedure to use, but she urged them, whatever method they use, to communicate with citizens. She said that Lisbon treaty texts are already available in a dozen language versions and that substantive information and Q&As are available on the Commission's web pages. She also asked MEPs to refer citizens to the "Debate Europe" website, and stressed the importance of engaging young people and women in the debate.
In his concluding remarks, co-rapporteur Richard Corbett (PES, UK) said the debate had shown that "in this parliament the elected representatives of the people approve this treaty by a large majority". He said he found it "quite amusing that those who oppose the European Parliament having powers, that are against the European Union being able to tell Member States what to do, come here and say that we should tell sovereign Member States what their internal procedures should be to ratify an international treaty. That is hypocrisy in the extreme!"
Closing the debate, the other co-rapporteur, Íñigo Méndez de Vigo (EPP-ED, ES), stressed that the aim was to "build a Europe based on respect for one's neighbours". Concluding, he quoted Cervantes, who had said "there are times when one has to decide whether to stay still or move forward". Mr Méndez de Vigo hoped that MEPs would opt to move forward by voting Yes to the Lisbon Treaty. Resolution by Parliament on the Treaty of Lisbon
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0055 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Future of Europe/European integration
Swedish Prime Minister argues for a "strong Europe" and no halt to enlargement
2008-02-25 - 14:10
Opening the latest and the last in the series of debates at the European Parliament on the future of Europe, Swedish Prime Minister Fredrik Reinfeldt told the House "today's Europe needs a clear vision", involving "strong European cooperation to prevent fanatical nationalism as well as religious fanaticism". Indeed, said the Prime Minister, "it is not a strong Europe we should fear but a weak one". Mr Reinfeldt said the Lisbon Treaty - due to be ratified by Sweden in the autumn - would make European cooperation more effective just as his country took on the EU presidency in the second half of 2009. Among key issues to be tackled under the Swedish presidency would be climate change and energy, the Hague programme (on freedom, security and justice), economic growth and job creation, the Baltic dimension and the EU's role in the world.
Employment, pensions, migration
Employment was a particular concern. Given that a third of those able to work were not in jobs, the Prime Minister saw reform of national labour markets as crucial. This was even more important given demographic trends and the pressures on pensions funding. "More people will have to work for a larger proportion of their lives", he stressed. However, he saw migration as another part of the solution and referred to the "positive energy" of migrants, who he argued were necessary to support Europe's welfare systems.
Mr Reinfeldt also believed the EU budget was unbalanced, with 40% of funding being used to support agriculture, although this sector accounted for only 2% of jobs. "This is not reasonable!", he said and called for more to be channelled into research and development, the fight against organised crime, the environment and external relations.
In a review of external relations, the prime minister highlighted the Middle East and relations with Russia as important but he particularly dwelt on the western Balkans, saying the EU would be involved in "the state-building process in Kosovo for a long time".
Another area of interest to Sweden is the Baltic and Mr Reinfeldt looked forward to the Baltic Strategy which the Commission is due to have devised by the time Sweden takes over the EU presidency.
Enlargement as a "strategic instrument"
Concluding, Mr Reinfeldt stressed the importance of enlargement, saying it was a policy that was "close to the hearts of the Swedish people". It should be seen as both "a challenge and an opportunity" and he deplored the "critical voices" that were being raised against more enlargement.
"It would be stupid to forget what we are supposed to be doing", he said. "Without enlargement, Europe would not be what it is today. Without continuing enlargement, we would run the risk of instability on our own continent. Enlargement is the most important strategic instrument for disseminating the values that European cooperation is founded on". Indeed, "we demolished one wall in Europe. We should not start building a new wall against Turkey or other European countries". Lastly, he said, "Let us never take European cooperation for granted. We need a strong Europe".
Political group speakers
The EPP-ED group leader, Joseph DAUL (FR) appealed for ratification of the Lisbon Treaty to proceed at a steady pace. “We need to say ‘Yes’ to the new tools the Treaty offers for turning our citizens’ hopes into reality,” he said, stressing that resolving the institutional questions would enable Europe to concentrate more on the content of its common policies.
Mr Daul called for a Europe of shared values with prosperity, solidarity and hope. Europe, he said, should be able to create jobs, growth and social development, in a sustainable manner while also tackling climate change. “We favour a free market because it will increase the purchasing power of the poorest citizens and reduce inequalities within and across borders.” This did not mean untrammelled free trade: there was a need to protect the weakest in society and support the European social model. That Europe’s growth in 2007 was higher than that of the US showed this was working, he said, arguing for the Lisbon Strategy goals to be pursued firmly.
A Europe following a policy of budgetary rigour should not, he said, mean affecting the principle of solidarity between Member States.
Turning to freedom and security issues, Mr Daul stressed: “Nothing is up for negotiation when it comes to the security of our citizens. The defence of freedom means determination and coordinated powerful measures, which respect individual freedoms.” Europe, he added, needed to build ever closer links with partners who share our vision, which means developing the neighbourhood and enlargement policies.
Mr Daul called for consistent European support for the Middle East peace process. He described Kosovo’s declaration of independence as opening “a tricky period” and called for all reactions to be measured and the avoidance of all provocations. “The time has come to show our ability to stabilize the Balkans,” he said, saying Kosovo should have a stable European future, as should Serbia.
Socialist group leader Martin SCHULZ (DE) said Mr Reinfeldt had made a clever speech. He agreed that Europe’s future primarily meant dealing with global challenges, whether climate change, world trade – or world peace. “Europe,” he said, “must be a power for peace in the world as well as internally,” with its idea of moving to supranational integration “beyond the trenches of a bloody past” of nationalism.
Still, he continued, he had missed any reference in the speech to a social Europe. “If people feel the internal market threatens their social standards, then the internal market will be rejected. We need to develop our social model in parallel. If not, if it is just a matter of free trade, we will destroy the social stability we have created at national level.”
Mr Schulz welcomed the Swedish leader’s positive comments on Turkey’s prospects for EU membership and called on him to persuade France’s President Sarkozy to take the same line. “If I was the Turkish Foreign Minister,” he said, “I would be astonished to hear you saying this and then the next President of the Council saying the opposite.”
Finally, he welcomed the comment that the Swedish Prime Minister would be back next summer – even if a permanent President of the Council had been appointed, said Mr Schulz, the programme of the Swedish government would have to be taken into account.
Graham WATSON (ALDE, UK) said that few would have thought when these debates started in the European Parliament, that the EU would have a new Treaty by the beginning of 2009. "Europe was sinking" he said, but with the new Lisbon Treaty Europe is back on track with a "democratic revolution". More openness, transparency and accountability putting the citizens first.
Sweden would take over the new EU Presidency with a new Commission and the European Parliament and citizens want to see more Europe on issues such as energy, migration, research and development and defence. With the new Treaty structures and increased powers for the European Parliament in foreign affairs, it would be important that there is increased dialogue between the Parliament and Council
The EU is now entering the last, delicate phase of ratifying the Lisbon Treaty, and a bigger role for Parliament in decision-taking means greater recognition of citizens, said Christina MUSCARDINI (IT) for the UEN group.
The Union's task to should be to punch at its proper weight on the international stage, working alongside the EU and not getting "caught unawares" by events such as Kosovo's declaration of independence.
Europe also needs to "forget pseudo-environmental concerns, sort out its energy problems, and become self-sufficient in energy", she continued.
Finally, Europe needs to tackle the issue of Internet regulation, inter alia to protect its citizens from terrorism, and its children from paedophile exploitation. If need be, Member States should harmonise their rules, and enable their police forces to pool information, to this end. "Without safe children, there is no future", she concluded.
Europe should build on the success of its past peace-making to lead the world in dealing with climate change, said Monica FRASSONI (IT) for the Greens/EFA, stressing that migration and climate change problems are interconnected.
Ms Frassoni hoped that lengthy debates on subsidiarity could be avoided, and that Sweden would play a constructive role with regard both to increasing the EU budget and to the energy package.
"We are not protectionists", she said, but "even the most ardent advocate of free trade cannot claim claim that it solves everything".
Ms Frassoni said she agreed with Mr Reinfeldt on Turkey, and concluded by suggesting that the question of where Parliament meets be reopened.
Francis WURTZ (GUE/NGL, FR) stressed the need to focus more on social issues in the EU, and illustrated this by talking of a case ruled on by the Court of Justice. A Swedish trade union had tried to make a Latvian company apply Swedish labour law in Sweden, the Latvian company refused and was supported in its stance by the European Court of Justice with reference to the free movement of services. "My group firmly calls that a debate be held in plenary on this crucial subject", said Mr Wurtz.
Hélène GOUDIN (IND/DEM, SE) spoke of "undemocratic tendencies in European politics." She said that "the political elite is not interested in listening to the people unless the underlings obediently and politely say yes to more EU-federalism." She asked the Swedish prime minister to give her one single example of a law that could have been adopted by the Constitution that can not be adopted under the Reform Treaty. "Are you up to challenge?" she asked him.
With reference to the ratification of the Reform Treaty in France, Jean-Marie LE PEN (NI, FR) said "the French treason has been completed and a congress of shame met in Versailles." When people are deprived of their right to speak on their future, he said, "there will be vengeance. We will see their revenge in the European Parliament elections next year."
British speakers
Giles CHICHESTER (EPP-ED, UK) said: "I am delighted to welcome the Prime Minister today. His historic win in the Swedish general election was a personal triumph. I also congratulate him on uniting the Centre Right and breaking the Social Democrat dominance, and wish him and his Government well.
Today, we are discussing the future of Europe in a week in which this House will vote on a report endorsing the Lisbon Treaty. I want to make very clear that British Conservative MEPs will vote against that report because we fundamentally disagree with the Treaty, with the process by which it was agreed and with the fact that it is simply a carbon copy of the constitution rejected by two of the Union’s founding Member States in national referendums.
The British Parliament is currently deliberating the Treaty. The people of the United Kingdom had, of course, hoped to have their say in a referendum. But the British Government has shamefully reneged on its manifesto pledge to hold one.
My party, both here and in the UK, will continue to campaign vigorously for the people to have their say in a referendum. "
Ian HUDGHTON (Greens/EFA, SE) said: "For more than nine years, I have had the great privilege of representing Scotland here in this Parliament, during which time we have had many a debate on the future shape of Europe and we have welcomed 12 new Member States to the top table. This massive expansion of the internal market and other areas of cooperation is good for Scotland and good for Europe as a whole. But, also in the past nine years, we have had to agonise over so-called crises, such as the resignation of the Santer Commission and the rejection of the Constitutional Treaty. It is a great pity and a frustration that many of the positives which EU membership entails have been tempered by such self-inflicted negatives.
In Scotland, we move on too. We have a new Government – an SNP Government, which is pro-European and which has a vision for a new future for Scotland in Europe. Prime Minister, I want to see Scottish Ministers sitting alongside your Ministers in the Council, not in the second row. Scotland has much to contribute to the European Union and its development: a constructive attitude and a wealth of energy resources to name but two. I look forward to a day when Scotland is welcomed as an independent Member State of this Union. Such a change, I think, would not just be good for Scotland but good for the future of Europe too."
Richard CORBETT (PES, UK) said: "Mr Chichester briefly appeared to make a short speech and disappeared before hearing the reply. There was not otherwise a single member of the British Conservative Party in this debate to hear a Conservative Prime Minister tell us about the future of Europe.
Why is this? Did they not want to hear from a fellow Conservative how good the Lisbon Treaty is? How it does not need a referendum because it does not involve any further transfers of sovereignty? How we need this new Treaty for our Union to work better? Are they unable to participate even in a debate on that? Did they rather stay outside, presumably in the bar with their colleagues from the UK Independence Party? I do think it is a shame they have not even been here to participate in such an excellent debate." Briefing article + links to previous debates with various Prime Ministers
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080129BRI19893 ITEM-002-EN NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Consumers
Goods package: MEPs clarify CE marking and importer rules
2008-02-25 - 14:10
Parliament has adopted at first reading a key legislative package on the internal market in goods. The legislation cover a large proportion of products marketed in the EU in more than 20 industrial sectors, including electro-technical products, machinery, radio/telecoms equipment, toys, medical devices, construction products and high speed rail systems. MEPs clarify what is meant by the CE mark and insist that importers must be responsible for the safety of goods they import. The package consists of two regulations and a decision designed to remove barriers to the free movement of goods while improving consumer safety.
Arlene McCARTHY (PES, UK), Chair of the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection, stated: "With the adoption today of this important Package, the free movement of goods within the EU, a cornerstone of the Internal Market, will be substantially reinforced. Businesses, and in particular, SMEs, will find it easier to sell their products across borders. At the same time, consumers will benefit from a greater offer of high quality and in particular, safe products. For the first time, there will be a Community-wide structure for accreditation, an important element in ensuring safety and mutual recognition of products, and for market surveillance."
The first regulation, on the application of national technical rules to products lawfully marketed in another Member State, deals with abuses of the principle of mutual recognition by Member States.
Parliament's report on this regulation was drafted by Alexander STUBB (EPP-ED, FI). In its amendments the EP has made major changes to the draft legislation. Firstly, the aim and scope of the regulation are much clearer. Secondly, a set of rules is established which must be observed by any country wishing to lay down specific technical requirements.
Speaking in the plenary in Strasbourg, Mr Stubb said: "Seventy-five per cent of goods are harmonised, and twenty-five percent are not. The harmonised proportion amounts to EUR 1 500 billion, or in other words EUR 1.5 trillion, and the non-harmonised proportion to EUR 500 billion. Of that EUR 500 billion, there are problems relating to EUR 150 billion. The Commission tells us that, if mutual recognition worked, our GDP would go up by 1.8%. "
These rules too are much clearer, thanks to Parliament. One of the key points was the proof of conformity. Until now it was up to the manufacturer to show that his product met the specific requirements of the Member State. Now the onus is on the authorising body to show if a product does not meet the standards. Any procedures needed will also be shorter (60 days maximum). Lastly, one-stop shops will be available to deal with all the formalities and provide information. This regulation concerns non-harmonised goods, i.e. a large proportion (25% of the market) of basic goods, from bicycles to scaffolding. It will apply 9 months after it enters into force.
Safer products create greater consumer confidence
Free movement of goods has to go hand-in-hand with high safety standards. Most goods in the EU (lifts, engines, electrical appliances, pharmaceutical products etc.) are governed by common standards laid down in sectoral regulations. The bodies which accredit the agencies that assess product conformity with the rules are, and will remain, national. However, another regulation adopted by the European Parliament, on requirements for accreditation and market surveillance relating to the marketing of products (rapporteur: André BRIE, GUE/NGL, DE), sets up for the first time a common EU accreditation system and standardises the rules by which accreditation is to be granted. This regulation (and the accompanying decision - see below), constitute a "qualitative leap" in the area of harmonised goods, according to Mr Brie. The aim was not to set up new agencies or bodies nor to increase the number of inspections but to make existing instruments more effective and to define clearly the responsibilities of manufacturers and importers as well as Member States.
The decision on a common framework for the marketing of products (rapporteur: Christel SCHALDEMOSE, PES, DK) lays down a clear legal framework for all future regulations on the internal market in goods. It covers areas such as importer liability and the level of protection of public interest.
The regulation also lays down rules on the CE mark on goods. It will now be clear that the CE mark does not guarantee safety but simply that the product complies with the relevant directive. The legislation as adopted does provide for the possibility of putting a safety marking, intended this time for the consumer and not for the accreditation bodies. It also states that national marks will continue to coexist along with the CE mark provided they bring added value regarding safety and as long as a common solution of all Member States has not been found. The regulation will apply from January 2010.
CE marking defined
The draft legislation also deals with the uncertainties faced by consumers who buy a product labelled with a national marking or the "CE" mark.
“CE marking” means a marking which materializes the declaration of the manufacturer that the product is in conformity with the applicable requirements set out in Community harmonization legislation providing for its affixing" says the committee in the agreement with the Council.
Burden on importers
In the agreement with the Council, the European Parliament underlines that importers must place only compliant products on the Community market. Before placing a product on the market importers must ensure that the appropriate conformity assessment procedure has been carried out by the manufacturer. They must ensure that the manufacturer has drawn up the technical documentation, that the product bears the required conformity marking(s), is accompanied by the required documents and that the manufacturer has respected the requirements set out in the directive.
Instructions and safety information obligatory for importers
The European Parliament says that "importers shall ensure that the product is accompanied by instructions and safety information supplied in an official language easily understood by consumers and other end-users as decided by the concerned Member State."
Product Contact Points will be established in all Member States. They will provide information on national technical rules, so that enterprises, in particular SMEs, can obtain reliable and precise information about the law in force in the Member State where they intend to sell their products. Text adopted on Community framework for the marketing of products
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0062 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Budgetary control
Transparency in financial matters - rules of professional ethics
2008-02-25 - 14:10
Parliament adopted an own-initiative report on transparency in financial matters. The House believes that each institution should adopt rules of professional ethics for its Members, depending on the specific nature of each institution, based on its current practices relating to all relevant financial interests. MEPs call upon the Commission to conduct a thorough review of the composition of its expert groups before the end of 2008. The report states that: "The Commission shall make available, in an appropriate manner, information on the beneficiaries of funds deriving from the budget held by it when the budget is implemented on a centralised basis and directly by its departments, and information on the beneficiaries of funds as provided by the entities to which the budget implementation tasks are delegated under other modes of management."
The European Parliament recalls that, as regards transparency in relation to the 20% of EU funding managed directly and centrally by the Commission (grants and public contracts); information including identification of beneficiaries is available for inspection on two websites:
For beneficiaries of Grants: http://ec.europa.eu/grants/beneficiaries_en.htm
For beneficiaries of Public Contracts: http://ec.europa.eu/public_contracts/beneficiaries_en.htm
Agriculture subsidies - useful websites
The report observes that the Commission's website http://ec.europa.eu/agriculture/funding/index_en.htm
currently includes links to the databases of the 14 Member States providing information on beneficiaries of Common Agricultural Policy payments under shared management. The House regrets, however, that the information is so diverse and scattered and of such varying quality that information can hardly be found. It calls on the Commission to learn from the very accessible website http://www.farmsubsidy.org/ which works very well and is set up without public funding.
Professional ethics
The House believes that each institution should adopt rules of professional ethics for its Members, depending on the specific nature of each institution, based on its current practices relating to all relevant financial interests.
Blacklisting of fraudsters
The report recalls that one of the questions examined by the Commission in its preparatory work on transparency was whether fraud could be better deterred by being more transparent about the results of investigations and whether the Commission should establish and publish a "blacklist" of confirmed fraud cases in order to name and shame.
Expert groups
MEPs call upon the Commission to conduct a thorough review of the composition of its expert groups before the end of 2008 and to take action to ensure a balanced representation of interest groups in the membership of expert groups. The European Parliament insists that the Commission must, before the end of 2008, develop an open, transparent and inclusive process for selecting members of new expert groups, and must inform Parliament no later than February 2009 of the new selection criteria. Text adopted on transparency in financial matters
EN
1
A
http://ec.europa.eu/grants/beneficiaries_en.htm
EN
2
A
http://ec.europa.eu/public_contracts/beneficiaries_en.htm
EN
3
A
http://ec.europa.eu/agriculture/funding/index_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0051 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Budgetary control
Fight against fraud - 2005-2006 - MEPs point to diverse national structures
2008-02-25 - 14:10
Parliament adopted an own-initiative report on the fight against fraud 2005-2006. The report welcomes the fact that the reports on the protection of the Communities’ financial interests and, in particular, the report concerning the financial year 2006, have become more analytical. The European Parliament notes, however, that the statistics rely on very diverse national structures with different administrative, judicial, supervisory and inspection systems.
Structural funds irregularities
The report points out that the amount affected by irregularities relating to structural actions increased by 17%, from €601 million in 2005 to €703 million in 2006 (Structural Funds €517 million, Cohesion Fund €186 million); these irregularities related mainly (75%) to the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF) and the European Social Fund (ESF); Germany, Spain, Italy, Portugal and the United Kingdom accounted for approximately 85% of the amount affected (€438,1 million) relating to the Structural Funds in 2006; in many cases the beneficiaries had invoiced for non-eligible expenditure; the details were uncovered following the checking of documents.
House of Lords report - VAT loss unsustainable
MEPs note, furthermore, that the House of Lords estimates lost national VAT receipts in the United Kingdom for 2005 to 2006 at between GBP 3,500 million and GBP 4,750 million, which is at least GBP 9.6 million per day; cites the report which states: "The current mechanism for intra-Community VAT transactions is not sustainable."
MEPs also notes that, concerning structural actions, 84% of all irregularities were recorded in Italy (2006: €228,2 million), Spain (2006: €85,7 million), the United Kingdom (2006: €59,8 million), Portugal (2006: €37,2 million) and Germany (2006: €27,2 million).
MEPs want the Commission to indicate which further actions it will undertake to put a stop to the fraudulent importing of televisions, cigarettes and counterfeit goods in general. The House welcomes the fact that OLAF has been able to open an office in China and urges the Commission to step up the fight against counterfeiting. MEPs call on the Commission to report back to Parliament's competent committees before March 2008 on the initiatives and action taken on the basis of Parliament's resolution of 11 October 2007 on the implications of the agreement between the Community, Member States and Philip Morris on intensifying the fight against fraud and cigarette smuggling.
Organised crime
The House calls on the Commission to provide Parliament's Committee on Budgetary Control with a detailed analysis of the system or systems used by organised crime, whether run on mafia lines or not, to undermine the Communities' financial interests.
The European Parliament expresses its deepest concern over the following finding of the President of the Court of Auditors: ‘The supervisory and control systems in the Member States were generally ineffective or moderately ineffective, and the supervision of their operation by the Commission was only moderately effective’.
MEPs call, therefore, on the Member States to guarantee the quality of their supervisory and control systems by adopting, at an appropriate political level, a national declaration on management concerning all Community spending in shared management. Text adopted on Protection of the Communities" financial interests – Fight against fraud – Annual reports 2005 and 2006
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0052 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External/international trade
EU's strategy to deliver market access for European companies
2008-02-25 - 14:10
Parliament adopted an own-initiative report on the EU's strategy to deliver market access for European companies. The House urges the Commission to ensure that the European Union's legitimate trade interests are defended against the abusive or unfair trade practices of third countries. It takes the view that, when third countries unjustifiably restrict access to their markets by European Union companies, the European Union should react rapidly and firmly. MEPs believe that Free Trade Agreements (FTAs) with the European Union’s target countries will be meaningless unless they secure significant market access and real progress in reducing and eventually eliminating non-tariff barriers which, it is worth recalling, are often more trade-distorting than tariff barriers.
Chambers of commerce and trade associations
The report calls on the Commission and the Member States to enhance cooperation with European chambers of commerce, trade associations and Member State trade promotion agencies located in third countries, and to ensure the appropriate exchange of information between delegations, Member State embassies, other governmental foreign trade bodies and interested European business associations.
The European Parliament urges the Commission to include in the new generation Free Trade Agreements and in other agreements having trade implications clear enforcement and dispute settlement provisions, especially designed to tackle 'behind-the-border' barriers.
MEPs urge European companies, which are legitimately competing against each other inside and outside the European Union, to adopt a cooperative approach to a new market access strategy, bearing in mind that opening foreign markets and ensuring free and fair trade serves their common interest and thus requires common and coordinated efforts.
Looking ahead
MEPs take the view that, unless justified by development concerns, the European Union should deploy its best efforts to obtain concessions from its trading partners that are proportionate to their level of development. Text adopted on the EU's Strategy to deliver market access for European companies
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0053 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External relations
Kosovo: a special case say MEPs
2008-02-25 - 14:10
On Wednesday afternoon (20 May) MEPs held a debate with the Council and Commission on the implications of Kosovo's unilateral declaration of independence. Opening the debate for the Council, Slovenian foreign minister Dimitrij RUPEL reminded the House that under the Thessaloniki Agenda 2003, the EU had announced that the western Balkan countries would eventually become EU members. "Now is the time to recall our commitments", he said, and do something for all the countries of the region. The EU-Western Balkans Forum to be held in Slovenia in March would be an important step, dealing with regional cooperation in various areas. The gradual abolition of visa requirements for the region was a key issue, in his view.
On Kosovo, the minister said the EU had already announced the ESDP mission, although the establishment of relations with Kosovo would be a matter for individual Member States. Regarding Serbia, he said "The EU needs Serbia and Serbia needs the EU". Moreover, "If negotiations are exhausted, the opportunities for dialogue are not. The time has come for true dialogue between the Serbs and the Albanians in Kosovo, between Serbia and Kosovo, between Serbia and the EU."
Case of Kosovo is "truly unique"
Mr Rupel took pains to emphasise that "The case of Kosovo is truly unique, because the international community had to step in to protect it on humanitarian grounds, and it became a protectorate for nine years". A new formula had to be found, since Serbia had had no authority in the province since 1999, while the Kosovo population had suffered ethnic cleansing, oppression and a humanitarian disaster prior to that. Thus, Kosovo's uniqueness meant that it did not call into question the general principle of state sovereignty.
The EU too was a unique community, said the minister, but it included respect for diversity. He then summarised the main points of the Council's common position just adopted on Kosovo, which included noting that Kosovo's independence declaration committed it to respect for the Serb minority and cultural heritage. The Serb people, heritage and culture in Kosovo "form a valuable element of the European cultural mosaic", he said.
Concluding, Mr Rupel described the EU as one of the most successful peacemaking organisations in the world, one based on tolerance and understanding for other people. His final words were a plea "to keep open the doors and windows for the Western Balkans and Kosovo".
Enlargement Commissioner Olli REHN informed Parliament of his institution's standpoint on Kosovo. He began by saying "Kosovo's Assembly declared independence last Sunday in a climate of dignity. In its declaration, Kosovo committed itself to fully respect extensive rights to Kosovo Serbs".
Celebrations in Kosovo had taken place "in a joyful but responsible manner". However, there had been acts of violence in Belgrade and North Kosovo. "We condemn the use of violence, and call on all leaders and people of the region to remain calm and maintain peace and stability", said the Commissioner.
The EU foreign ministers on Monday had responded with a common position, which was essential "to enable the EU to successfully steer the ongoing stabilisation in the Western Balkans and to help bring the Kosovo status process to conclusion". Like Mr Rupel, he stressed that Kosovo was a special case. Several Member States had recognised Kosovo and Mr Rehn expected others to do so, albeit at their own pace.
The Commission, he said, was preparing to play its part and on 5 March would propose concrete measures for the broader region "in order to advance its European aspirations".
In Kosovo itself, many areas were in need of development. It was important "to help Kosovo stand on its own two feet as quickly as possible". The Commission was working on organising a Donors' Conference, to take place before the summer, to help alleviate the most pressing financial problems.
"I know this is a difficult moment for Serbia" added Mr Rehn. "I am very conscious of Kosovo's historical importance to the Serbian people. However, I believe the time has come to turn the page on the past, and to look to the future. And Serbia's future is in Europe. Serbia and the whole region has a prospect of membership of the European Union". This was the way "to keep countries on a peaceful, reformist track".
Lastly, said the Commissioner, he was counting on the European Parliament's support to ensure that "the citizens of this region can fulfil their aspiration of becoming, one day, part of the European Union".
Political group speakers
Doris PACK (EPP-ED, DE) began by referring to the inevitability of Kosovan independence but expressed her concern about the solution which had been found. She emphasised that "this is certainly not an attack on Serbia" but also stated that "I am convinced that there will be problems ahead." She pointed to the importance of the rule of law in the future of Kosovo and of efforts to fight criminality. Mrs Pack made reference to the award of the European Parliament's Sakharov prize for the freedom of thought to Ibrahim Rugova and concluded by stating that the situation in Kosovo "is not a precedent - it is a sui generis case."
Jan Marinus WIERSMA (PES, NL) pointed out that although there has been intensive debate within his Group on this issue, "we've had to simply accept the reality on the ground." He agreed that the recognition of Kosovo "is a matter for Member States" but referred to the role of the European Parliament in the future of a multi-ethnic Kosovo.
Annemie NEYTS-UYTTEBROECK (ALDE, BE) began by stating that "any country which wants to go its own way ..[..].. is going to damage the territorial integrity of that group of countries." She pointed to the example of the Belgian situation and encouraged the Foreign Minister of Serbia to look at this example. Mrs Neyts-Uyttebroeck expressed her sadness that the Foreign Minister repeated "the traditional Serbian position without any glimmer of understanding." She concluded by pointing to the €3 billion invested by the EU in Kosovo to date and the need for more. She expressed her hope that the citizens of the region will soon be "able to enjoy normal relations."
Konrad SZYMAŃSKI (UEN, PL) said that recognition of independence for Kosovo was particularly important. The EU should support and build up Kosovo's institutions. There was a risk of ethnic conflict, he said, and history must not be repeated. "Europe has a vested interest in Kosovo and Kosovo has a vested interest in Europe", he concluded.
Joost LAGENDIJK (Greens/EFA, NL) said that "what happened was the unavoidable, inescapable consequence of what happened in 1999 when tens of thousand of Kosovars were murdered in UN presence." He went on to say that "we have seen how angry Serbia is, how angry and aggressive the Serbian foreign minister is - one can understand that, provided it is non-violent." "After initial euphoria the Kosovars will wake up to their responsibility. Proper relations with minorities must not exist on paper alone." One must recognize that "the future Kosovo lies within an EU framework."
Francis WURTZ (GUE/NGL, FR) said "the Union in principle aims to contribute to a better world government and many of its Member States have or will dangerously weaken the future credibility of international law by supporting the unilateral declaration of the province of a state." Countries of the EU were opening Pandora's box by recognizing power relations rather than then legal relations. This will "feed nationalism rather than shrinking its sources. The Union has alienated the Serbian People, without them there is no regional policy possible in that part of Europe." "The new challenge which the EU has just given itself could make it dizzy - we are now heading for a new protectorate and no satisfactory analysis has been brought on the protectorate coming to an end."
Bastiaan BELDER (IND/DEM, NL) asked Minister Rupel about how exactly the internal chain of command would be regarding the EU-mission? He went on to stress the importance of cooperation between Serbs and Albanians: "The Serb and Albanian mafia bands and gangs have been working hand in hand for years - I hope that because of the European mission in Kosovo this will gave way to genuine interethnic cooperation because that is the only way that Kosovo will have the kind of European perspective we want them so much to enjoy."
Slavi BINEV (NI, BU) categorically opposed the independence of Kosovo declared last Sunday. "It sets an inadmissible precedent." Kosovo's assembly had had no right to declare independence. He spoke of ethnic cleansing committed by Albanians: "the fact that ethnic cleansing and destruction of thousands of orthodox churches took place under the eyes of the forces of NATO and UN is despicable and revolting." "We appeal to the EU not to accept Kosovo's independence and to abide by decisions of the UN Security Council."
British and Irish speakers
Sarah LUDFORD (ALDE, UK) agreed with Commissioner Rehn that the message to Serbia must be that the time has come to turn the page. She hoped that Prime Minister Thaci will make it absolutely clear to his compatriots that the protection of the Serb minority and other minorities in Kosovo is an absolute priority, because violence will not be tolerated. The important thing now, she said, is economic development. There is, she said, 40% unemployment in Kosovo, as well as massive unemployment in Serbia as well. "Let us move on towards rapid integration in the EU, moving via visa liberalisation, which I hope will come very soon", she concluded.
Seán Ó NEACHTAIN (UEN, IE) (speaking in Irish) wholeheartedly welcomed Kosovo’s Declaration of Independence. Nine years have passed since the Milošević regime ordered the terrible bombing of Kosovo. Kosovans have a right to independence and, in a way, the events of the last nine years have helped them on that road to independence. However, he said, it is imperative that the civil and political rights of the Serbian minority are still respected in Kosovo.
The EU, he said, must support the Kosovan Government in promoting the economy of the state. The problem of unemployment in Kosovo, now at 40%, must be addressed. Mr O Neachtain hoped that this is a fresh start for Kosovo and that the EU will support the rebuilding of this new state in the years to come. He also hoped that this will lead to reconciliation as well as exemplifying the goodwill of the EU in bringing people and families together.
Richard HOWITT (PES, UK) accepted that this is a test of credibility for the European Union, and any failure to respect the Serb population’s rights in the new Kosovo would be a victory for ethnic cleansing in reverse. We should, he said, emphasise that Serbia, as well as Kosovo, will be equal partners as future members of our European Union.
But, he continued, "let not the ghost of Slobodan Milošević stalk this decision or this Chamber. The entrenchment of peace, the precursor of reconciliation, the platform for a whole region – as the fall of the Berlin Wall was for Eastern Europe, so let independence for Kosovo be for former Yugoslavia."
Charles TANNOCK (EPP-ED, UK) warned that we have now managed successfully to injure a Serbia trying to forget Milošević and build a democratic future. Its loss, he said, may fan nationalist sentiments and drive Serbia towards Russia, which, in turn, may apply the precedence of the Kosovo situation in frozen conflicts ranging from Transnistria to Abkhazia. Russia will, interestingly, now claim the moral high ground in international law – perhaps for the first time in recent history.
Mr Tannock expressed considerable sympathy with Cyprus, which has refused to join the majority of EU Member States in recognising Kosovo. Already, he said, Mr Talat, the leader of the so called ‘breakaway republic of Northern Cyprus’ claims Kosovo as a precedent for his territory.
Not surprisingly, Spain is concerned about the Basque Country and Catalonia, and Slovakia about its Hungarian minority. Curiously, although the Organisation of the Islamic Conference (OIC) has welcomed an independent Kosovo as a potential new member, Azerbaijan, although in the OIC, is wary over Nagorno-Karabakh claiming independence and refuses to recognise Kosovo.
Concluding, Mr Tannock said that whatever the EU and the US are saying about this issue being sui generis, clearly not all the countries of the world agree. Briefing article 14.02.2008
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080129BRI19893 ITEM-013-EN NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External relations
Situation in the Gaza Strip: policy of isolation has failed, say MEPs
2008-02-25 - 14:10
MEPs believe that the policy of isolation of the Gaza Strip has failed at both political and humanitarian level, according to a resolution adopted by the plenary. MEPs reiterate a call to all parties to fully respect international law, and notably international humanitarian law. The EP reiterates "its deep concern at the humanitarian and political crisis in the Gaza Strip" but also expresses "its deepest sympathy for the civilian population affected by the violence in Gaza and southern Israel". MEPs believe that the civilian population should be exempt from any military action and any collective punishment. They also call on Israel to fulfil its international obligations, as an occupying power, in the Gaza Strip.
The House reiterates its call for an end to the blockade and for a controlled re-opening of the crossings in and out of Gaza. Israel should ensure the movement of people and goods at Rafah, Karni and other crossings, in compliance with the Agreement on Movement and Access. The resumption of the EU Border Assistance Mission at Rafah is called for.
MEPs call on Israel to cease military actions killing and endangering civilians, and extrajudicial targeted killings. They also call on Hamas, following the illegal takeover of the Gaza Strip, to prevent the firing of rockets by Palestinian militias from the Gaza Strip into Israeli territory.
Role of Egypt
The House considers that the reaction by Egypt to the disturbances at Rafah, which allowed many Palestinian families to have access to essential goods for their basic needs, to be positive. MEPs also urge the Government of Egypt to continue to play an active role in maintaining peace and stability in the area.
MEPs welcome the proposal by the Palestinian Authority to take control of the crossings, on the basis of an agreement involving Egypt, Israel and the Palestinian Authority.
Corporal Gilad Shalit and imprisoned Palestinians
The House reiterates its call for the immediate release of the Israeli corporal Gilad Shalit, which would be perceived as an act of goodwill on the part of Hamas, and of all imprisoned Palestinian former ministers, legislators and mayors.
Humanitarian aid and PEGASE
MEPs call on the Council and the Commission to continue to guarantee, together with the international community, essential humanitarian aid for the Palestinians living in the Gaza Strip. MEPs stress the importance of the European Commission's new financing mechanism, known as PEGASE replacing the Temporary International Mechanism (TIM). Resolution adopted on the situation in Gaza
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0064 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External relations
An EU strategy for Central Asia - MEPs concerned about slowness of implementation
2008-02-25 - 14:10
Parliament adopted an own-initiative report on an EU strategy for Central Asia. While the report welcomes the EU's increased focus on Central Asia, of which the adoption of the Central Asia strategy is the clearest expression, it notes, however, the slowness of implementation of the projects for the five countries of the region. The five countries referred to collectively as Central Asia (Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz Republic, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Uzbekistan) lie at a key intersection between Europe and Asia and, historically and traditionally, they have represented an important meeting and transit point between the two continents.
The House is convinced that certain issues can only be dealt with effectively by means of regional approaches leading to regional solutions (e.g. counter-terrorism, the eradication of human trafficking, counter-narcotics, water management) which require enhanced regional cooperation.
Human rights
Parliament calls on the Council and the Commission to further promote good governance, human rights, democracy and education, including consideration of engagement with all types of religious communities. It calls on both the Council and the Commission to ensure that human rights issues should carry equal weight with the EU's robust approach to energy, security and trade.
MEPs consider that, when assessing the human rights situation, the EU should pay special attention to the existence – or absence – of a credible commitment on the part of the respective government to improving that situation, focusing on demonstrable progress, the climate for human rights defenders and the level of cooperation with UN special rapporteurs and mechanisms, as well as with other relevant international actors.
The House condemns the persecution of human rights defenders in Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan; calls on the Council and the Commission to make every effort to protect their activities and physical integrity, and calls on the relevant governments to immediately release all human rights defenders imprisoned or compulsorily detained in psychiatric hospitals and/or for political reasons.
WTO accession
The European Parliament calls on the Commission and the Council to implement all appropriate measures to encourage deeper integration of Central Asia into the world trade and economic system, in particular through WTO accession for the four countries in the region which are not yet members.
Energy
MEPs consider that cooperation on the EU's external energy policy is of the greatest importance in the context of its Central Asia strategy; supports, therefore, efforts by the European Union to boost gas and oil imports from Kazakhstan and Turkmenistan and to diversify transit routes. The European Parliament calls for active EU energy cooperation with the region, especially with the Kyrgyz Republic, Tajikistan and, if possible, Uzbekistan, in order to address energy problems of particular importance to their huge human and economic development needs, difficult inter-state relations and precarious security of supply;
MEPs believe that further strengthened cooperation between Central Asia and the Black Sea region in the fields of energy and transportation is essential for the accomplishment of the above-mentioned goals of the EU. Parliament takes the view that this should include investing in the development of alternative energy sources, energy efficiency and energy saving, and new infrastructures in the energy sector with modernisation of the existing ones. Finally, the European Parliament recognises the important role of Kazakhstan as a strong economic actor in Central Asia, where the EU is the number one trading partner, and where Kazakhstan pursues a strategy of advanced social, economic and political modernisation. Resolution adopted an EU strategy for Central Asia
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0059 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External relations
MEPs call for increased involvement of African scientists in R&D
2008-02-25 - 14:10
In adopting a joint resolution on the importance of supporting measures to improve international scientific cooperation with Africa, the European Parliament underlines the need to increase the involvement of African scientists in international collaborative science and R&amp;D projects in order to keep and develop R&amp;D knowledge in Africa, in particular in specific sectors such as food, health and energy. The House acknowledges the increasing trend amongst policy-makers in Africa to prioritise science and technology (S&T) and innovation for development.
MEPs recognise the valuable contribution of the New Partnership for Africa’s Development (NEPAD), its S&T consolidated action plan and the S&T programmes of the African Union, and calls for better implementation and fuller development thereof and for the relevant measures to be improved.
Research into AIDS
Parliament recalls the special relevance given to neglected diseases within the 7th Research Framework Programme and considers that special emphasis should be placed on research into AIDS in African countries.
The House calls for the reinforcement of existing research infrastructure in accordance with the indications of the African Union and the African scientific community, including the NEPAD Office for Science and Technology, programmes of the African Union and R&D projects, in particular in specific sectors such as food, health and energy.
The House urges Member States to promote knowledge and technology transfer between the EU and Africa, together with R&D projects, under a new coherent framework for action to achieve immediate and long-term goals for sustainable development, and accordingly develop policy and resources.
Finally, the European Parliament calls on the European Union and the Member States to ensure greater consistency between the EU's international science and technology policy and the basic needs of African countries, thus leading to the development of a new global framework for science and diplomacy with Africa. Resolution adopted on scientific cooperation with Africa
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0067 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Human rights
Resolution on seventh session of UN Human rights Council
2008-02-25 - 14:10
Parliament adopted a resolution giving a mandate to a seven-member delegation of MEPs who on 17-19 March will accompany a Council and Commission delegation to the seventh session of the UN Human Rights Council (UNHRC) in Geneva. The EP sees the seventh session of the UNHRC (which superseded the UN Human Rights Commission in 2006) as a crucial one, since it will examine a range of issues under new working methods and will fine-tune the Universal Periodic Review (UPR) mechanism. The resolution says "the credibility of the UNHRC rests on the implementation of these reforms and mechanisms in a way which will strengthen its ability to address human rights violations around the world".
A number of positions within the UNHRC are due to be filled in the near future. The EP wants these posts to go to the right kind of candidates and thus calls on the EU to support "candidates with high standards of integrity for the election of the new President of the UNHRC" on 23 June 2008. It also "regrets that some countries with problematic human rights records have so far been elected" to the UNHRC. A useful step would be to establish "membership criteria for election to the UNHRC".
Universal Periodic Review
Under the recently introduced system of Universal Periodic Review, all UN members are to have their human rights records scrutinised through a standard mechanism. Parliament's resolution urges EU Member States and the Commission to ensure that the conclusions of any UPR are taken into account in EU assistance programmes. It also calls on EU Member States which will themselves be subject to UPR "to be self-critical" and not just focus on their positive achievements.
Special Procedures
Special Procedures are a UN mechanism designed to address specific country situations or thematic issues. They are commonly conducted by a special rapporteur.
MEPs say that Special Procedures are at the core of the UN human rights machinery and hence "the credibility of the UNHRC will depend on the new nominations for special procedures mandate-holders in March 2008". The EP "calls for the nomination, as mandate-holders, of persons with recognised human rights expertise, relevant experience, independence, impartiality, personal integrity and objectivity".
The Human Rights Council's decision not to renew the mandates of the Special Rapporteurs on Belarus and Cuba is condemned and the EU's support for the HRC's decision to put an end to its expert group on Darfur is regretted. By contrast, the renewal of the country mandates of the Special Rapporteur on Sudan and of the Independent Experts on Liberia, Haiti and Burundi is welcomed.
EU Member States are urged to ensure the renewal of the mandates of the Special Rapporteurs on Myanmar and North Korea, and the extension of the mandates of the Independent Experts on Somalia and the Democratic Republic of the Congo.
The resolution also "calls on the EU to sponsor its own resolution to seek consensus in addressing the current violations of human rights in relation to the blockade on Gaza and to rocket attacks against Israel".
The EU's role
Lastly, the EP recognises the active involvement of the EU and its Member States in the first year of work of the UNHRC but stresses the need "for the EU to speak with one voice to address human rights issues" but also the importance "of each EU Member State's voicing the EU position in order to give it more weight ". Lastly, MEPs urge that all EU Member States automatically sign and ratify all international human rights instruments.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Human rights
Human rights: Timor-Leste, Belarus, Congo
2008-02-25 - 14:10
In three human rights resolutions adopted at the end of this week's plenary session, the European Parliament condemned the assassination attempt on the president and prime minister of Timor-Leste (East Timor), drew attention once more to the lack of democracy and human rights in Belarus and highlighted the appalling violence in the North Kivu region of the Democratic Republic of Congo. Assassination attempts in Timor-Leste
The resolution on Timor-Leste (East Timor) condemns the recent attacks on President José Ramos Horta and Prime Minister Xanana Gusmão, calls for a proper inquiry and urges long-term international support for the country.
According to the resolution, the shootings by rebel groups on 11 February 2008 of Timor-Leste's president and prime minister amounted to "separate but coordinated attacks against the leadership of the country and State institutions".
The EP notes that "a state of emergency has been declared by the Timorese parliament" and that "the government has requested reinforcements for the 1,600 international peacekeepers already deployed in Timor-Leste". It also points out that both the European Union and the United Nations are "publicly committed to supporting independence, democracy and the rule of law in Timor-Leste".
Condemnation of assassination attempt and call for thorough inqu iry
Parliament "condemns vehemently" the attempted assassination of the president and the simultaneous attack against the prime minister. It hopes the Timorese authorities will be able to overcome these threats to the country's stability and "cooperate to ensure respect for law and order and the normal functioning of democratic institutions, in accordance with the Constitution". All parties in Timor-Leste are urged to refrain from violence and to engage in dialogue.
The EP calls for a thorough inquiry to clarify every detail of the apparent coup d’état attempt and "the failure of the security system in the country to bring to justice the perpetrators". Meanwhile, it welcomes the opening of a joint investigation into the attacks by the UN and Timor-Leste police.
It also "stresses the importance of the conduct of Timor-Leste's neighbouring countries" in respecting the stability of Timorese society and the consolidation of its national democratic institutions but "acknowledges the positive attitude of Indonesia since the recognition of Timor-Leste's independence and the decisions of Australia and others to help".
Tackling Timor-Leste's fundamental problems: international aid essential
The country will also need political, technical and financial support in building infrastructure and administrative structures, invigorating its economy, boosting employment, alleviating poverty and consolidating democracy.
The Timor-Leste state institutions and the UN mission (UNMIT) are urged "to uphold the rule of law, combat impunity of crimes and ensure compliance with international human rights standards by all in Timor-Leste, especially the police and armed forces".
Lastly, the resolution asks the Commission to open up swiftly a fully functioning delegation in Dili and "recommends sending an ad hoc parliamentary delegation to Timor-Leste to reassess the political situation, express solidarity to democratic forces and institutions and renew the offer of EP assistance to the democratic functioning of the National Parliament".
Democracy in Belarus
In a resolution on Belarus, MEPs voice concern at the lack of democracy and human rights, express support for opposition figures and urge the Belarus authorities to introduce democratic reforms.
According to the resolution, "the situation of democracy, human rights and the rule of law is not improving in Belarus". The continuing arbitrary arrests of members of civil society and opposition activists and a clampdown on independent media "contradict the recent rhetoric of the Belarusian Government concerning their wish to improve relations with the European Union".
The EP urges the Belarus authorities to "stop using intimidation, harassment, targeted arrests and politically motivated prosecutions against the activists of the democratic opposition and civil society in Belarus" and "condemns the fact that Belarus is the last country in Europe which still practises the death penalty".
Belarus must comply with EU's conditions in exchange for closer ties
Recent moves on establishing the Commission’s delegation in Minsk are welcomed as a step towards renewing dialogue with the European Union. However, the EP recalls that in November 2006 the EU declared its readiness to renew its relationship with Belarus under the European Neighbourhood Policy "as soon as the Belarusian Government demonstrates respect for democratic values and for the basic rights of the Belarusian people".
Belarus must thus accept certain conditions, including "the release of all political prisoners, abolition of the death penalty, the assurance of free media and freedom of expression, the independence of the judiciary and respect for democratic values and for the basic rights of the Belarusian people". The resolution also urges Belarus to implement OSCE standards in organising the parliamentary elections scheduled for 28 September 2008.
Easier access to visas, support for civil society
MEPs want the Commission and Council to take further steps to liberalise visa procedures for Belarusian citizens, so as to facilitate people-to-people contacts. At the same time they deplore the decision of the Belarus authorities to repeatedly refuse entrance visas to MEPs and national parliamentarians in the last couple of years.
They also call "on the Commission and Council and the international community as a whole to extend more support to the civil society of Belarus and, in particular, to increase financial aid to the independent media, to non-governmental organisations and to Belarusian students studying abroad".
Solidarity with Milinkevich and all Belarusian democrats
The EP has made numerous efforts to highlight the situation in Belarus in recent years, twice awarding its Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought to citizens of that country: to the Belarus Association of Journalists in 2004 and to opposition leader Aleksander Milinkevich in 2006.
In today's resolution, MEPs express "solidarity with the united democratic opposition of Belarus and the leader of the democratic movement, Aleksander Milinkevich, and all Belarusian citizens who strive for an independent, open and democratic Belarus based on the rule of law".
Atrocities in North Kivu (Congo)
In a resolution on North Kivu, adopted unanimously, MEPs draw attention to the dreadful human rights abuses being perpetrated against the population and urge the UN and EU to take action.
According to the resolution, the conflict in the Democratic Republic of Congo has claimed the lives of 5,400,000 people since 1998 and continues to be the direct or indirect cause of 1500 deaths each day. In the last 18 months there have been massacres, rapes, forced recruitment of civilians and child soldiers, and other acts of violence in the Eastern DRC, by Laurent Nkunda’s rebel troops, the Democratic Forces for the Liberation of Rwanda (FDLR) and the Congolese army itself.
Since the end of 2006 the conflict has also forced some 400,000 people to flee their homes and there is now a total of 800,000 displaced persons in the province of North Kivu. Malnutrition is also a growing problem.
MEPs voice outrage, call on UN and EU to act
In its resolution Parliament expresses "deep outrage at the massacres and crimes against humanity" in North Kivu. It calls on the national and international authorities "to bring the perpetrators to justice" and on the UN Security Council "to take all measures capable of genuinely preventing any further attacks on the civilian populations of North Kivu".
In particular, MEPs call for zero tolerance of sexual violence against girls and women and demand "severe criminal penalties against the perpetrators of these crimes".
The EP calls on the Council and Commission to see if the recent strengthening of the under-resourced UN mission in Congo (MONUC) leads to a significant improvement in the human rights situation and, should this not occur, to press the Security Council to give MONUC the resources it needs.
It welcomes the holding of the peace conference in Goma in January 2008. However, the undertakings given at Goma concerning gradual demobilisation have still to be worked out in detail through a joint technical peace and security commission. The EP therefore calls for this commission to be set up swiftly so as to finalise demobilisation issues.
EU aid
Parliament in any case wants the Council and Commission "to release emergency funds, in view of the extreme gravity of the humanitarian situation faced by the populations of North Kivu, not only because of the conflicts which continue to affect that region, but also as a result of the earthquake of 3 February 2007".
The Council and Commission are also urged "to implement large-scale medical assistance programmes for the civilian populations in Eastern DRC with immediate effect, in order to meet immediate needs and in anticipation of the reconstruction which will be required". In addition, the Council and every EU Member State are asked "to provide special aid to the populations of Eastern DRC".
MEPs also propose the creation of monitoring mechanisms, such as the Kimberley process for the certification of the origin of natural resources imported into the EU market. Lastly, the EP instructs the EU mission to North Kivu scheduled for March 2008 to report back to it. Resolutions adopted (21 February) on Timor Leste, Belarus and North-Kivu
-//EP//TEXT TA 20080221 TOC NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Justice and home affairs
MEPs reject report on factors favouring the support for terrorism and recruitment of terrorists
2008-02-25 - 14:10
MEPs rejected a report on factors favouring the support for terrorism and recruitment of terrorists. A lack of consensus among the main political groups regarding the best instruments to fight radicalisation led to MEPs rejecting the report as a whole with 241 votes in favour 332 against and 87 abstentions. The amendments initially adopted before the rejection of the entire report in plenary called on EU Member States to consider amending the definition of terrorist offences and applicable penalties so as to include "the glorification of terrorism" in its scope, "with full respect for freedom of expression". It also mentioned the need to promote dialogue with religion leaders and minorities, on the basis of the UN concept of the alliance of civilizations.
Following the 9/11 terrorist attacks, the European Union adopted a framework decision urging Member States to align their legislation and set out minimum rules on terrorist offences. During the vote on the detail of the report, amendments were initially adopted, (before the report was rejected), encouraging Member States to open discussions to include "the glorification of terrorism" in the scope of the framework decision, as "they are factors which contribute to violent radicalisation".
MEPs had also stated in several paragraphs, before the entire report was rejected, that preventive measures must be based upon avoiding social isolation and promoting increased dialogue - with different civilisations, religions, minorities, on the basis of the UN concept of the alliance of civilisations.
The report that was put forward to plenary and rejected in plenary was in the name of the new Civil Liberties Committee Chairman - Gérard DEPREZ (ALDE, BE). Jaime MAYOR OREJA (EPP-ED, ES), the original rapporteur, had withdrawn his name from the report after its adoption by the Civil Liberties Committee.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Customs
Law on customs and agricultural matters - deal reached with Council
2008-02-25 - 14:10
MEPs adopted a legislative report on mutual assistance between the Member States for application of the law on customs and agricultural matters. Ahead of the vote, the rapporteur Bill NEWTON DUNN (ALDE, UK) said: "This is an important measure to counter cross-border crime in the light of technological developments and of enlargement of the Union. I am glad that objections about sovereignty by several member states in the Council have been overcome and we are able to agree on first-reading." The goal of this regulation proposal is to bring the existing Council Regulation (EC) 515/97 of 13 March 1997 in line with the new Community powers in the area of customs cooperation, while at the same time strengthening the cooperation and data exchanges between Member States and between them and the Commission. The purpose of this proposal, is to roll out a new Anti-Fraud Information System, (AFIS) in a bid to improve its overall functionality.
The European Parliament says that the Commission should be authorised to provide all forms of technical assistance and training to the liaison officers of third countries and of European or international organisations and agencies, including Europol and Frontex.
The report also says that data exchanges with third countries governed by this Regulation should be subject to prior verification that data protection rules in the receiving country, particularly in relation to the processing of personal data, offer a degree of protection equivalent to that offered by EU rules.
The Commission, in cooperation with the Member States, must each year submit to the European Parliament and to the Council a report on the measures taken in implementation of this Regulation. Text adopted on application of the law on customs and agricultural matters
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0050 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Regional policy
Combining competitiveness and cohesion
2008-02-25 - 14:10
Should EU regional development policy aim to enhance competitiveness, cohesion, or both? An own-initiative report by Ambroise Guellec (EPP-ED, FR), adopted by Parliament assesses the rival merits of using regional development money to further the "Lisbon" (growth and jobs) strategy, or to reduce development disparities within and between regions. This report builds on the European Commission's fourth report on progress in achieving EU economic and social cohesion policy aims, including the methods used in Member States to achieve them. The fourth report focuses on the 2000-2006 programming period, but also assesses preparations for 2007-2013.
Competitiveness
The Guellec report notes that regional competitiveness largely depends on productivity, market accessibility and qualifications, plus "institutional factors such as a business culture that facilitates co-operation, enterprise and efficient public administration.
It shares the Commission view that cohesion policy can further the Lisbon strategy, by directing public investment towards projects that "favour the creation of a more dynamic, growth-generating, innovation-stimulating economic fabric".
In 2007-2013, "earmarking" of appropriations will direct 64% of "convergence" resources and 80% of "regional competitiveness and employment" resources towards innovation, notes the report, which nonetheless points out that making (good) use of this money hinges on the ability of less-developed regions to manage research, development and innovation projects of sufficient number and quality to ensure they are used.
Cohesion
However, cohesion policy cannot be confined to meeting the Lisbon strategy aims. Strict earmarking would favour already dynamic regions, says the report, which notes that the Lisbon Treaty, would make "territorial cohesion" (e.g. between urban centres and peripheral areas) a fundamental objective of the Union (alongside economic and social cohesion) and that together these would "go beyond" the Lisbon strategy.
The report calls for the Lisbon strategy to be broadened to include the territorial dimension, so as to take account of regions' specific characteristics, encourage trans-European synergies and co-operation, and support broad-based innovative activities.
To this end, it stresses the importance of real partnership and genuinely multi-level governance, involving national, regional, local and Community players, in defining and implementing regional development aims.
Getting the policy mix right
In fact, achieving territorial cohesion by means of action under the convergence objective is a precondition for the long-term competitiveness of regions says the report, which notes that convergence among countries often masks widening gaps, within and between regions, e.g. in jobs, productivity, income, education and innovation capacity. The cohesion policy objectives of Convergence (1), Regional competitiveness and employment and European territorial co-operation should therefore be treated as complementary in future, it says.
The report also advocates an "integrated approach" that identifies synergies between cohesion policy and major sector-specific policies such as transport, agriculture, fisheries, rural development, environment and energy, and research and technology
Territorial disparities breed Euro-scepticism
There is clear link between rising Euro-scepticism and growing territorial disparities within and between regions, says the report, that demonstrates the need for economic, social and territorial cohesion so as to strengthen convergence and confirm the EU's legitimacy by making regional policy visible on the ground.
Preventing polarisation around cities
The report notes that "uncontrolled urbanisation" can create demographic, economic, social, transport and environmental imbalances within a restricted area and lead to depopulation of rural areas far from towns (14). It recommends better interlinking of urban and rural issues and proposes giving priority to policies that serve a genuinely polycentric development of territories, such that pressures on capital cities are lessened and the emergence of secondary poles is encouraged.
Cohesion policy funding should match adjustment needs
Finally, the report says cohesion policy will need sufficient financial resources at Community level to enable it to deal with new challenges that have an important territorial impact, such as demographic change, urban concentration, migratory movements, energy supply and adjusting to globalisation and climate change. It calls for the revision of the financial framework to be used to define the budgetary resources needed to meet all EU cohesion policy challenges. Text adopted on 4th report on cohesion
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0068 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Regional policy
Tailoring spatial development planning to foster local talent
2008-02-25 - 14:10
An integrated approach to regional and town planning is needed to enhance the ability of regions and cities to improve their adaptability to economic change. By harnessing local talent and assets to drive spatial development, this approach should help remedy problems such as rural depopulation, urban sprawl, and high energy consumption, more effectively, says an own-initiative report by Gisella Kallenbach (Greens/EFA, DE), adopted by the European Parliament. The integrated approach should encompass all economic, ecological, territorial and social factors, and promote partnership at all levels. The report looks at progress in implementing the EU Territorial Agenda (sustainable spatial development) and Leipzig Charter (sustainable cities).
Challenges
Spatial development challenges include climate change, urban sprawl, energy consumption, transport infrastructure, demographic change (including rural depopulation), the effects of EU enlargement, the uneven regional impact of globalisation, and the unequal development of urban and rural areas, says the report.
Partnership
The report stresses the importance of partnership and of sharing functions between urban and rural areas for the balanced and sustainable development of the territory as a whole. It calls on the urban and rural authorities, in co-operation with all public and private stakeholders, to identify their common assets and come up with joint regional and sub-regional development strategies to secure better living conditions and quality of life for all EU citizens. It also calls on the Council and Member States to involve all these parties in the action programme for implementing the Territorial Agenda and the Leipzig Charter.
Territorial cohesion
Central to this approach is the concept of "territorial cohesion", which the Lisbon Reform Treaty makes a treaty objective (alongside economic and social cohesion). The Kallenbach report welcomes the fact that the Treaty provides for shared legislative competence between the EU and Member States in this area (22) and calls on the Commission clearly to define territorial cohesion and to list EU territorial development objectives in its forthcoming green paper on territorial cohesion.
Territorial Agenda for sustainable spatial development
The Agenda advocates, inter alia, a polycentric and balanced urban system, a new urban-rural relationship, innovative regional clusters, and parity of access to infrastructure and knowledge. It was adopted at an informal Council of Ministers in Ponta Delgada (Azores) in November 2007.
Creativity
The report calls for a policy on creative economic sectors to be incorporated into spatial and urban development with the aim of creating a framework for improving opportunities for creative and innovative action.
Provide general services to harness local talent
To enable people to exploit their region's own specific opportunities and potentials, the report calls on Member States to guarantee, throughout their territory, the availability of, right of access to and accessibility of services of general interest.
Seek synergies with EAFRD
The report calls on the Commission and Council to make better use of synergies with the European Agricultural Fund for Regional Development (EAFRD) for the development of the territory as a whole and recommends, with a view to post-2013 cohesion policy, close co-ordination between cohesion policy and rural development policy, so as to enhance opportunities for improving the quality of life in rural areas.
Spatial development indicators
The report also calls on the Council to agree quantifiable indicators, such as annual land use, for measuring spatial development in the EU.
Leipzig Charter for sustainable European cities
The Charter advocates integrating urban development policy measures to, inter alia, create high-quality public spaces, modernise infrastructure, improve energy efficiency, promote innovation and education, provide sustainable and affordable urban transport, and strengthen the local economy. It was adopted at an informal Council of Ministers in Leipzig in May 2007.
Land use and urban sprawl
To combat landscape fragmentation and the loss of land to urban growth, the report calls on Member States to restrict land use. It also recommends that they step up the re-use, or use for new purposes, of existing buildings, before building on new land. The report also calls on the Commission to concern itself more intensively with the issue of urban sprawl.
Climate change
The report takes the view that cities have a particular responsibility for fulfilling EU climate targets, as they are in a unique position to help reduce global greenhouse gas emissions. It calls on the Commission and Council to agree city sustainability benchmarks, as set out in the Leipzig Charter, such as per capita energy consumption, use of local public transport as a proportion of total transport volume, and per capita greenhouse gas emissions.
Finally, the Kallenbach report regrets that the Council has yet to adopt an action programme for implementing the Charter, and calls on forthcoming EU presidencies to remedy this omission. Text adopted - The Territorial Agenda and the Leipzig Charter
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0069 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Social policy
Tackle demographic change, say MEPs
2008-02-25 - 14:10
Measures to prepare for demographic change should include cutbacks in early retirement, pension bonuses for parents, a guaranteed right to infertility treatment, and sanctions against employers of clandestine immigrants, says an own-initiative report on the demographic future of Europe, approved by the European Parliament. The EU's average birth-rate of 1.5 is "abnormally low" says the report, drafted by Françoise Castex (PES, FR). It stresses that although "maternity choices are among the most private decisions men and women take, and must be respected", birth-rate curves can be positively influenced by "creating a family- and child-friendly material and emotional environment". The Parliament recommends inter alia that Member States provide tax breaks for company crèches and take measures against employers who directly or indirectly discriminate female workers who wish to have children.
Cut back on early retirement and promote gradual alternatives
MEPs call for "a thorough reform of career management for senior employees" aged 50 and older. They advocate "a cutback as soon as possible in companies resorting to early retirement". However, for older workers beyond the minimum retirement-age threshold who do not wish to continue working full-time of their job, "an innovative form of gradual retirement" should be considered, such as part-time work, flexible working hours, distance working or job-sharing. MEPs also say that rules and conventions should be established to promote a voluntary prolongation of working life.
Additionally, Member States should provide specific employment advice for older workers, e.g. on interview techniques, confidence building and CV writing.
The Parliament calls on the Member States to set aside budgetary appropriations each year for the payment of future pensions in order to maintain the budgetary balance between revenue and expenditure in the various pension schemes.
Pension bonuses for parents
Member States should ensure that "work breaks for maternity and parental leave cease to constitute a penalty when pension entitlements are calculated", say MEPs adding that those periods should count towards women's pension entitlements. They suggest adding bonuses to pensions on the basis of the number of children parents have raised.
Guarantee right to infertility treatment
The EP is concerned about the growth in infertility, which now occurs in about 15 % of couples. Member States should guarantee couples a universal right of access to infertility treatment
MEPs deleted, however, a passage from the report which called for offering adoption to couples as an alternative to infertility treatment. The Parliament equally rejected a call for raising the age limit for legal adoption. Yet it urged Member States to facilitate the fostering of abused children without parents and those raised in specific institutions.
Promote fathers' rights
The Parliament says that EU paternity law needs to be improved and urges the Commission to propose specific measures for an entitlement to paternal leave. Fathers' rights regarding the upbringing and care of children, particularly in case of separation or divorce, should be promoted, it adds.
Fight xenophobia and clandestine work
Europe needs "a clear and reasoned approach to immigration in order to counter xenophobic and racist opinions and attitudes and promote the full and effective integration of migrants into society", say MEPs (amendment 15). Immigrants needed to be better integrated into the formal economy and must receive legal and social security, including pension entitlements. Member States should fight "resolutely" against human trafficking and clandestine channels, by penalising employers who employ or exploit illegal workers, says the report.
Furthermore, the EP favours giving family members accompanying immigrant labour residence permits and, where appropriate, work permits.
10% of older people experience physical, financial or mental abuse
Finally, MEPs also draw attention to "the maltreatment and lack of care to which the elderly are exposed within their families or within the institutions in which they are placed". As an estimated 10% of older people experience some form of physical, financial or mental abuse before they die, the Commission and the Member States should develop warning systems and penalties for maltreatment of this kind, stresses the report. The Commission's communication on the abuse of older people, which it intends to publish this year, should draw up "a comprehensive strategy for a large-scale information and action campaign in this field", including training of care workers, definition of quality standards, and penalties for maltreatment. Text adopted on the demographic future of Europe
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0066 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Social policy
Population and housing census - agreement with Council
2008-02-25 - 14:10
MEPs adopted a legislative report by Ona JUKNEVIČIENĖ (ALDE, LT) on population and housing censuses. The debate took place in Strasbourg on 10 December 2007 (see link below). There is now a first-reading agreement with Council. The controversial criterion on "consensual union" has been removed from the text. The report was adopted with 579 votes in favour 41 against and 18 abstentions. The agreement says that each Member State should determine a date to which its data refer (reference date). This reference date shall fall in a year specified on the basis of this regulation (reference year). The first reference is 2011.
The aim of the regulation is to establish common rules for the decennial provision of comprehensive data on the population and on housing.
International, European and national institutions need to be in possession of sufficiently reliable information on the population and on housing in the European Union. The last Population and Housing Census in the European Union was conducted for the reporting year 2001. It was not based on any European legislation, but instead on a "Gentlemen's agreement". The wide variation in reference dates seriously reduced comparability. Furthermore, punctuality was not ensured. The last data were received in mid 2005, leading to a publication in September 2005, i.e. 44 months after the end of the reference year. The data initially provided were often incomplete, not fully validated or inconsistent. Numerous requests to recheck the data greatly delayed the production process. Given the important uses that are to be made of the census data, higher metadata and quality assurance standards are required.
The periodic statistical data on the population and the main family, social, economic and housing characteristics of individuals are necessary for defining future regional, social and environmental policies and for making annual population estimates. High quality annual estimates are e.g. needed for the qualified majority voting within the Council which shall represent at least 62 % of the EU's population.
The last EU population and housing census was conducted for the reporting year 2001 based on a "gentlemen's agreement" between the Member States. According to the Commission the reference dates, however, varied widely - from March 1999 (France) to May 2002 (Poland) - that the comparability of the data was seriously reduced. Text adopted on population and housing censuses
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0056 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Competition
MEPs call for supermarkets to be regulated to protect consumers, workers and producers - written declaration adopted
2008-02-25 - 14:10
With some 439 MEPs having signed the written declaration on investigating and remedying the abuse of power by large supermarkets operating in the EU, the EP President officially announced the written declaration adopted. The declaration requests the Commission to propose appropriate measures, including regulation, to protect consumers, workers and producers from any abuse of dominant position or negative impacts identified in the course of this investigation. Put forward by Caroline LUCAS (Greens/EFA, UK), Gyula HEGYI (PES, HU), Bernard WOJCIECHOWSKI (IND/DEM, PL), Harlem DÉSIR (PES, FR)and Hélène FLAUTRE (Greens/EFA, FR), the written declaration calls upon the European Commission's DG Competition to investigate the impacts that concentration of the EU supermarket sector is having on small businesses, suppliers, workers and consumers and, in particular, to assess any abuses of buying power which may follow from such concentration.
In order for a written declaration to be adopted over half of all MEPs (785) need to have signed it and was officially adopted in Strasbourg at the opening of the plenary session.
MEPs point out that throughout the EU, retailing is increasingly dominated by a small number of supermarket chains and these retailers are fast-becoming ‘gatekeepers’, controlling farmers’ and other suppliers’ only real access to EU consumers.
MEPs also say such squeezes on suppliers have negative knock-on effects on both quality of employment and environmental protection and consumers potentially face a loss in diversity of products, the cultural heritage and retail outlets. Text adopted - Declaration of the European Parliament on investigating and remedying abuse of power by large supermarkets operating in the European Union
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0054 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Adopted text / Draft Agenda for March plenary session
2008-02-25 - 14:10
Adopted texts from Strasbourg plenary (18-21 February) are now available and can be accessed via the link hereunder. The draft agenda for March plenary (10-13 March) can be accessed via the link hereunder. Adopted texts / Draft Agenda for March plenary session. Texts adopted during Strasbourg plenary (18-21 February 2008) Draft Agenda - 10-13 March (Strasbourg plenary session)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
2
LINK
/activities/plenary/home.do?date=20080225&tab=NEXT&subTab=20080310&language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-FULL DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-FULL DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
