Thursday in plenary: Regional policy, Gaza, Human Rights
Institutions
2008-02-22 - 09:01
Isolating Gaza has failed - MEPs
Two reports on cohesion policy and urban and regional planning were discussed and adopted by the plenary on Thursday. MEPs also looked at human rights in Belarus, North Eastern Congo, and East Timor. The plenary voted on a number of issues that had been debated previously, including Gaza, the demographic future of the EU and the “goods package” - aimed at improving the cross-border sale of a wide range of products.
Thursday morning was dominated by a debate about "cohesion policy," which aims to reduce disparities between EU countries. French EPP-ED MEP Ambroise Guellec's report on the European Commission's 4th Report on Economic and Social Cohesion, notes that "Greece, Spain, Portugal and Ireland, have caught up remarkably well, recording impressive growth rates during the period 2000-2006.”
Decreases in disparities between countries may mask wider regional gaps
The report, adopted by plenary, also notes high rates of growth in the new Member States, but said they will catch up fully "only in the medium or long term…because of the very low starting point in some of these countries".
Parliament also said decreasing differences "among countries very often mask widening gaps between regions and within individual regions." In some countries the region where the capital is based accounts for a third of gross domestic product (GDP).
Need to integrate urban planning, growth strategy
A second report on regional policy focused on spatial development and territorial cohesion, which involves developing an integrated approach to regional and town planning to make them more adaptable to economic change and using local talent and assets to overcome problems like rural depopulation, urban sprawl, and energy consumption. During the debate, rapporteur German Green Gisela Kallenbach stressed the need to integrate urban and regional planning into the Lisbon agenda for growth and jobs and called on EU leaders to address these issues when they meet in March.
The report highlights the following problems to be addressed in spatial development planning:
climate change
urban sprawl and land use
energy consumption
transport infrastructures
demographic change
the impact of EU enlargement and uneven regional effects of globalisation
unequal development of urban and rural areas
Situation in Gaza
MEPs adopted a resolution calling on Israel to end the blockade and to ensure the movement of people and goods as they consider that the policy of isolating the Gaza Strip has failed at both a political and humanitarian level. Gaza's economy is "paralysed" and "the lack of medicines and of fuel to run the generators in hospitals is endangering Palestinian lives," it said. Parliament praised Egypt for allowing many Palestinian families access to essential goods and urged the government to continue to play an active role in maintaining peace and stability in the area.
MEPs said the civilian population should be exempt from any military action and collective punishment and called for an immediate end to all acts of violence in Gaza and Southern Israel.
Human rights and Democracy: Belarus, East Timor, Congo
During the Thursday afternoon human rights debate, MEPs condemned the recent attacks against the democratically-elected leaders in East-Timor and the harassment and prosecutions of democratic opposition and civil society activists in Belarus. In a resolution on North Kivu (North Eastern Congo), Parliament deplored the lack of resources that prevented the UN peacekeeping mission from preventing "massacres, rapes, pillaging, forced recruitment of civilians and child soldiers” and called on ministers and the Commission to ensure "a significant improvement in the security of the population of North Kivu".
Plenary also adopted a resolution outlining a mandate for the EU delegation to the UN’s Human Rights Council.
20080215STO21493 Combining competitiveness and cohesion - Press Service Tailoring spatial development planning to foster local talent - Press Service Goods package: MEPs clarify CE marking and importer rules - Press Service Situation in the Gaza Strip: policy of isolation has failed, say MEPs - Press Service Tackle demographic change, say MEPs - Press Service
EN
1
PHOTO
20080221PHT21975.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080219IPR21740 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080219IPR21741 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080221IPR21949 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080221IPR21950 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080221IPR21951 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
