Strasbourg Plenary round up February 18-21
Institutions
2008-02-25 - 17:25
As MEPs gathered in Strasbourg for their plenary session the recent declaration of independence of Kosovo dominated many minds in Europe. MEPs debated the issue during the week with Members agreeing that Kosovo was indeed a special case. The week also saw MEPs vote to lift a raft of measures on goods traded around Europe. It will affect everyday items such as bikes and bread. The week also saw Sweden's Prime Minister Fredrik Reinfeldt set out his views on the future of the European Union.
The dominant position of supermarkets in Europe and conditions in the Gaza strip were also considered by Members. For a full round up of the February session please read this focus.
20080225FCS22130
Monday in Plenary: Kosovo, supermarket dominance
Sunday celebrations in Kosovo's capital Pristina European Parliament President Hans-Gert Pöttering opened the February plenary session by saying that Kosovo's declaration of independence reflects the "will of the people". Also Monday, Parliament adopted a written declaration, signed by over half of MEPs, expressing concern about the dominant position of Europe's supermarkets and particularly the impact they have in forcing prices down for suppliers.
Kosovo: situation is "unique" Sunday 17 February saw Kosovo proclaim independence to the jubilation of ethnic Albanians, the trepidation of the Serb minority and condemnation by Belgrade. Mr Pöttering said "the decision expresses the will of Kosovo's citizens to take their fate into their own hands." In March last year MEPs accepted the conclusions of the report by UN envoy Martti Ahtisaari on the future status of Kosovo. Mr Pöttering told MEPs that the case of Kosovo is not a precedent: "The situation in Kosovo is unique; it is a special case which cannot be compared with others." He appealed for reason and calm. "I'm convinced that Serbs and Kosovars will try to bring about peace and reconciliation in the region." The President welcomed the Council's decision to send a police and administrative mission to Kosovo to help with a smooth transition in the region. Abuse of market dominance by large supermarkets A written declaration tabled by five MEPs and signed by 439 Members was adopted since it has received majority support. "Consumers, providers and employees of the big retail chains have to be better protected against the unfair trade terms imposed by hypermarkets," the resolution says. In particular it criticises the practice by retail giants of imposing excessively prolonged payment conditions that jeopardise producers' cash flow. "Consumers potentially face a loss in diversity of products and cultural heritage," it says. Rises in retail food prices do not bring any extra income to the producers.. "Evidence from across the EU suggests big supermarkets are abusing their buying power to force down prices paid to suppliers." MEPs therefore ask the European Commission to examine the effect of the current retail concentration on the functioning of the European internal market and to propose measures to counteract any infringement of EU competition law. Written declarations MEPs can use written declarations to start or prompt a debate on a subject that comes within the EU’s remit. To be formally adopted. it must be signed by over half of the 785 members. The text is then forwarded to the President, who announces it in plenary and it is then forwarded to the institutions named. Other examples of adopted written declarations:
more publicity for the European "112" emergency number
an end to testing on primates Also on Monday During the day's other debates, MEPs turned their attention to transparency in financial matters and the fight against fraud and EU market access for European companies. MEPs also discussed a report from the Civil Liberties Committee on how to prevent radicalisation and the recruitment of terrorists. Watch Tuesday's debates and votes by clicking below Written declaration on investigating and remedying the abuse of power by large supermarkets operating in the European Union Post briefing: full round up of Strasbourg Plenary
Tuesday in Plenary: Swedish PM, goods package, Lisbon strategy
Swedish PM Fredrik Reinfeldt during his speech in the EP hemicycle A series of restrictions on goods, from bikes to bread, which prevent trade across the EU will be swept away after MEPs reached agreement Tuesday. The House also debated the EU's Lisbon strategy on jobs and growth and heard a speech from Swedish Prime Minister Fredrik Reinfeldt. He called for more cooperation on climate change, immigration and asylum. He also said the Union should not to abandon its enlargement strategy.
Free movement of goods On Tuesday morning MEPs debated three legislative reports on the marketing of products across Europe. The "goods package" is expected to speed up the free movement of goods within the EU. Three reports, by German MEP André Brie (GUE/NGL), Danish Socialist Christel Schaldemose and Finnish EPP-ED Member Alexander Stubb were examined, covering various aspects of the marketing of goods, including health and safety, technical and environmental standards and bureaucratic obstacles to trade. "What I want to say to all small and medium-sized businesses in Europe is that there is no need ever again to fill in a form to apply to enter the market of another country," said Mr Stubb. He told a press conference: "with my report, there should absolutely be no trade barriers, no bureaucracy unless for health and safety purposes". Swedish PM: "Don't build a wall against Turkey" After Tuesday's votes the afternoon was devoted to a debate on the future of Europe. The Swedish Prime Minister was the latest European figure to address the House as part of this series. Mr Reinfeldt told the House that he looked forward to the Swedish presidency of the EU (July-December 2009), when he hopes for "very close cooperation between Member States on issues like climate change, energy, immigration, the Balkans, the EU as a global player and a common asylum policy by 2010". Regarding the possible future enlargement of the EU Mr Reinfeldt said, "without enlargement the EU wouldn't be where it is today…the EU should not build a wall against Turkey or any other European country. We should not be afraid of a strong Europe, but of a weak Europe. We need a strong Europe that defends our values, freedom and democracy". For more from Mr Reinfeldt's speech and political reactions click on our link to the Press service. And don't miss our interview with Mr Reinfeldt on the "Headlines" page. MEPs debate Lisbon strategy, Europe's economy MEPs discussed progress with the "Lisbon" jobs and growth strategy with the Council and Commission. The debate also focused on the Broad Economic Policy Guidelines (the EU’s main tool for coordinating economic policy), which are due to be renewed this spring. Slovenian minister for economic growth Ziga Turk told MEPs, "we need more researchers, to develop more high-tech research, we need to be entrepreneurial". Speaking for the centre-right ( EPP-ED) group Belgian MEP Marianne Thyssen called for "more investment in R&D and intellectual property rights, better legislation on the internal market and less red tape." She focused on the "need to create jobs rather than relocation." Speaking for the Socialist group, Luxembourg's Robert Goebbels said tackling "poverty and exclusion are likely to move to centre stage. Many workers have insecure contracts. Problems will become more acute. Texts must reflect the new climate." Bulgarian Liberal Member Bilyana Raeva said that "knowledge based economy means learning from one another. High social standards and a dynamic economy are not mutually exclusive." She added, "support is needed for a more flexible labour market." Also on Tuesday Parliament adopted an own-initiative report on transparency in financial matters. In the evening it debated an EU strategy for Central Asia with Europe's External Relations Commissioner Benita Ferrero-Waldner. A report on the fight against terrorism debated on Monday evening and voted on Tuesday proved controversial. After a number of amendments were voted down, the report was rejected (241 votes in favour 332 against and 87 abstentions). Read our detailed report at the link below. Goods package MEPs reject report on factors favouring the support for terrorism and recruitment of terrorists Results of votes on Thursday 21 February 2008 Interview with Sweden's PM Fredrik Reinfeldt Swedish Prime Minister argues for a "strong Europe" and no halt to enlargement
Wednesday in Plenary: Lisbon Treaty, Kosovo and Europe's demographics
MEPs backed the Lisbon Treaty Midweek saw MEPs back by a large majority a report that supports the new Lisbon Treaty as a step forward for democracy and transparency. A few Members spoke against the Treaty and called for referenda in individual states. The independence of Kosovo was another hot topic of the day, with a debate and declarations by the Council and the Commission. MEPs also debated the application of community law and the demographic future of the EU.
On Wednesday morning, British Labour MEP Richard Corbett and Spanish EPP-ED Member Íñigo Méndez de Vigo presented their report on the Treaty of Lisbon. An overwhelming majority of MEPs expressed their support for the new Treaty, which they believe will enhance the EU's democratic accountability, protect citizens' rights and improve the functioning of EU institutions. In addition, MEPs highlighted the fact that the new Treaty will also enhance Parliament's powers as a fully recognised co‑legislator with increased budgetary powers. It will also give the Parliament a key role in the election of a future President of the European Commission. Rapporteur Corbett called this Treaty a "massive increase in democracy in the European Union". Co-rapporteur Méndez de Vigo called it a "political solution", which allows us to "move beyond the crisis and standstills" of the past. "We had left many of our ambitions on the roadside, but nevertheless we managed to preserve the essential parts of the Constitution" added Mr Méndez de Vigo. A few Members nonetheless voiced concerns, notably about some states having ratified a not yet consolidated text. There were calls for referenda, and claims that that a EU political elite was imposing its will on the people. So far, five Member States have ratified the Treaty (Hungary, France, Slovenia, Malta and Romania) and ten others have launched ratification procedures. Ireland is the only country to hold a referendum on the Treaty. Member States should ratify it by the end of this year, to pave the way for the June 2009 European elections, says the Constitutional Committee's own-initiative report. Mixed feelings on Kosovo Reaction to Kosovo's independence on Sunday 17 February ensured a lively debate and a mixed response from MEPs. Doris Pack (EPP-ED) chairs Parliament's delegation to South East Europe, she spoke of the inevitability of Kosovan independence but expressed her concern about the solution which had been found. She emphasised that "is not a precedent - it is a sui generis case." Austrian Socialist Member Hannes Swoboda said that "we can understand that there is a collective sense of loss in Serbia", but "no other solution was found". French Member Francis Wurtz (GUE-NGL) told the House that "several Member States have dangerously weakened the future credibility of international law through their support for the unilateral declaration of independence of a province of a sovereign UN member state". Speaking for the current holders of the Presidency of the Union, Slovene Minister Dimitrij Rupel for the Council said that "the EU needs Serbia and Serbia needs the EU"; "The time has come for true dialogue between the Serbs and the Albanians in Kosovo, between Serbia and Kosovo, between Serbia and the EU". Also in the debate Europe's enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said "this is a difficult moment for Serbia. However, time has come to turn the page on the past"; "We condemn the use of violence, and call on all leaders and people of the region to remain calm and maintain peace and stability"; He also thanked the EP for supporting the EU perspective of the Western Balkans. Outside the plenary, the Foreign Affairs Committee also focused on Kosovo. In a specially convened meeting, it played host to the Foreign Minister of Serbia, Vuk Jeremić, who spoke in frank terms about his government's reaction to the declaration of independence and the role played by wider Europe. Read our report on the visit at the link below. Other debates The House also debated a report by Italian Member Monica Frassoni (Greens/EFA) on monitoring the application of Community law, dealing with infringement procedures, to be voted on Thursday. Late in the evening, the Chamber debated a report by French Socialist MEP Françoise Castex on the demographic future of Europe. The report deals with the European demographic decline and suggests several measures to deal with this problem. Vote on Thursday. (See our interview with Françoise Castex on her report via the link below). To watch the plenary live and to get more information on the debates and votes, click on the links below. Press service: results of votes Ratify the Lisbon Treaty this year says the European Parliament Kosovo: a special case say MEPs Vuk Jeremic at EP following Kosovo's independence declaration: "I am ashamed as a European" As Europe ages - how can we tackle its demographic decline?
Thursday in plenary: Regional policy, Gaza, Human Rights
Thursday in plenary: Regional policy, Gaza, Human Rights Two reports on cohesion policy and urban and regional planning were discussed and adopted by the plenary on Thursday. MEPs also looked at human rights in Belarus, North Eastern Congo, and East Timor. The plenary voted on a number of issues that had been debated previously, including Gaza, the demographic future of the EU and the “goods package” - aimed at improving the cross-border sale of a wide range of products.
Thursday morning was dominated by a debate about "cohesion policy," which aims to reduce disparities between EU countries. French EPP-ED MEP Ambroise Guellec's report on the European Commission's 4th Report on Economic and Social Cohesion, notes that "Greece, Spain, Portugal and Ireland, have caught up remarkably well, recording impressive growth rates during the period 2000-2006.” Decreases in disparities between countries may mask wider regional gaps The report, adopted by plenary, also notes high rates of growth in the new Member States, but said they will catch up fully "only in the medium or long term…because of the very low starting point in some of these countries". Parliament also said decreasing differences "among countries very often mask widening gaps between regions and within individual regions." In some countries the region where the capital is based accounts for a third of gross domestic product (GDP). Need to integrate urban planning, growth strategy A second report on regional policy focused on spatial development and territorial cohesion, which involves developing an integrated approach to regional and town planning to make them more adaptable to economic change and using local talent and assets to overcome problems like rural depopulation, urban sprawl, and energy consumption. During the debate, rapporteur German Green Gisela Kallenbach stressed the need to integrate urban and regional planning into the Lisbon agenda for growth and jobs and called on EU leaders to address these issues when they meet in March. The report highlights the following problems to be addressed in spatial development planning:
climate change
urban sprawl and land use
energy consumption
transport infrastructures
demographic change
the impact of EU enlargement and uneven regional effects of globalisation
unequal development of urban and rural areas Situation in Gaza MEPs adopted a resolution calling on Israel to end the blockade and to ensure the movement of people and goods as they consider that the policy of isolating the Gaza Strip has failed at both a political and humanitarian level. Gaza's economy is "paralysed" and "the lack of medicines and of fuel to run the generators in hospitals is endangering Palestinian lives," it said. Parliament praised Egypt for allowing many Palestinian families access to essential goods and urged the government to continue to play an active role in maintaining peace and stability in the area. MEPs said the civilian population should be exempt from any military action and collective punishment and called for an immediate end to all acts of violence in Gaza and Southern Israel. Human rights and Democracy: Belarus, East Timor, Congo During the Thursday afternoon human rights debate, MEPs condemned the recent attacks against the democratically-elected leaders in East-Timor and the harassment and prosecutions of democratic opposition and civil society activists in Belarus. In a resolution on North Kivu (North Eastern Congo), Parliament deplored the lack of resources that prevented the UN peacekeeping mission from preventing "massacres, rapes, pillaging, forced recruitment of civilians and child soldiers” and called on ministers and the Commission to ensure "a significant improvement in the security of the population of North Kivu". Plenary also adopted a resolution outlining a mandate for the EU delegation to the UN’s Human Rights Council Combining competitiveness and cohesion Tailoring spatial development planning to foster local talent Goods package Gaza Tackle demographic change, say MEPs
EN
1
PHOTO
20080225PHT22188.jpg
EN
2
PHOTO
20080219PHT21662.jpg
EN
5
PHOTO
20080220PHT21874.jpg
EN
8
LINK
/news/expert/tous_les_epvotes/default/default_en.htm
EN
11
PHOTO
20080221PHT21973.jpg
EN
12
LINK
/news/expert/tous_les_epvotes/default/default_en.htm
EN
17
PHOTO
20080221PHT21975.jpg
-//EP//TEXT WDECL P6-DCL-2007-0088 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215BRI21439 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215STO21486 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080219IPR21728 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215STO21489 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215IPR21457 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080219IPR21733 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080219IPR21734 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080219IPR21605 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080204FCS20431 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080219IPR21740 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080219IPR21741 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080221IPR21949 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080221IPR21950 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080221IPR21951 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
