Human rights, gas, democracy: Cem Özdemir MEP on Central Asia
External relations
2008-02-26 - 14:03
Özdemir wants "virus of democracy" in Central Asia
MEPs want the European Union to beef up measures to promote human rights, democracy, education and good governance in countries in Central Asia (Kazakhstan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan, and Tajikistan). In a report adopted during the February plenary, MEPs called for human rights to carry equal weight to energy security and trade. We asked rapporteur and German Green MEP Cem Özdemir about his proposed strategy for this vast and often overlooked region.
Mr Özdemir, why should people in the EU care about Central Asia – a relatively distant and unknown region?
I believe that we should care about where our energy comes from, under what conditions it is produced, the leadership of these countries and what happens to the citizens of these countries. In the long-term we can only have energy security if those countries are stable countries. Dictatorship does not guarantee stability. The best guarantee for stability is participation of all the citizens, and that's what we call democracy. Like global warming, Central Asian issues are universal: caring about Central Asia is good for the people there and good for our people in Europe.
What are the factors that will determine future relations between the countries of Central Asia and the EU? Can the EU speak with one voice?
Twenty seven countries (of the EU) can do a lot - but we can do a lot more if we join forces. Is it really necessary that 27 states open 27 embassies in the 5 Central Asian countries? Do we have the means for that? Probably not. But an EU diplomatic service - such as the one foreseen in the Lisbon treaty - could be much more efficient.
A lot of these countries have a leadership that is post-Soviet and not very experienced in democracy to say the least. So, our business is to train the next generation. I want the next generation of leaders to study in European universities and to know us, and I want us to know them. If they study in Europe, they will come back with "the virus of democracy" and they will know that losing power does not mean the end of the world, that you can always come back at the next election. We have to encourage all those who have more democracy - like Kyrgyzstan - and who want reforms.
What would you say to those claiming that democracy only brought instability into Kyrgyzstan and that Central Asia is not ready for democracy?
For the past 15 years we have said "this is a post-Soviet era". But now we are in the "post-post Soviet era". How many more years are they going to tell us that they have a specific situation? If they want to continue using that argument, these countries have to develop a strategy towards democracy.
They can't for example put opposition politicians or independent journalists into prison, because these are not steps towards democracy but in the other direction. In a country like Kazakhstan, had the elections been fair, the President would have still won - maybe with 70%. So, the leaders of these countries can afford to be more generous towards the opposition and the independent media.
Is there a risk that the immense energy potential of the region could push concerns over torture and other violations of human rights into second place?
We always speak about 5 Central Asian countries and energy but in reality it is 2: Turkmenistan and Kazakhstan. In a country like Tajikistan there are big energy problems: people are freezing. We had to postpone a delegation to Tajikistan recently, because the government could not guarantee acceptable working conditions for us. If this is true for MEPs, what about average people, the ill, the old and the young? The situation is unbelievable. Uzbekistan is selling gas to Russia at the expense of its own people, who are freezing. That's the reality.
Russia and China are also helping Central Asia. But their help is "we give you money, we want your energy". Our help goes beyond that: we also want an end to child labour, healthy and secure conditions for people, who can express their opinions without being threatened with jail or prosecution.
What we offer to Central Asia is technological exchange, environmental knowledge, the best universities in the world, pure friendship which goes beyond just having energy resources. I believe in the long-term that will pay off. We have to tell the leaders of Central Asia "if you want to move your country forward then jump into the 21st century. We know how to do it. So, why don't you copy a successful model which has worked? That's our offer."
20080225STO22136 An EU strategy for Central Asia Report on an EU strategy for Central Asia Profile of Cem Özdemir MEP Parliamentary Cooperation Committee to Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan and Mongolia Foreign Affairs Committee
EN
1
PHOTO
20080225PHT22262.jpg
EN
4
LINK
/members/expert/searchForm/view.do?partNumber=1&name=Ozdemir&language=EN&id=28235
EN
5
LINK
/activities/delegations/homeDel.do?language=EN&body=DCAS
EN
6
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=AFET
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080219IPR21736 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0059 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
