Croatia and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia: progress towards EU
External relations
2008-02-27 - 12:56
The Foreign Affairs Committee stresses the need for Croatia to resolve outstanding bilateral border issues, and reiterates that the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia's bilateral name dispute with Greece should not obstruct FYROM's EU accession process, in two reports, adopted on Wednesday, that are generally positive about on the two countries' progress towards EU accession.
The report by Hannes Swoboda (PES, AT) on Croatia “congratulates the Croatian authorities on the positive results achieved so far, particularly with regard to the number of negotiation chapters which have been opened.” It urges the government to “redouble its efforts to meet the benchmarks for the remaining chapters,” while also reminding the authorities that “it is now crucial to speed up the development of administrative capacity required in order to implement the new legislation.” MEPs commend Croatia for its “exemplary Constitutional Law on National Minorities.”
MEPs also address the Commission, calling on it to “step up its efforts and increase the resources allocated for preparing, processing and finalising negotiating material so that the EU can respond rapidly and efficiently to progress made by Croatia in meeting the relevant opening and closing benchmarks.” The committee expressed its hopes that “increased efforts on the part of Croatia and enhanced support by the EU institutions can still lead to the finalization of an accession treaty in time for the European Parliament to take its final decision on the EU-membership of Croatia before the next European elections in June 2009, so as to start the ratification process as early as possible.”
Remaining concerns for Croatia
Members expressed their concerns about the further need to improve the judiciary in the country, as well as efforts to eradicate the “in some cases unacceptably high level of corruption, which undermines the economic development of the country.” While welcoming the fact that “Croatia continues to fully cooperate with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY),”, they called on Croatia to involve media and civil society in maintaining popular support for the court after the negative impact on public opinion of some of its rulings.
Another concern remains the country’s outstanding border issues with its neighbours, especially Slovenia and Bosnia-Herzegovina. In a similar vein, the committee “regrets the fact that the Croatian Parliament decided to introduce unilaterally the Ecological and Fishing Protection Zone (ZERP) in the Adriatic, despite the agreement reached with Italy, Slovenia and the European Commission.” At the same time, MEPs state that the accession negotiations “should not be used as a leverage to settle bilateral political disputes falling outside the scope of the acquis.”
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
The report by Erik Meijer (GUE/NGL, NL) on the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia welcomes the government's achievements “in the implementation of the Ohrid Framework Agreement”, which deals with the political aspects of inter-ethnic relations in the country, while noting the “continuing discrimination against the Roma community.” The committee also welcomes the fact that the government has pledged to rebuild the mosque that was damaged in the otherwise “professional and effective” police operation in Brodec on 7 November, 2007. MEPs also commended the government’s economic performance, and the adoption of several crucial laws on prosecutors.
While welcoming the entry into force of the visa facilitation and readmission agreement between the country and the EU, MEPs underline the difficulties citizens still face when trying to enter the EU. At the same time, Members regret the signing of a bilateral immunity agreement between the US and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, granting exemption from the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court in the Hague, which “contradicts EU standards and policies.”
Name dispute
On the consistently contentious issue of the country’s bilateral name-dispute with Greece, the report welcomes the bilateral talks held between the two sides, assisted by UN Special Envoy Matthew Nimitz. It “calls on both sides to increase efforts to overcome the issue, that in no circumstances should become an obstacle to the membership of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia in international organisations.”
Procedure: Own-initiative reports -- Committee votes: Swoboda report - 52 in favour, none against, 1 abstention; Meijer report - 55 in favour, 5 against, 1 abstention -- Plenary vote: April I, Brussels
2008-02-25 Committee on Foreign Affairs In the Chair: Jacek Saryusz-Wolski EPP-ED PL
20080225IPR22123 Committee on Foreign Affairs
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=AFET
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
