MEPs debate draft reports on the gas and electricity package
Energy
2008-02-28 - 10:39
The issue of whether energy supply businesses should be separated from transmission ones took centre stage in a debate on two draft reports, respectively on the EU internal market in electricity and on conditions for access to natural gas transmission networks, presented to the Industry Committee on 27 February. The committee is to debate three further reports, on cross-border exchanges in electricity, the internal market in gas, and co-operation among energy regulators, on 28 February.
"Unbundling", i.e. separating energy supply operations from transmission, was the key issue in debate on the first two draft reports on 27 February. "Full ownership unbundling [is] the only model that can ensure fair competition and avoid conflict of interest", said rapporteur on the "Internal market in electricity" directive Eluned Morgan (PES, UK). In her draft report, Ms Morgan opposes an "alternative model", proposed by the Commission, whereby a company would not have to unbundle provided it hands over control of its transmission assets to a so-called "Independent System Operator" (ISO). This "implies bureaucracy and costly regulatory control", she says.
Putting renewable energy and consumers in the picture
Ms Morgan also linked her report to newly proposed legislation on climate change (particularly the renewable energy directive). System operators, says one of her proposed amendments, should be required "to give priority to generating installations using renewable energy sources".
Her report also includes proposals to " impose price caps in uncompetitive markets, for a defined and limited period, in order to protect customers against market abuse"; to ensure that by 2020 "no company may hold more than 20% of the relevant market"; and to protect consumers' rights by way of information requirements, as well as "fair and transparent" general terms and conditions in contracts.
Reactions
Gunnar Hökmark (EPP-ED, SE) was supportive of Ms Morgan's proposals on unbundling as a way to diversify energy sources and agreed that deleting the ISO model "may be a good thing", but sceptical about her amendments on pricing models and regulating market share. This was echoed by Alejo Vidal-Quadras (EPP–ED, ES): "Though it is necessary to take the needs of vulnerable consumers into account, we cannot distort markets", he said. Unbundling "is not a religion", he added and although we may consider it "the most effective method", "other possibilities exist."
"I see no advantage in unbundling", said Anne Laperrouze (ALDE, FR), who favoured increasing the powers of national authorities instead. Rebecca Harms (Greens/EFA, DE) disagreed. The Commission's proposal, as well as Ms Morgen's report, "are very good", she said, arguing that security of supply would be best ensured by proceeding as the Commission had suggested.
First diversify, then unbundle
“Ownership unbundling does not seem to be a universal solution”, argued Jan Březina ( EPP–ED, CZ). “In many new Member States," he said, "we are dependent on one supplier – and in that context unbundling cannot help us.” Our priority, therefore, is “diversification of suppliers.” Only then, he said, “can we talk about unbundling.”
Rapporteur on " Conditions for access to the natural gas transmission networks", Atanas Paparizov (PES), sought to address similar concerns by pointing to his report's provisions on regional co-operation. One of these states that "Member States and regulators shall co-operate [...] for the purpose of integrating their national markets at the regional level"; another defines measures to be implemented by Transmission system Operators (TSOs) at regional level so as to achieve technical convergence; yet another calls on the Commission to "pay particular attention to 'energy islands' within the EU [...] where there is a need to develop connections to the gas transmission grid."
On 28 February the committee is to discuss the three remaining reports on the so-called "energy package" (3rd legislative package for the electricity and gas markets). These deal with Conditions for access to the network for cross-border exchanges in electricity (rapporteur Alejo Vidal-Quadras, EPP–ED, ES), the Internal market in natural gas (Romano Maria La Russa, UEN, IT), and the Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators (Renato Brunetta, EPP–ED, IT).
Committee votes on all the reports are expected in May.
2008-02-28 Committee on Industry, Research and Energy In the chair: Angelika NIEBLER EPP-ED DE
20080225IPR22129 Energy Package reports Committee on Industry, Research and Energy
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/draftReportsCom.do?language=EN&body=ITRE
EN
2
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=ITRE
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
