MEPS put supermarkets under spotlight
Competition
2008-02-28 - 11:15
Most of us shop in supermarkets on a weekly basis. We go there because they are convenient, claim low prices and we can do our shopping in one go. These are the positive aspects, but there is growing concern about the size and buying power of supermarkets in Europe. On 18 February, a written declaration signed by 439 MEPs called on the Commission to investigate their effect on small businesses, suppliers and workers. It also suggested retailers are "abusing their power".
Supermarket power: a Europe-wide phenomenon
There is no doubt that large supermarkets across the continent are attracting more and more customers. Figures for 2005 show that Carrefour of France, Metro Group of Germany, Tesco in Britain and Rewe in Germany have the largest market shares in Western, Central and Eastern Europe.
In Germany, France, Ireland and Sweden the top 5 retailers made up more than 70% of the grocery market in 2005. In the UK every 1 in 7 pounds spent by consumers is spent in Tesco supermarkets.
The backers of the written declaration say supermarkets often use cheap prices on a few highly visible goods to mask high prices on less visible items, such as prepared foods.
The written declaration
The written declaration signed by 439 MEPs says:
EU retailing is increasingly dominated by a small number of supermarket chains.
Supermarkets are fast-becoming "gatekeepers" - controlling farmers’ and other suppliers’ only real access to EU consumers,
There is evidence from across the EU that big supermarkets are abusing their buying power to force down prices paid to suppliers.
Such buying power impacts negatively on working conditions and environment.
What MEPs are demanding
The declaration also sets out what MEPs want:
That the Commission's competition watchdog investigates the effects of concentration on small businesses, suppliers, workers and shoppers.
An assessment of potential abuse of buying power
They also want measures to protect consumers, workers, producers - including the possibility of legislation
Big supermarkets abuse their buying power
In October 2007 Parliament adopted a resolution on rising feed and food prices: "retail food prices have not kept up with the cost of living, and farmgate prices have failed to keep up with retail prices".
Polish MEP Janusz Wojciechowski (UEN), vice-chairman of the Agriculture Committee and one of the MEPs who tabled the declaration, said "our declaration is a continuation of the subject. There is a big price difference between what the suppliers get and what consumers pay in the shops."
The tablers of the declaration also claim big supermarket chains need big farms. Farms are increasingly taken over by fewer bigger farm enterprises, many of which dispense with local labour and employ cheaper migrants.
UK Green Caroline Lucas, is worried by the environmental aspects of supermarket shopping saying that "massive scale and reliance on unsustainable practices means they depend upon fossil fuels for transport, fertilisers and copious amounts of packaging".
Hungarian Socialist Gyula Hegyi said, "for many years I had thought that unfair practices by western supermarkets in Hungary were due to a lack of respect for the laws of the new Member States". However, "Western European countries face the same complaints. That is why we need regulation for such activities at European level. If supermarkets are subject to the same internal corporation rules, they also should be subject to the same regulations."
Not just groceries
This phenomenen is not restricted to food. Supermarkets are also fast moving into clothes, home entertainment, pharmaceuticals and banking. The vast buying power available to the big players allows them to dictate terms, claim the sponsors of the declaration.
Click on the link below to read more about written declarations
20080225STO22149 Written declaration supermarkets European Parliament resolution of 25 October 2007 on rising feed and food prices
EN
1
PHOTO
20080228PHT22457.jpg
-//EP//TEXT WDECL P6-DCL-2007-0088 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0480 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
