UK should be "at the heart of Europe" says Pöttering
Institutions
2008-02-28 - 12:38
Queen Elizabeth greets Hans-Gert Pöttering
The UK should play a role "at the heart of Europe". That was one of the messages Parliament's President Hans-Gert Pöttering took with him on a two-day visit to the UK, during which he had an audience with the Queen and talks with Prime Minister Gordon Brown. He gave a speech at the London School of Economics where he made a plea for intercultural dialogue as a tool for improving understanding between different cultures and religions and avoiding a so-called "Clash of Civilisations".
The visit also included a meeting with former Prime Minister Tony Blair, now Middle East peace envoy for the Quartet (Russia, US, UN and the EU). Mr Pöttering briefed Mr Blair on Parliament's new Middle East Working Group, and confirmed that Parliament will hold a special conference on the Middle East later in the year, which Mr Blair, French Foreign Minister Bernard Kouchner, and other members of the Palestine donors' conference would address.
He also met the leaders of the main opposition parties, leading MPs and leaders of the Catholic and Muslim faiths.
After meeting Queen Elizabeth, Mr Pöttering told students that he had reflected on the fact her reign had seen 11 British Prime Ministers and 10 US Presidents. "The continuity she has provided - and her vantage point on world affairs have been quite extraordinary," he said.
Speech to LSE students: "Intercultural Dialogue"
Marking the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue, Mr Pöttering delivered a speech at the LSE on "Dialogue of Cultures or Clash of Civilisations". He opened by making a plea for Britain to be fully engaged in European affairs: "I want and hope that this country will play a true leadership role in the European Union...at the very heart of Europe".
He said that the "relationship between Islamic and Western societies is going to be increasingly central to life in Europe". He urged people to "appreciate and respect one another and find a way to life with one another". He said such an approach would help resolve international issues like "Israel-Palestine, Iraq, Iran and the threat of terrorism". Finally, he vowed to continue to work through the Euro-Mediterranean Assembly to contribute to intercultural dialogue between Europe and the Middle East.
Speaking to the press at the end of his visit he expressed "great satisfaction" at the outcome of his talks "with the British Government and opposition leaders. "I leave Britain reassured that the Lisbon Treaty ratification process is well on track. It was also good to learn first-hand of the cross-party consensus on the need to fight climate change."
Talks with opposition figures
He went on to say that "I briefed Mr Brown, Mr Cameron and Mr Clegg on Parliament's plans to see the Energy package of legislation adopted before the European elections in 2009. It is clear that ratification of the Lisbon Treaty, with its new provisions on climate change and on energy solidarity, is a vital element in ensuring that the EU maintains its current lead in the global battle against climate change".
20080225STO22146 President's website Buckingham Palace
EN
1
PHOTO
20080228PHT22459.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/president/defaulten.htm
EN
3
LINK
http://www.royal.gov.uk/output/Page1.asp
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
