Alojz Peterle MEP on Slovenia, Kosovo and cancer
Institutions
2008-02-29 - 11:32
A key player - Slovenian MEP Alojz Peterle
Former Slovenian Prime Minister Alojz Peterle has made a mark in the European Parliament since being elected for the centre right EPP-ED in 2004. As the Slovenian Presidency of the EU enters its third month, we ask his opinion about its performance as well as about former fellow Yugoslav nations. He talks frankly about his successful personal battle against cancer and his campaign against the disease.
Prior to the Slovene presidency of the council some critics said Slovenia was too small and too new to hold the presidency. How is the presidency doing so far?
Tell me, did anyone ever criticize Luxembourg, which is smaller than Slovenia? The size of the country does not have any direct connection with the quality of the presidency.
Slovenia started its presidency with great enthusiasm and with the right priorities. I am very happy about the conference on intercultural dialogue. We successfully introduced the legislation package on goods, which strengthens the internal market and favour SMEs. The preparations on the new Lisbon strategy are going well and it seems that we will be successful with legislation on the hydrogen vehicle. My analysis would be that the work so far has been a success.
Improving relations with the Western Balkans is a priority of the Slovenian presidency. What does the future hold for the region?
This is of interest to the whole Union. Slovenia knows the region very well because of our common history and has close economic and other ties with the Western Balkan states. Slovenian knowledge and shared experiences in the region are a big advantage for it during the presidency.
In politics we do not always choose between the good and better solution. The proclamation of Kosovo's independence had repercussions around the world. So did the unity of the EU regarding sending the EULEX mission to Kosovo and the common position of the Council, that each country would decide individually whether to recognise Kosovo.
The situation will improve when all participants adopt the same rules of the game that led to a peaceful and successful development of the EU after WW2. Respecting national identity and a willingness to reconcile and cooperate have to become the basis for living together for different nations and minorities in this part of Europe.
As the only representative of the new Member States in the Praesidium of the Convention on the Future of Europe (2002-2003) what are your thoughts on the new Lisbon Treaty?
It enables a more effective and transparent working of the EU's institutions, further enlargements and gives a more important role to the EP and national parliaments. It also establishes a strong foreign policy with the support of a common diplomatic service.
Allow me to ask you a personal question: You have openly spoken of how you beat cancer. How can the EP contribute?
Cancer is becoming the main health problem in the EU. Today already every third citizens can reckon to this unpleasant diagnosis. We have to act urgently! At the beginning of my mandate, I started MAC (Members Against Cancer), which includes 60 MEPs so far.
The EP can work on legislation for the fight against cancer. It can also strengthen the political will for better cooperation with the Council and the Commission as well as with national parliaments.
One of the key ideas is the establishment of a European Cancer Task Force. Health is in the competence of the member states but some issues can be solved successfully only at the European level. Also citizens expect European action.
20080225STO22153 Alojz Peterle Slovenia's EU Presidency inaugurates Year of Intercultural Dialogue Slovenia's Janša ready to solve Kosovo impasse The future of Serbia and Kosovo lies in the EU - Saryusz-Wolski
EN
1
PHOTO
20080228PHT22549.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/members/public/yourMep/view.do?name=peterle&partNumber=1&language=EN&id=23693
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080107STO17490 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111STO18361 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080204STO20426 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
