Russian delegation MEPs give Medvedev a guarded welcome
External relations
2008-03-04 - 11:17
In from the cold, Russians said "Da" to Medvedev
The quiet rise of Dmitry Medvedev and his ultimate election as Russia's President on Sunday will impact on Moscow's relations with the European Union. After being endorsed by Vladimir Putin, Mr Medvedev's coronation was all but assured given the former's popularity due to Russia's economic growth. As he prepares to take up the reigns in the Kremlin, we ask MEPs on Parliament's delegation to Russia their feelings on Sunday's election and what the future holds for Moscow's relations with Europe.
Prior to the 2 March poll, the European Parliament had joined the OSCE in not sending any observers to the elections due to the restrictions that had been placed on the Vienna-based human rights watchdog.
Putin endorsement seen as key
A certain amount of doubt about the transparency of the election was voiced by Finnish Socialist MEP Reino Paasilinna who told us that "competing candidates were prevented from participating or otherwise discriminated". Tellingly perhaps, the vice-chair of parliament's delegation to Russia concedes that "traditional democratic elections" would probably had led to a similar high score for a Medvedev candidature (he took 70.2% in the election). Anna Jensen, a Danish Liberal Member told us that regarding the elections she regrets that "the conditions...were not freer".
For some MEPs the crucial aspect of the election was the fact that President Putin had picked Dmitry Medvedev as his chosen successor to continue his policies of a strong state and a growing economy. For Greek MEP Emmanouil Angelakas (EPP-ED) the result "underlines the trust of the Russian people to the choices of the outgoing President". Lithuanian MEP Justas Paleckis shares this view telling us that "before and during the campaign, the legacy and image of Mr Putin were printed all over Mr Medvedev's face".
Other Members of the delegation were more critical of the whole process. Polish MEP Hanna Foltyn-Kubicka of the UEN group said she hesitated to describe them as elections "as there were no opposition candidates, no real debate nor any media coverage of Mr. Medvedev's opponents".
Latvia 's Tatjana Ždanoka (Greens/EFA) was one of the few who were willing to completely endorse the new candidate. She called the election of President Medvedev "a unique chance for building EU-Russia relations on a new basis". She noted that the only question is how the European Union responds.
The EU in tray of President Medvedev
One of the most keenly watched areas of Dmitry Medvedev's presidency will be the course he steers in foreign affairs - notably in relations with the European Union. As he has been a key man in President Putin's circle since 2000 and has announced that Putin could be his Prime Minister, there are questions as to what extent he will chart an independent path after his May 7 inauguration.
Nevertheless, Dmitry Medvedev is the first leader of Russia who has not risen up through either the Communist party or the KGB. He is also not a member of the security or defence establishment - the so called " siloviki".
Regarding the course a new president will chart for Russia, Justas Paleckis told us he saw two possible scenarios; "First, President Medvedev is likely to continue with "Putin's Plan" in tandem with Putin as Prime Minister, second, the siloviki in the Kremlin give way to a more liberal Medvedev's Russia, a country able to accommodate European values".
Anna Jensen is another MEP hoping that Medvedev lives up to his "liberal image". She wants him to bring Russia into the World Trade Organisation. Finally Emmanouil Angelakas wished the new President well "for the promotion of democracy, respect for human rights, the fight against corruption and improvement in the quality of life of the Russian people".
20080229STO22574 Parliament's delegation to Russia Looking ahead to Russia's election on Sunday EU-Russia relations in spotlight ahead of Summit Foreign Affairs Committee
EN
1
PHOTO
20080228PHT22545.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/activities/delegations/homeDel.do?language=EN&body=D-RU
EN
5
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=AFET
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080225STO22150 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070514STO06590 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
