Opening of the March plenary session in Strasbourg - agenda change
Institutions
2008-03-10 - 18:27
Parliament adopted the following change to the agenda announced by the European Parliament President Hans-Gert Pöttering:
Thursday 13 March
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights, democracy and the rule of law will be as follows:
Armenia
The arrest of demonstrators following the presidential elections in Russia
The case of the journalist Perwez Kambakhsh and the case of the Iranian Mehdi Kazemi
Highlights of the week
Monday 10 March 2008
EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering will make a statement on the situation in Gaza as the first point, followed by statements from the political groups.
Parliament will then debate, after a statement from the Commission, the bilateral agreements being negotiated between certain Member States and the United States on visas and passenger name records (PNR). The House will also debate data protection and consumer rights.
The session continues with a debate on a conciliation agreement on common rules in the field of civil aviation security. Parliament will vote on a new regulation that aims to ensure a high level of aviation security throughout the EU. It lays down common rules and standards, such as screening of passengers and cabin baggage, access control or aircraft security checks. The regulation also deals with in-flight-security measures, such as the deployment of "sky marshals" or the carriage of weapons on board an aircraft.
The House will debate and vote on reports from the Budgets Committee on the mobilisation of the EU Solidarity Fund for an amount of €162.4 million in commitment and payment appropriations, relating to the major storms in the United Kingdom in June and July 2007. The grant will go towards reimbursing part of the cost of emergency measures such as rescue services, cleaning up after flood damage, and restoring basic infrastructure.
Tuesday 11 March 2008
EP President Pöttering will open the debate on Tuesday by marking 11 March, four years after the Madrid bombings, on the European day against terrorism.
Tuesday starts with a debate on the Commission's annual policy strategy for 2009. The vote will be held at a later part-session. The strategy outlines the Commission's policy objectives in five priority areas: growth and jobs, climate change and sustainable Europe, making a reality of the common immigration policy, putting the citizen first, and Europe as a world partner.
Parliament will then debate a legislative report on establishing the European institute of Innovation and Technology. (EIT) The EIT will be able to start operating this summer if the Council's common position on establishing the institute is officially approved by the European Parliament.
At midday on Tuesday, Estonian President (and former MEP) Toomas Hendrik Ilves will address Parliament at a formal sitting of the House, just weeks after the 90th anniversary of the founding of the Republic of Estonia (24 February 2008).
Parliament will also tackle two non-binding reports from the Agriculture Committee. The first is on national quotas for milk. As consumers complain about the rising price of milk, Parliament is being consulted on legislation drafted by the Commission which would allow Member States to increase dairy quotas by 2% on a voluntary basis from 1 April 2008, thereby expanding supplies.
The second is on the Commission health check on the CAP. The committee recommends broad approval of the proposals, although it has reservations about certain points, including the amount of funds to be switched from the "first pillar" of the CAP (market support) to the "second pillar" (rural development) as well as the capping of direct aid.
The House will then debate sustainable agriculture and biogas. The report stresses that, in the long term, renewable energy sources such as biogas and biofuels, together with solar power and wind energy subject to further intensified research efforts, can bring about a higher degree of independence from fossil-fuel energy sources.
Wednesday 12 March 2008
The key debate is on the forthcoming Spring European Council 13-14 March 2008. The two-day meeting of EU Heads of State or Government begins on Thursday, and as usual for the Spring Summit, it is mainly devoted to economic issues. As usual the summit will begin with an address from the EP President, Hans-Gert Pöttering , followed by a discussion.
At 3pm on Wednesday, the Chamber in Strasbourg will play host to a special ceremony to mark the 50th anniversary of the European Parliament. The President of the European Parliament Hans-Gert Pöttering, President of the Council - Slovenian Prime Minister Janez Janša and Commission President José Manuel Barroso will address the House. The European Union Youth Orchestra will perform for Parliament. For the record, the European Parliamentary Assembly first met for its constituent meeting in Strasbourg on 19 March 1958.
Later on Wednesday, the House will debate the EU's role in Iraq. MEPs will vote on a report that urges greater EU involvement in Iraq, increased transparency and efficiency of EU aid and more support for the United Nations' efforts in the country. The suggestions are part of a recommendation to the Council on the EU's role in Iraq, contained in an own-initiative report drafted for the Foreign Affairs Committee.
MEPs will hold a debate with the Commission and Council on the situation in Chad, where EU troops have been dispatched under a UN mandate to protect refugees who are fleeing over the border from Darfur, Sudan. The operation's overall commander, Lieutenant-General Patrick Nash, is Irish. Ireland has committed 400-plus troops to the mission.
On Wednesday evening, the House will debate international financial reporting standards. The International Accounting Standards Board (IFRS) lacks transparency, legitimacy and accountability. It is not under the control of any democratically elected parliament or government says a report from the Economics Committee.
In the evening, MEPs then tackle a legislative report from Neena GILL (West Midlands, Labour, PES, UK) on enhancing the quality of life of older people. Helping older people to stay healthier and to live independently for longer is the aim of a new research programme on "Ambient Assisted Living" (AAL). It will develop new information and communication technology (ICT), to enable more elderly people to access public services more easily, but these services must nonetheless respect their privacy and dignity, say MEPs in the Industry Committee. There is now a first-reading agreement with Council.
On the subject of women in prison, MEPs highlight the situation of female prisoners, a minority of the prison population but a fast-growing one. The report focuses on prison conditions, the preservation of family ties and reintegration into society and the workplace.
Thursday 13 March 2008
Thursday is dedicated to development issues with debates and votes on the challenges of the EU development cooperation policy for the new Member States, and gender equality and women empowerment in development cooperation.
As usual the session ends with debates and votes on human rights issues in the world, on this occasion, the topics are:
- Armenia
- the arrest of demonstrators following the presidential elections in Russia
- the case of the journalist Perwez Kambakhsh and the case of the Iranian Mehdi Kazemi
20080307IPR23278 Briefing - 10-13 March 2008 (Strasbourg plenary session) Final draft agenda - 10-13 March 2008 50 years of the European Parliament - evolution, powers, policies, presidents and elections
EN
2
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?reference=2008-03&language=EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080219BRI21798 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080226BKG22350 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
