MEPs debate rising food prices and biofuels with World Food Programme Chief
Development and cooperation
2008-03-07 - 14:59
MEPs debated the impact of soaring food prices on development, and of biofuel production on food supply, with Josette Sheeran, Executive Director of the United Nations World Food Programme, at an extraordinary meeting of the Development Committee on Thursday.
"High food prices have hit hard the World Food Programme's capacity to respond to hunger", in terms of operational costs (up 40% since June 2007), said Ms Sheeran, adding that these high prices are also "likely to increase the incidence and depth of food insecurity".
Among factors driving food price rises, she cited the rise in oil and energy prices, economic booms in India and China, weather-related events impacting on harvests and "competition" between food and fuel.
Ms Sheeran called for a solution to be found to the WFP's funding gap (500 million US dollars in 2008). Otherwise, by June of this year, "this gap may lead to a cut in food rations or in the number of people to whom we can deliver aid", she said.
Food prices set at fuel prices
"The shift to biofuels production has diverted land out of the food chain. Food prices, such as that of palm oil in Africa, are now set at fuel prices", she said. Whilst acknowledging, in reply to a question by Thijs Berman (PES, NL), that the increase is partly due to speculation, she stressed that "structural factors are part of today's high prices".
Ms Sheeran made it clear that biofuel production capacities are twice what is produced today, putting even more pressure on the food supply chain. "It may be a bonanza for farmers - I hope it is true - but in the short term, the world's poorest are hit hard", she said.
"New face of hunger" and DRC
Ms Sheeran talked about the "new face of hunger", with people unable to afford food even though shortage is not an issue. Food prices are also causing "social unrest", she noted as food riots have been reported lately in Cameroon, Burkani Faso and Senegal.
"The real revolution in food aid is buying local products to feed the population. In the DRC, local purchases have risen by 30% lately", she said in reply to a question from Jürgen Schröder (EPP-ED, DE), about developments in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. "The Congolese Government helped the WFP to reopen roads blocked by conflict", she added.
The Development Committee is to send delegation to North Kivu from 25 to 31 March 2008.
Appointed in April 2007, Mrs Sheeran is the eleventh Executive Director of the United Nations World Food Programme. She has also served as Deputy US Trade Representative in the Office of the US Trade Representative (USTR).
2008-03-04 Committee on Development Chair Josep Borrell Fontelles PES ES
20080307IPR23504
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
