Clearer rules on European Ombudsman's access to information
Ombudsman
2008-03-11 - 11:07
Proposed changes in the rules governing the European Ombudsman's access to information held by EU bodies and evidence given to him by EU civil servants, are set out in a report, approved by the Constitutional Affairs Committee on Monday, on the Ombudsman's statute. The key aim of these changes is to boost citizens' confidence in the Ombudsman's work.
Changes in the Ombudsman's statute were requested by the Ombudsman himself, Mr Diamandouros, in a letter sent to EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering in July 2006.
Clearer rules on access to confidential documents
Committee members approved an amendment to a provision that obliges all EU institutions and bodies to provide the Ombudsman with the information he requests. This amendment deletes the current caveat that information may be refused on grounds of secrecy, which Members felt that citizens could interpret as restricting the Ombudsman's right to acquire information.
The new text spells out the rules on the handling of classified information obtained by the Ombudsman and his staff in the course of their inquiries. The report says that they would be required not to divulge any sensitive information or any document falling under the scope of the Community legislation regarding the protection of personal data.
Officials bound to testify
Committee members also agreed to change the rule on the testimony of EU officials. The approved text deletes a requirement that Community civil servants must testify "in accordance with the instructions from their administrations". Again, the committee felt that this wording might mislead citizens into thinking that officials are not always required to tell the truth.
The report setting out amendments to the statute of the European Ombudsman and his staff, drafted by by Anneli Jäätteenmäki (ALDE, FI), was approved in committee with 19 votes in favour and 3 abstentions.
After the plenary vote in Parliament, the agreement of the Council is also needed for the changes to enter into force.
Procedure: own-initiative (Rule 45.2) --
Vote in plenary: April (Strasbourg)
2008-03-10 Committee on Constitutional Affairs In the chair: Jo Leinen PES DE
20080310IPR23576 Committee on Constitutional Affairs
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=AFCO
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
