Women in rural areas
Women's rights/Equal opportunities
2008-03-12 - 13:52
Parliament adopted an own-initiative report on the situation of women in rural areas of the EU, Christa KLAß (EPP-ED, DE) for the Women's Rights committee which calls on the Member States to develop strategies aimed at curbing the out-migration of women in rural areas, especially those who are highly educated.
The European Parliament is convinced that mainstreaming gender into the rural sector is a key strategy not only for the promotion of equality between women and men but also for economic growth and sustainable rural development;
The report calls on the Commission to improve statistical data and information as regards this phenomenon and to analyse the patterns of, main reasons for and consequences of the out-migration from rural areas in the EU . The report also calls on the Member States to develop strategies aimed at curbing the out-migration of women in rural areas, especially those who are highly educated.
MEPs call on the Member States, in collaboration with local government and business, to create incentives for the participation of women in the labour force. These incentives could particularly focus on getting rid of any discrimination against women in the labour market, with the aim of addressing the problem of poverty and social exclusion in rural areas. The Committee notes that poverty is widespread in rural communities, especially in the new Member States.
Sexual violence
The report draws attention to the strong taboos surrounding sexual and/or domestic violence against women and girls in rural areas, and calls on the Member States to take appropriate measures to ensure better protection and support of victims and those at risk of becoming victims of such violence.
The report refers to the fact that women are under-represented in formal rural or regional leadership positions, despite the fact that they play an important role in the ‘informal’ community, where women often play an essential role in the community’s social life by influencing the emergence of social capital through their involvement in informal local networks (e.g. in the framework of voluntary community work or various thematic associations).
Recognition of work
MEPs also call on the Member States to develop the legal construct of shared ownership, in order to ensure that women’s rights in the agricultural sector are fully recognised, appropriate protection in the field of social security and recognition of their work.
Finally, the House calls on the relevant national, regional and local authorities to encourage the participation of women in local action groups and the development of local partnerships under the Leader axis as well as to ensure gender-balanced participation on their management boards.
20080311IPR23702 The situation of women in rural areas of the EU Text, as adopted by the EP on 12 March, will be available here
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5484672
EN
2
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
