Euro-Mediterranean Assembly discusses environmental and political future of the region
Delegations
2008-03-28 - 18:08
The Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly, meeting on 27-28 March in Athens, issued declarations on the Union for the Mediterranean and on Dutch MP Geert Wilders' film on Islam, after a session which featured debates on energy and environment issues in the Mediterranean. European Parliament President, Hans-Gert Pöttering, has been elected as the new chair of the Assembly.
“Both sides of the Mediterranean must work together on the many environmental issues affecting the region. It is up to us to avoid using the environmentally damaging production methods practised to date. The development of new, clean energy technologies and efforts to improve energy efficiency must be pursued more intensely”, said EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering at the opening session of the fourth plenary meeting on Friday.
The Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly (EMPA) calls, in the Final Declaration, for the creation of the Euro-Mediterranean Energy Community (EMEC) which will contribute to energy security of supply, to attraction of investments and competitiveness.
Union for the Mediterranean
The EMPA welcomes “the fresh impetus given to the Euro-Mediterranean partnership” by the proposal for a Union for the Mediterranean, recently endorsed by the EU Spring Summit. The Paris Summit of 13 July will launch the “Barcelona Process: Union for the Mediterranean”. The 27 Member States of the EU and the 10 non-EU Mediterranean coastal partners are to take part.
“This initiative should deepen the existing Euro-Mediterranean Partnership. We will insist that the Parliamentary dimension is retained”, said Hans-Gert Pöttering, referring to the proposals the European Commission has been asked to submit to the July Paris Summit.
Dutch MP's film "highly offensive towards Islam"
Dutch MP Geert Wilders's film is “highly offensive towards Islam”, says a statement of the Assembly. The EMPA says the content of the film is likely “to cause strong reactions in numerous Muslim countries”.
Recommendations adopted
The EMPA also adopted the following recommendations:
Ways for the Parliaments to contribute to the settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict. Rapporteurs: Edward McMillan-Scott (EPP-ED, UK) and Yassine Jaber (Lebanon);
Monitoring the implementation of the code of conduct for the fight against terrorism. Rapporteurs: Robert Del Picchia (France) and Afifa Salah (Tunisia);
Renewable energy sources and promotion of the environment friendly forms of energy. Rapporteurs: David Hammerstein (Greens/EFA, ES) and Fatima Chellouch (Algeria);
Encouraging investment in the Euro-Mediterranean area through education and employment-job creation. Rapporteurs: Jamila Madeira (PES, PT) and Fethi Ferjaoui (Tunisia);
Enhancing intercultural dialogue, freedom of expression, respect for religions, beliefs and cultures. Role of media and education in the dialogue between cultures. Rapporteurs: Jean-Claude Guibal (France) and Mahmoud El Karoui (Tunisia);
Impacts of radical climate change in the Mediterranean basin with particular emphasis on drinkable water. Rapporteurs: Carlos Carnero (PES, ES) and Ms Ibtisam Mechail (Egypt).
EMPA expands
With Romania and Bulgaria acceding to the EU in 2007, the Assembly has expanded from 240 Members to 260 in total. 130 MPs now represent the European Union (49 MEPs and 81 MPs appointed by the parliaments of the 27 EU Member States) and 130 represent the national parliaments of the non-EU Mediterranean partners: Egypt, Jordan, Israel, Lebanon, Morocco, the Palestinian Authority, Syria, Tunisia and Turkey.
EMPA, which meets once a year in plenary session, is a joint Parliamentary Assembly. During its debates the Assembly uses French, English and Arabic as working languages. Texts adopted are also available in Hebrew, Turkish and all the official languages of the European Union.
EP President elected chair of the Assembly
European Parliament President Hans-Gert Pöttering has been elected chair of the EMPA. His mandate runs until March 2009. At that time, the next plenary session of the Assembly will be held in Brussels. Mr Pöttering said his priorities would include the situation in the Middle East and intercultural dialogue.
20080327IPR25057 Full details of all the texts adopted will be available in due course on the EMPA webpages
EN
1
LINK
/intcoop/empa/default.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
