Economic Partnership Agreements could threaten ACP regional integration, warns EU-ACP Assembly
Development and cooperation
2008-03-20 - 16:09
Concern that the Economic Partnership Agreements which the EU is negotiating separately with individual ACP states or groups could threaten their regional integration, and post-electoral violence in Kenya, dominated the 15th ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly in Ljubljana (Slovenia) from 17 to 20 March.
The ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly (JPA) brings together 78 MEPs and 78 parliamentarians from the African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP).
EPAs and regional integration
The JPA called on the EU and ACP countries to ensure that Economic Partnership Agreements (EPAs) are consistent with, and contribute to, the strengthening of ACP regional integration initiatives.
Many ACP countries fear that the current trends of the EPA negotiations and the adoption of agreements by sub-regions may undermine regional integration efforts. The JPA stressed that any agreements adopted by sub-regions must be open to other members of their respective regional organisations. Countries benefiting from the WTO preference system for least advanced countries need not sign new agreements.
The situation in Kenya
The ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly called for an urgent and thorough investigation of the violence triggered by the contested re-election of outgoing President Mwai Kibak in December 2007, and also of offences under the Electoral Offences Act, so as to restore trust in democracy and enable displaced people to go home. The JPA deeply regrets the death of Melitus Were and David Kimutai Too, two newly-elected Members of Parliament.
Chad
A motion for a resolution on developments in Chad was rejected because it failed to win sufficient backing from the ACP side.
Reports put to a vote
The Assembly voted three reports on:
Social and environmental consequences of structural adjustment programmes , by Gay Mitchell (EPP-ED, IE) and Alma Oumarou (Niger), which says that the practice of subjecting World Bank and IMF lending to economic policy conditions has had disastrous social and environmental consequences for ACP countries, and should be replaced by a country-specific lending policy that focuses on reducing poverty.
Experiences from the European regional integration process relevant to ACP countries , by Filip Kaczmarek (EPP-ED, PL) and Mr De Sousa (Angola), which calls on ACP countries to agree to exercise sovereignty jointly in areas where they have long-term common interests and cross-border problems, and advocates regional undertakings for joint exploration, regulation and control of natural resources.
Food security issues in ACP countries and the role of ACP-EU co-operation , by Alain Hutchinson (PES, BE) and Mohamed Ali (Ethiopia), which says that b etter managing water supplies, empowering women to manage food production, and banning the use of food plants in bio-fuels would all help to reduce food insecurity.
JPA mourns the death of Dr Chosani Njobvu
The JPA held a minute's silence to pay tribute to Zambian MP and Head of Delegation Dr Chosani Njobvu, who died in Ljubljana on Wednesday 19 March.
Coming meetings
The JPA's first regional meeting with parliamentarians from southern Africa will be held in Windhoek (Namibia) from 28 to 30 April 2008. A delegation of 15 MEPs will take part in the work.
The ACP-EU JPA's next meeting takes place in Port Moresby (Papua New Guinea) from 22 to 28 November 2008.
2008-03-15
ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly - 15th session, Ljubljana, Slovenia Co-Presidents: Glenys Kinnock (PES, UK) and Wilkie Rasmussen (Cook Islands)
20080317IPR24360 Full details on the 15th session of the ACP-EU JPA in Ljubljana
EN
1
LINK
/intcoop/acp/60_15/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
