The Week Ahead 31 March – 6 April 2008
Institutions
2008-03-28 - 10:43
Committee meetings - Brussels
Hearing of Androula Vassiliou. The Commissioner designate from Cyprus, proposed as the replacement for Markos Kyprianou with the health portfolio, will face a three-hour hearing before the Environment Committee, allowing MEPs to consider whether to back her appointment. (Tuesday)
Hans-Gert Pöttering visits Denmark. The EP President makes an official visit to Denmark, including meetings with Queen Margrethe and Prime Minister Anders Fogh Rasmussen. He will also give a speech at Copenhagen University and visit the European Environment Agency. (Tuesday-Wednesday)
Climate Change. The Temporary Committee on Climate Change will adopt its interim report on the scientific data on climate change. Meanwhile, the Development Committee will hold a hearing on cooperation with developing countries in the fight against climate change. (both Tuesday)
Immigration/Poland. A delegation from the Civil Liberties Committee makes the latest in a series of visits to centres in the Member States for asylum seekers and immigrants, this time in Poland. They will also visit the EU border agency Frontex and meet the Polish Interior Minister. (Tuesday-Thursday)
Human rights in the world. The Foreign Affairs Committee is set to vote on its annual report on human rights in the world. (Wednesday)
Financial markets/McCreevy. Internal Market Commissioner Charlie McCreevy will meet the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee, as turmoil continues on the financial markets. (Tuesday)
Lobbying the EU. The Constitutional Affairs Committee will vote on a report on the systems in place to ensure transparency in lobbying activity in the European Union institutions, Parliament included. (Tuesday)
EU/Burma. A hearing organised by the Development Committee and the Human Rights Subcommittee will consider how EU policy can influence change in Burma/Myanmar. (Wednesday)
Sport in Europe. The Culture Committee is set to adopt a wide-ranging report on EU sport policy. (Tuesday)
20080328IPR25077 For details of all the week's events see "The Agenda"
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081400AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
