MEPs share their Easter with us
Culture
2008-03-28 - 10:13
Most Europeans have already celebrated Easter though for some in the Orthodox Church the celebrations are still to come. Easter is the most important religious festival for Christians and Jews celebrate Passover around the same time. The abundance of eggs, rabbits and chocolate over Easter also indicates that it has resonance for those who are not religious. As the snow settles over an unusually cold and early Easter 2008, we asked some MEPs what Easter means for them and how they celebrate it.
For some Members we spoke to, Easter is primarily a religious occasion and a time to be with family and friends. Ljudmila Novak (EPP-ED) told us that "in Slovenia we tend to accent the Easter celebration on spending time with the family and therefore we go to the church every day from Thursday to Monday together".
Independent Dutch MEP Bastiaan Belder told us that "we celebrated Easter with my wife, children and four grandsons, the whole family together. Easter has a very special religious meaning to us and it is not just a day off. On Easter Sunday we went twice to the protestant Church with 1000 people attending".
Finnish Green MEP Satu Hassi described her weekend; "o n Easter Monday we had a dinner with some friends at home with lamb steak and Easter dessert called pasha. For Easter decorations we had daffodils in the table and an "Easter Witch" in the window".
Easter is a time for tradition...
Romanian Liberal MEP Adina-Ioana Vălean told us that "a fter a long lent period that lasts for more than six weeks the Easter celebrations start on Friday before the Easter Sunday. On Saturday night after a religious ceremony everyone eats bread and wine and take home the light – the candle they held during the procession".
"It is believed that burying an Easter egg in the soil would bring a good harvest. Those who roll their egg the furthest in the egg rolling game can expect a successful year." This is how Lithuanian Member Eugenijus Maldeikis (UEN) explained to us a traditional Easter in his country.
Estonian Socialist Andres Tarand told us that "children in Estonia paint eggs in different colours and then adults hide them – we say that they’re brought by rabbits. People also offer branches of willow katkin to each other. People also go outside asking the children if “the sun is dancing”.
Irish MEP Kathy Sinnott (IND/DEM) described to us a typical Easter in her family; "a fter the Vigil Mass on Holy Saturday, Easter begins. Chocolate Eggs are exchanged on Easter Sunday or if children are present, the chocolate eggs are often hidden and hunted. In my house we also have an Easter Egg hunt with hard boiled eggs that we dye and decorate".
In the Czech Republic and Slovakia there is a tradition where women are symbolically "whipped" or have water poured on them to ensure that they are young, beautiful and healthy. In return women give men ham, eggs and sometimes money depending on the area. Czech MEP Jana Hybášková (EPP-ED) explained to us that "on Eastern Monday morning, me and my daughters carefully wait in our beds for dear Ivan, my husband, to come and whip us. We shout a lot".
Easter is a celebration of a new year...
Spanish Green MEP David Hammerstein sees Easter as "a celebration of spring, new life, so I turned it into a working celebration and gave several press conferences in defence of ecology. I will also celebrate the Jewish Easter . I celebrate it in a secular way with the symbolic dinner and I will think about the liberation of all people fighting against oppression, like in Tibet".
German MEP Feleknas Uca (GUE/NGL) spent 21 March in Diyabakir in Turkey, celebrating Newroz – the Kurdish New Year.
20080319STO24705 Articles about culture
EN
1
PHOTO
20080327PHT25026.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/news/public/documents_par_theme/906/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
