Pöttering praises "role model" Ireland ahead of Treaty poll
Institutions
2008-04-08 - 13:00
President Pöttering meets Taoiseach Bertie Ahern
In a two day visit to Dublin, Parliament's President Hans-Gert Pöttering has made the case for a "Yes" vote in the forthcoming Irish referendum on the reform treaty. However, in a speech to the Irish Senate - the Seanad - he stressed that "it is a decision only the Irish voters can make". He also thanked Ireland for its contribution to European unity. During the visit he met with Irish Taoiseach Bertie Ahern, President Mary McAleese and leaders of the Republic's main political parties.
The visit - his first to Ireland since taking up his position last year - marked an opportunity for Mr Pöttering to spell out what he believes to be the main advantages of the new treaty: namely increasing the democratic legitimacy of the EU and an extension of powers of national parliaments. He also told Irish Senators that he wanted to "dispel the myth that the EU is all powerful". It "does not set tax or run our health education and social services", he told them. Irish voters are likely to give their verdict on the Treaty in mid-June in a referendum.
He also used the opportunity to cite Ireland as a "role model" for many countries in Central and Eastern Europe who joined the Union in 2004 and 2007. He praised the efforts of the Irish peacekeepers in Chad as part of an EU force for "defending European values".
Earlier, in an interview with the "Irish Times" he had told the paper that he wanted to assure voters that the Lisbon Treaty would not force Ireland to join NATO or lead to the introduction of abortion. Both are key issues for the traditionally neutral and predominantly Catholic country. He also paid tribute to outgoing Prime Minister Bertie Ahern who he said had "not wanted his personal difficulties to become a factor in the referendum campaign".
20080407STO25842 President's website EP Information Office in Ireland
EN
1
PHOTO
20080407PHT25917.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/president/defaulten.htm
EN
3
LINK
http://www.europarl.ie/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
