€400 million for research-driven SMEs as MEPs approve EUROSTARS programme
Research and innovation
2008-04-10 - 13:34
Research and development performing SMEs will soon receive transparent and non-bureaucratic support for their research activities. The European Parliament gave its green light to a compromise package, negotiated with Council beforehand, to co-finance the EUROSTARS funding programme for R&amp;D-driven SMEs to the tune of €100 million from Community funds, participating countries will jointly provide €300 million.
The compromise took on board most of the points raised by the Parliament's Industry Committee. "The negotiations in the European Parliament together with the Council were handled in a record time of five months", said rapporteur Paul Rübig (EPP-ED, AT). "We could obtain decisive improvements. EUROSTARS now has the potential to become a real showcase for the European Union", he added.
EUROSTARS will primarily fund research and development activities driven by one or more SMEs. However, research organisations, universities, other SMEs or large companies could also participate in the programme. The research programme was set up by the EUREKA intergovernmental network for industrial research last year. The EU's Seventh Research Framework Programme (FP7) is to co-finance it to the tune of €100 million, and the 25 participating EU Member States and five Associated Countries will jointly provide another €300 million.
Transparent and non-bureaucratic payments
The programme will finance R&D activities carried out in the entire field of science and technology. Independent experts shall evaluate the proposals for projects and establish a binding ranking list for the allocation of funds from Community and national budgets, says the new text.
The R&D performing SMEs who participate in a selected project are required to jointly contribute the larger part of the overall costs of the R&D activities. The compromise took on board MEPs call for "transparent and efficient" payments. To facilitate payments to participants in selected projects, Member States should, when ever possible, pay financial support in form of lump sums.
The monitoring of the programme's implementation should "not impose an unnecessary burden" to small and medium-sized enterprises either, says the amended proposal.
Use of Community logo in all publications
The compromise text equally took up the Industry Committee's suggestion to use the Community logo in all printed and electronic publications on the EUROSTARS Joint programme.
Participating countries
Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland , Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Luxemburg, the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovenia, the Slovak Republic, Spain, Sweden and the United Kingdom as well as Iceland, Israel, Norway, Switzerland and Turkey.
The amended proposal was adopted by 626 votes in favour, 14 against and 6 members abstaining. The EU's research ministers are expected to endorse the compromise during their next meeting on 29 and 30 May. The legal act shall enter into force on the third day after its publication in the EU Official Journal.
20080408IPR26047 Eurostars Joint Programme: participation by the Community in a research and development programme aimed at supporting research and development performing SMEs undertaken by several Member States Text, as adopted by the EP on 10 April, will shortly be available here
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5527262
EN
2
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
