New guidelines for coal and steel research programme
Research and innovation
2008-04-10 - 13:34
The European Parliament backs the Commission's proposal to revise the guidelines for the research programme of the Research Fund for Coal and Steel (RFCS). However, MEPs stress that research in so called "clean coal technologies" must be improved.
The programme was established after the expiry of the European Coal and Steel Community Treaty and promotes the utilisation and conversion of resources, health and safety in mines, management of external dependence on energy supply, the use of coal as a clean energy source and reducing CO2 emissions. The RFCS has an annual budget of about €60 million, financed by the interest generated by the remaining capital of the European Coal and Steel Community Treaty. The European Commission intends to review the new guidelines every seven years but it could also propose any amendments to the Council before.
Promote clean coal technologies
The consultation report as approved today by Parliament highlights the importance of enhancing research leading to more efficient conversion of primary energy latent in coal into other energy forms, for example through the use of coal gasification and liquefaction which are considered "clean coal technologies". Products of gasification and liquefaction like hydrogen can be used as motor fuels, helping to reduce CO2 emissions.
The European Parliament also stresses that projects shall aim to make Community coal more competitive, especially on local energy markets, by cutting the costs of mining production, increasing the quality of products and reducing the risks while at the time guaranteeing an efficient use of local coal reserves.
Finally, MEPs support the Commission in its proposal to increase the financial support for pilot and demonstration projects from 40% to 50%.
The report was adopted by 558 votes in favour with 61 votes against and 22 members abstaining.
20080408IPR26048 Multiannual technical guidelines for the research programme of the Research Fund for Coal and Steel Text, as adopted by the EP on 10 April, will be available here
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5508872
EN
2
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
