Cancer: MEPs call for EU cancer task force to be set up
Public health
2008-04-10 - 13:34
MEPs call for a new EU cancer task force to be set up
The collection of data, the exchange of best practices, better information of citizens, information campaigns on cancer screening, the promotion of healthy lifestyles, the encouragement of research and innovation and the availability of cancer medicines are some of the recommendations of the European Parliament in a resolution on combating cancer in an enlarged European Union, adopted by MEPs with 621 votes in favour, 10 against and 6 abstentions.
MEPs support the Slovenian Presidency, which has made cancer one of its priorities 2008 (and calls on all future presidencies to continue to make cancer a priority). They underline that according to estimates one in three Europeans is diagnosed with cancer during their lifetime and one in four Europeans dies from the disease. The WTO estimates that at least one third of all cancers are preventable and that prevention offers the most cost-effective long-term strategy for the control of cancer.
Call for a EU Cancer Task Force
The House calls on the Commission to set up an interinstitutional EU Cancer Task Force to collect and exchange best practice for prevention, screening and treatment and to provide leadership for improved cancer control in Europe. The EU Cancer Task Force should in particular promote new measures as well as existing screening projects to help to increase the part of the population taking part in screening measures by at least 50 % in each of the MS by 2018. Furthermore, Initiatives aiming to prevent cancer through the promotion of healthy lifestyles shall be promoted, putting a strong emphasis on children and adolescents.
Better information on screening and cancer treatment are needed
MEPs underline the importance to promote information campaigns on cancer screening and the exchange of best practice on the use of preventive measures. The Council recommendation on cancer screening has to be promoted and implemented effectively. The Commission should increase the information available to patients with cancer by encouraging initiatives which inform patients of their treatment and the ways to access such treatment.
Support for more research and innovation
The Commission should ensure that community legislation contains incentives for industries and researchers to secure ongoing research and guarantee new evidence-based medicines and treatments to combat and control cancer. Funds within FP7 shall be allocated to encourage research and innovation in the area of primary prevention screening and early detection and of new anti-cancer treatments and medicines.
Charter of Patients rights / Charter for protection of cancer patients in the work place
MEPs encourage Member States to adopt national Charters of Patients rights according to European guidelines. Furthermore they call on the Commission to draw up a charter for the protection of cancer patients and chronically sick people in the workplace.
20080408IPR26045 Oral Question to the Commission on combating cancer in the enlarged EU Link to debate on combating cancer in the enlarged EU - Wednesday, 9.4.08 Text, as adopted by the EP on 10 April, will be available here
EN
1
PHOTO
20080410PHT26324.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/activities/plenary/cre.do?language=EN#
EN
4
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//TEXT OQ O-2008-0014 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
