Romania 1 year on - much still to be done: two MEPs give their view
Future of Europe/European integration
2008-04-11 - 07:06
Somewhat over a year has passed since Romania became a member state of the EU. A few months ago Romanian citizens went to the polls to elect MEPs in the country's first European election. In February, the Commission published a report on Romania's progress with judicial reform and in dealing with corruption - with mixed conclusions. Two leading Romanian MEPs speak to us about the country and their work.
How is Romania doing? On 4 February, the Commission offered its assessment of the country's progress so far in achieving reform of its judicial system and in tackling the problem of high-level corruption. Although the mechanisms are in place, it regrets the lack of "convincing results". In conclusion, the Commission expresses "concern at the absence of convincing results to date in the fight against high-level corruption in Romania". It suggests that Romania should "step up its efforts to achieve progress in this area."
Against this background, Romanian MEPs, directly elected in European elections in Romania on 25 November 2007, have settled into their work. In this feature, we speak to the leaders of the two largest Romanian political groupings in the European Parliament, Sorin Frunzﾄプerde, who leads the Romanian contingent within the EPP-ED political group, and Adrian Severin, his counterpart for the Romanian members of the PES group. Both react to the Commission's report and speak to us about their country and their roles as MEPs.
20080402FCS25491
Sorin Frunzﾄプerde: Romanians are "not second-class citizens"
A stern message from Sorin Frunzﾄプerde: Romanians "not second-class citizens" Sorin Frunzﾄプerde leads the 18-strong Romanian contingent in Parliament's largest political group the EPP-ED. He tells us how this position helps him achieve his political objectives: notably fighting what he considers discrimination against his countrymen.
What can you tell us about Romania's progress during the last year? What do you think of the 4 February 2008 European Commission report on justice in Romania?
After Romania's accession to the EU, Romanians have the assurance of a common future in the European family. The EU has contributed to an increase in economic security, in foreign investment and to the creation of new jobs; it also brought Romanians European citizenship and mobility on the European labour market. Romanians are also able to contribute to EU decision-making.
The Commission's report is correct and balanced. I think we need to continue the reform of Romanian justice.
What is the impact of Romania's accession to EU on Romanian politics, for example on minority rights?
European integration is a common project of Romanians and of the national minorities in Romania; this project stimulates our common effort and inter-ethnic harmony. In 2007, Romania continued to respect and apply the European standards regarding national minorities, in all fields: education, culture, administration, mother tongue use and political representation at local and central level.
The UDMR (Hungarian Democrat Union in Romania), the party which represents the Hungarian minority, is part of the coalition government. Another 18 smaller minorities are represented in Romania's Parliament and participate to the legislative process. I think that Romania is a positive model in the protection of minorities and this model can be used in other countries too.
What are your personal objectives as MEP?
As a member of the Committee on Foreign Affairs in the European Parliament, I am a supporter of the Union's enlargement in the Balkans. I have proposed amendments myself to FYROM's accession to the EU, asking for a better representation of the minorities (Vlachs, Jewish, Roma, Serbs) in Skopje's Parliament. We also fight for strengthening the European neighbourhood policy and support close EU relationships with the Republic of Moldova.
In my capacity as head of Romania's EPP-ED delegation in the European Parliament, I fight against discrimination of Romanians and of other people from the new Member States. They shouldn't be considered second-class citizens on the labour market and their professional certificates should be recognised. Taking advantage of the importance of Romania's delegation within the biggest political group at the EP, we support a large representation of Romanians in all European institutions at all levels. We also support the efficiency of the European institutions, as stipulated in the Lisbon Treaty.
Adrian Severin - realistic about "unhappy reality"
Adrian Severin Adrian Severin leads a contingent of 10 Romanian members within the European Parliament's second largest political group, the Socialist PES. He tells us of the many difficulties ahead and looks for a reformed EU closer to citizens.
What can you tell us about Romania's progress during the last year? What do you think of the European Commission report from 4 February 2008 on the justice in Romania?
Romania didn't make much progress during the last year. This is an unhappy reality, but we have to be realistic about it. The continuing political crisis weakens Romania from inside and affects our external image. What is even worse is that political instability influences the Romanian economy and society. Romania experiences 5% growth every year, but there is no sustainable basis for that. Socially, we see that Romanians trust politicians less and less and experience more and more anxiety and nervousness.
The Commission's report reflects the lack of real progress in justice. The truth is the present institutional deadlock couldn't bring good results. It's important to know that the risk for a safeguard clause still exists; the sanctions were not mentioned now because this was just a mid-term report.
I don't want to sound pessimistic or hyper-critical. We all want to be able to say "yes, Romania made huge progress, absorbed a lot of European funds, Romanians' lives are better"; but things are different and we have to be honest about it.
What is the impact of Romania's accession to EU on Romanian politics, for example on minority rights?
Accession should mean more efficiency, more coherence and professionalism and the impetus of a new beginning. But we cannot speak of such a big or visible impact. Things are almost unchanged - with the exception of the more frequent visits of Romanian officials to Brussels. We have to consider what happened immediately after accession: once the period when the EU could make bad reports was over, the authorities gave up their efforts and the government's will to progress disappeared.
As far as minorities are concerned, we cannot speak of a certain impact of the accession. Minorities in Romania have full rights now as they had before accession.
What are your personal objectives as MEP?
I have multiple objectives. First, there is a general objective, to act together with my colleagues from the delegation in the interests of Romanian and European citizens. Second I would like to prove that we Romanians can assume responsibilities at European level, that we are capable of innovating and finding solutions to the EU's problems. I had the honour to be rapporteur for the distribution of seats in the European Parliament and I am willing to take over other important projects for us and Europe. Third, I'd like to contribute to EU reform and getting closer to citizens.
Talking about being close to citizens, I'll work more on the national debate about Romania and EU. Without a realistic explanation of European politics we risk losing Romanians' interest in the European adventure. Adrian Severin
EN
1
PHOTO
20080409PHT26213.jpg
EN
2
PHOTO
20080409PHT26215.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/members/expert/groupAndCountry/view.do?partNumber=1&group=1534&country=RO&language=EN&id=33990
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
