Qatar: “A true partner for the promotion of democracy and dialogue in the Middle East”, says EP President Pöttering
External relations
2008-04-15 - 16:10
The President of the European Parliament, Hans-Gert Pöttering, ended an official visit to Qatar on Monday. During his visit, he met the Emir of Qatar, Sheikh Hamad Bin Khalifa Al Thani, and the Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign Affairs, Sheikh Hamad Bin Jassim Bin Jabr Al-Thani. He also met the Speaker of the Majlis Esh-Shoura of Qatar (Advisory Council), Mohamed bin Mubarak.
The subjects discussed with the Qatari interlocutors included the EU's relationship with Qatar and the Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC), energy cooperation, the Middle East peace process, Iran and regional stability, as well as issues of religion and tolerance in the context of intercultural dialogue.
The role of the Gulf States in the Euro-Mediterranean partnership was also discussed. President Pöttering proposed, in his capacity as President of the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly (EMPA), that the next Bureau of EMPA discusses the possibility of including two parliamentarians from GCC countries as observers to the Assembly.
During his visit to Qatar President Pöttering also delivered the key-note speech at the opening ceremony of the 8th Doha Forum, which dealt with international peace and dialogue, democracy and human rights promotion, free trade and development, economic and social reforms.
In his speech the President emphasized the necessary link between democracy and parliamentarism and alluded to the example of the European Parliament and its evolution over time towards a fully-fledged legislative body. “When I was elected for the first time in 1979, the European Parliament had no legislative power at all; with the Lisbon Treaty, it will be on an equal footing with the Council of Ministers as a true co-legislator in all areas”. President Pöttering commended Qatar for having chosen democracy as a means to protect human rights and to achieve the participation of the people, a choice which represents a model for others in the region.
“Dialogue is a question of mutual understanding and respect of our differences, the only pre-condition being that all preserve the dignity of the human being, based on the respect of human rights and good governance”, President Pöttering said to the 8th Doha Forum.
During 2008, the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue, President Pöttering and the European Parliament aim to achieve closer cooperation between cultures, especially by promoting dialogue with the Arab and Islamic countries, in an effort to improve mutual understanding. This visit to Qatar is the first visit of President Pöttering to a GCC country.
20080414IPR26493
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
