Brussels Plenary 9-10 April: Climate change, Tibet, Health Commissioner
Institutions
2008-04-15 - 13:25
Androula Vassiliou, new Commissioner for Health In two days of debates in Brussels last week, MEPs covered a series of issues ranging from Tibet to climate change. They also approved the EU's new Health Commissioner and considered reports on Croatia's and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia's aspirations to join the Union. Also discussed during the two-day plenary session was a new Cancer screening strategy that would extend best practice across the 27 member bloc.
Also up for discussion was the situation in Lebanon and two reports by MEPs on ways to boost the European Union's cultural industry. On the issue of the Olympic games and China's policies in Tibet MEPs from across the House called for the Union to adopt a common policy in its response to controversy over the torch and the opening ceremony.
20080407FCS25871
Wednesday in plenary: EU hopefuls, new Health Commissioner
MEPs approved the appointment of a new Commissioner Meeting in Brussels on Wednesday MEPs voted to approve the appointment of the EU's new Heath Commissioner Androula Vassiliou. They also debated the EU aspirations of Croatia and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (FYROM) and their progress towards accession. European initiatives in combating cancer and a debate about the current situation in Lebanon also featured during the day.
Chairing the sitting Parliament's President Hans-Gert Pöttering noted the appointment of MEP Alexander Stubb as Finnish Minister of Foreign affairs and welcomed his successor, Sirpa Pietikäinen, a former minister for the environment. MEPs voted in favour of approving the new Cypriot Commissioner Androula Vassiliou for Public Health, Food Safety, Animal Health and Welfare. Ms Vassiliou underwent a parliamentary confirmation hearing on 1 April. She will now serve at least until the appointment of a new Commission after the June 2009 European Parliament elections. EU hopes of FYROM and Croatia discussed The EU aspirations of Croatia and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia were under the spotlight on Wednesday as MEPs discussed their progress towards accession. A majority of speakers stressed the fact that EU membership for both countries could bring stability and prosperity to the troubled south eastern region of Europe. Croatia - on track for EU membership on 2011? "We should make every effort so that Croatia becomes a member state by 2011" - that was the position of parliament's rapporteur on Croatia Hannes Swoboda (PSE). He told the plenary that "I would have hoped that 2008 would be the year in which the negotiations would be concluded. That is unfortunately not realistic". He said every effort should be made to get them into the EU by 2011. His report identified the need to improve the judiciary, eradicate in some case unacceptably high corruption and resolve some border issues with Slovenia and Bosnia-Herzegovina. MEPs voted to adopt the report on Thursday. FYROM - EU entry negotiations to start this year A representative of the Council - Slovenia's Minister for European Affairs Janez Lenarčič - told the parliament that he hopes negotiations will be opened this year and said that the country could act as a stabilising force in the region. Dutch rapporteur on FYROM Erik Meijer (GUE/NGL) has outlined the key areas in which he hopes to see improvements in the course of this year, leading to a favourable evaluation of the progress in preparations for EU membership. Speaking to MEPs he said that "I hope the report in 2009 will reflect perfectly normal developments...involving environmental protection, improvements in the legal system, modernisation of the railways, equality of all religious communities and freedom for trade unions". He also noted that the "relationship between the two language communities has improved after the split in 2001". A vote on the report was postponed after MEPs agreed a delay would make it easier for Greece and FYROM to find more time to reach agreement on the name of the country . Athens objects to the "Macedonia" name that FYROM would like to adopt as this is the name of a region in Greece itself. Other topics on Wednesday:
Lebanon - debate and a vote on the resolution during the April Strasbourg plenary (21-24 April)
Combating cancer in the enlarged EU - oral question to the Commission followed by a vote on a resolution on Thursday (10 April)
European culture - debate of two reports: on a European agenda for culture in a globalising world (Vasco Graça Moura, EPP-ED) and on cultural industries in Europe (Guy Bono PES) MEPs approve new Cypriot Commissioner for health Androula Vassiliou A cultural plenary: Heritage label, jobs in culture, subtitles Combating cancer on plenary agenda Wednesday Draft FYROM report Draft Croatia report
Thursday's plenary: climate change - need to help poorest stressed
Aid for areas hit by climate change was discussed Support for poorer parts of Europe and the developing world and measures to ensure security of food and energy. These were proposals in a resolution on climate change passed by MEPs on 10 April. MEPs also debated the wider impact of climate change. Thursday also saw votes on Tibet, investment to adapt to globalisation, Croatia and cultural industries in Europe.
The resolution says about climate change that "60 000 deaths per year are attributable to climate-related natural disasters" and that "climate change is a problem that concerns modern societies as a whole." The chair of Parliament's Committee on climate change, Italian Socialist Guido Sacconi asked the Plenary, "How can we in the EU…give those countries more help that have less capacity to deal with the effects of global warming, sometimes devastating, that have already emerged". He also called for more research: "We still don't know enough...about the effects coming from global warming which make it difficult to plan long-term policies to adapt and to forestall the worst aspects." Europe's Environment Commissioner Stavros Dimas said, "I hope we will reach an agreement on emissions in Copenhagen in 2009". He also said that climate change hits the poorest hardest: “despite not having really contributed to it, they are the ones who are the greatest victims of it". Many MEPs also stressed that poorer countries suffer the most and need help. In its resolution MEPs call for:
additional resources for innovative solutions to address climate change
cooperation to support the poorer parts of Europe and the developing world
measures to ensure security of food and energy supplies
measures to ensure the availability, accessibility, use and conservation of water
action to strengthen the capacity of health systems to cope with the adverse effects of climate change Polish MEP Jerzy Buzek for the centre-right EPP-ED group told the house that "the whole world would need to act to counter climate change" and that it is "much more cost-effective to invest in prevention". Greek Member Katerina Batzeli for the Socialist group said that "we have reached the very limit of sustainability (...) the crisis is also an economic crisis". Tibet, cultural industries in Europe Later MEPs adopted a resolution on the situation in Tibet, condemning the Chinese repression against Tibetan population and calling for the opening of an inquiry into the most recent riots. It also wants EU countries to clarify their position about whether to attend the opening ceremony of the Olympic Games in Beijing. Among other resolutions adopted Thursday: the recommendation on approving the aid from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund for Portugal and Malta, cultural industries in Europe, the progress report on Croatia, including the positive results achieved so far, and efforts needed in the fight against discrimination and supporting the rights of national minorities MEPs call for study on the economics of adapting to climate change Resolution on EC Green Paper ‘Adapting to climate change in Europe" Tibet: MEPs urge joint EU stance on Olympic Games opening ceremony Results of votes
EN
1
PHOTO
20080403PHT25658.jpg
EN
2
PHOTO
20080410PHT26337.jpg
EN
8
PHOTO
20080411PHT26405.jpg
EN
12
LINK
/news/expert/tous_les_epvotes/default/default_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080408IPR26050 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080407STO25856 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080407STO25818 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A6-2008-0059 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A6-2008-0048 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080408IPR26105 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT MOTION B6-2008-0131 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080408IPR26107 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
