Opening and highlights of Strasbourg plenary session 21-24 April 2008
Institutions
2008-04-21 - 19:13
This week's Strasbourg plenary session was opened by EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering. The House adopted the agenda for the week without amendment. (See links below)
Selected highlights of the Strasbourg plenary session 21-24 April 2008 include:
Budget discharge for 2006
US waiver program and new Member States
Slovenian President to address the House
War crimes committed by totalitarian regimes
Organ donation and transplantation - what can the EU do?
China's policy and its effects on Africa
Price rises of food products in the EU and in developing countries
Role of volunteering in contributing to economic and social cohesion
Situation in Zimbabwe - human rights
Monday 21 April 2008
MEPs will debate a hearing of the Commission on "crimes on genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes committed by totalitarian regimes." The hearing, held on 8 April, focused on two main issues: recognition of the crimes and reconciliation. It was organised in response to a request made by the Justice and Home Affairs Council on 19 April 2007 for a hearing on “crimes of genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes committed by totalitarian regimes as well as those who publicly condone, deny, grossly distort or trivialise them”.
The House will debate the rules for Belarusian and Ukrainian citizens to obtain visas to enter the EU/Schengen area.
Marian Harkin (ALDE, IE) will be putting forward her report on the role of volunteering in contributing to economic and social cohesion. Volunteering is good for you, your community, your region's economic development and your national economy. It also helps build the "social capital" that public policies need to succeed. Over 100 million EU citizens volunteer, and every €1 spent on supporting them generates a return of between €3 and €8 - a contribution that should appear in national accounts, says a report by the Regional Development Committee.
Proposed changes in the rules governing the European Ombudsman's access to information held by EU bodies and evidence given to him by EU civil servants, are set out in a report, proposed by the Constitutional Affairs Committee, on the Ombudsman's Statute. The key aim of these changes is to boost citizens' confidence in the Ombudsman's work.
Parliament will debate and vote on a report on organ donation and transplantation. Reducing the organ and donor shortage is “the main challenge that EU Member States face with regard to organ transplantation”, said the Committee for Environment, Public Health and Food Safety. MEPs in the committee propose a wide range of measures, including a European donor card, to tackle problems like organ shortage, transplantation risks and organ trafficking.
Tuesday 22 April 2008
Tuesday starts off with a debate on the 2006 annual report of the European Investment Bank. The committee gives clear backing to the EIB and welcomes its willingness to work with MEPs. The committee's report "congratulates the EIB on its 2006 activity report and encourages it to continue with its activities to promote the development of the European economy and foster growth, job creation, and interregional and social cohesion". It also "welcomes the EIB’s transparency and its total cooperation with Parliament".
The Budgetary Control Committee is recommending that Parliament sign off the accounts of all the EU's institutions and agencies for the financial year 2006. However, it is also calling for the creation of a joint Parliament-Commission group to monitor the Commission's supervision of the structural funds and certain other matters.
On Tuesday afternoon, MEPs will also debate establishment of European satellite navigation system Galileo. The Industry Committee is recommending approval of a first-reading compromise on Galileo's deployment phase which would pave the way for the European satellite radio navigation system to be operational by 2013.
Parliament will also debate the protests against price rises of food products in the EU and in developing countries following statements from the Council and the Commission. A resolution will be voted on at one of the May plenary sessions.
The House will also examine China's policy and its effects on Africa. The EP Development Committee points the finger at investments made by China with no strings attached in African countries ruled by oppressive regimes. This policy helps perpetuate human rights violations, say MEPs in the committee, who also highlight Beijing's role in the spread of arms and the conditions under which natural resources are being exploited.
On Tuesday evening, MEPs debate the implementation of the posting of workers directive following the judgements of the European Court of Justice.
Wednesday 23 April 2008
The key debates of the Strasbourg plenary are on the EU - Latin America and Caribbean Summit and negotiations between the EU and US on visa waiver rules. The EU-LAC summit (between Latin America, the Caribbean and the European Union), which is due to take place on 16-17 May in Lima, Peru, is the subject of a plenary debate with the Council and Commission. MEPs will also vote on a resolution.
The outcome of talks held on 12-13 March between the EU troika and the United States on the USA's visa waiver program will be the subject of a debate by MEPs with the Council and Commission. The visa waiver program allows citizens of certain countries deemed by the US authorities to present a low security risk to travel to the USA for up to 90 days without having to obtain a visa. These countries include all those that were EU Member States before 2004 (except Greece) plus Slovenia. All the other "new" Member States are excluded from the program. However, some of these states (Czech Republic, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Hungary and Slovakia) have recently signed bilateral agreements with the US enabling them to be admitted to the program. MEPs will vote on a resolution in May.
The Slovenian President Dr Danilo Türk will address the European Parliament on Wednesday 23 April at midday. Slovenia currently holds the six-month rotating presidency of the EU.
The House will vote on a report from the Chair of the Internal Market Committee Arlene McCarthy (PES, UK) on an agreement on a proposed directive to promote the use of mediation as a faster and cheaper alternative to going to court in civil and commercial cross-border disputes. MEPs in the Legal Affairs Committee recommend approving the text at second reading with no amendments to the Council's common position.
At 3pm on Wednesday the House will debate the situation in Burma/Myanmar following statements from Council and Commission. The House will also vote on a resolution on this topic.
Parliament then debates illegal immigration, the EU's external action and the role of Frontex - the body tasked to coordinate the operational cooperation between Member States in the field of border security.
Thursday 24 April 2008
The Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety is proposing an own- initiative report on the Green Paper on market-based instruments for environment and related policy purposes. MEPs in the committee welcome the Green Paper but regret the absence of an in-depth analysis on the merits of differentiation between market-based instruments (MBIs) targeted at the consumer as opposed to the producer level.
The International Accounting Standards Board lacks transparency, legitimacy and accountability. It is not under the control of any democratically elected parliament or government. So says a report from the Economics Committee now due for debate by the full Parliament – and the IASB’s governing body has already made proposals for change.
As usual the session ends with three debates and votes on human rights issues in the world. On this occasion the topics are: Zimbabwe, Iran, the case of Khadijeh Moghaddam (imprisoned women's rights activist in Iran) and Chad.
20080418IPR27049 Briefing for Strasbourg plenary session 21-24 April 2008 Final draft agenda - 21-24 April 2008
EN
2
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?reference=2008-04-2&language=EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080410BRI26349 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
