Clearer rules on European Ombudsman's access to information
Ombudsman
2008-04-22 - 12:20
Proposed changes in the rules governing the European Ombudsman's access to information held by EU bodies and evidence given to him by EU civil servants, are set out in a report adopted by the European Parliament on the Ombudsman's Statute. The key aim of these changes is to boost citizens' confidence in the Ombudsman's work. The report was adopted with 620 votes in favour 18 against and 18 abstentions.
Changes in the Ombudsman's statute were requested by the Ombudsman himself, Mr Diamandouros, in a letter sent to EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering in July 2006.
The report setting out amendments to the statute of the European Ombudsman and his staff is drafted by Anneli JÄÄTTEENMÄKI (ALDE, FI). The EP voted only on the main body of text of the resolution, and the final vote has been suspended so as to negotiate and reach an agreement with Council. The rapporteur also urged the Commission and the Council to express their position on Parliament's proposal.
Clearer rules on access to confidential documents
Parliament adopted an amendment to a provision that obliges all EU institutions and bodies to provide the Ombudsman with the information he requests. This amendment deletes the current caveat that information may be refused on grounds of secrecy, which Members felt that citizens could interpret as restricting the Ombudsman's right to acquire information.
The new text spells out the rules on the handling of classified information obtained by the Ombudsman and his staff in the course of their inquiries. The report says that they would be required not to divulge any sensitive information or any document falling under the scope of the Community legislation regarding the protection of personal data.
Officials bound to testify
MEPs also agreed to change the rule on the testimony of EU officials. The approved text deletes a requirement that Community civil servants must testify "in accordance with the instructions from their administrations". Again, the European Parliament feels that this wording might mislead citizens into thinking that officials are not always required to tell the truth.
20080418IPR27077 Statute of the European Ombudsman Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 22 April)
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5384032
EN
2
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
