MEPs debate visa waivers for EU travellers to USA
Visa policy
2008-04-23 - 11:34
The question of visa waivers for Europeans travelling to the USA was the subject of a debate on Wednesday between MEPs, the Council and Commission. Last week, the Council adopted a decision authorising the Commission to open negotiations with the US on conditions for participation in the visa waiver programme that come under Community law. The decision does not apply to the UK and Ireland as they do not take part in the common visa policy.
On behalf of the Council, Slovenian interior minister Dragutin MATE set out the current state of play. A two-track system has been agreed, under which the Commission, on the basis of a mandate just granted by the Council, will negotiate with the USA on certain issues of exclusive Community competence, while Member States will be able to negotiate bilaterally with the USA on other issues. Electronic approval via internet of visa applications will be possible and the US will only require the same personal data as now. Once an application is authorised it will be valid for two years.
Commissioner Jacques BARROT also spoke of the two-track system, adding that key issues in negotiations with the USA would be the principles of reciprocity and respect for fundamental rights, including data privacy. He hoped for rapid progress and said the ultimate aim was visa-free travel with fair treatment for all EU citizens
Political group speakers
On behalf of the EPP-ED group, Urszula GACEK (PL) welcomed the announcement of a two-track approach. She said it sent a clear signal to the USA that it could not pressure smaller countries over matters such as passenger name records. "Individual Member States must have the possibility to negotiate separately to get the best deal for their own citizens but we also need a common EU position", she said, adding that she hoped for "a swift conclusion to these negotiations".
For the Socialist group, Claudio FAVA (IT) stressed that the Commission's negotiating mandate was for all Member States, and looked forward to their all being included in the Visa Waiver Program. Bilateral agreements are "completely unacceptable", he said, stressing that the US government "must respect the EU's political unity and treaty remit".
Visa and asylum policy fall within the EU's remit, and there should be no bilateral negotiations in these areas, he added, looking forward to the day when US visas would be waived for all EU citizens, on a reciprocal basis.
For the ALDE, Sophia IN 'T VELD (NL) welcomed Mr Mate's statement that visas are for citizens, not for Member States. She was worried by Homeland Security Secretary Michael Chertoff's recent statements on the (non-)privacy of fingerprints. "If PNRs go beyond the EU/US accord, does this mean that the accord lapses?", she asked.
Neither was she reassured by talk of electronic visa authorisation. "The twelve principles are well and good, but what about the exceptions?", she asked, stressing the need for guarantees that the system will work, and hence for parliamentary scrutiny.
Konrad SZYMAŃSKI (UEN, PL) welcomed the Commission's efforts to achieve equal treatment for all citizens, but felt that this issue had made the EU's limits clear."The talks have failed, and the US will be signing bilateral agreements", he said, noting that "the Commission alone is not always able to act", and saying he was not surprised that some countries had decided to go it alone.
Dimitrios PAPADIMOULIS (GUE/NGL, EL) said "the Americans' decisions to sign separate agreements with countries that fall within Community remit is very offensive to the EU" and nobody should have the right to do so without there being oversight provided by the European Parliament and the European Union.
Jana BOBOŠÍKOVÁ (NI, CZ) said such agreements are "subject to the political will of the Member States" and the European Commission should stop punishing those that are trying to thwart terrorism through data-sharing agreements.
British speaker
Baroness Sarah Ludford said (ALDE, UK London, Liberal Democrat): "I want to know if the Commission and the Council will give an assurance that the EU will not, as part of the negotiations, allow access to EU databases like the Schengen Information System and the Visa Information System (VIS). As rapporteur on the VIS, I achieved a general ban on transfers to third countries from the VIS database, and I want to know if that is threatened in any way.
Secondly, do the Commission and Council accept that going down this blind alley of mass surveillance and collection of personal data on everybody – 99% of whom will be completely innocent – risks being a distraction from trying to catch the 0.1% who may be a terrorist danger or an organised crime suspect?
Today, a top anti-Mafia prosecutor in Italy is warning that Mafia crime is spreading its tentacles across Europe because it is being neglected for lack of proper cross border cooperation and criminal justice systems not working together. Is that not our top priority? And it is not being done because it is a harder nut to crack."
20080422IPR27272 Council authorizes the Commission to open negotiations for an agreement with the United States of America regarding certain conditions for access to the US Visa Waiver Program - 18 April 2008 Audio, 13:07 - Council and Commission statements - Slovenian interior minister Dragutin Mate and Commissioner Barrot - EN Audio, 11:26 - Political group statements - EN
EN
1
LINK
http://europa.eu/rapid/pressReleasesAction.do?reference=IP/08/612&format=HTML&aged=0&language=EN&guiLanguage=en
EN
2
MULTIMEDIA
20080423MLT27420.asf
EN
3
MULTIMEDIA
20080423MLT27426.asf
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
