Burma: broadened and more targeted sanctions needed, say MEPs
External relations
2008-04-24 - 13:21
Broadened and more targeted sanctions, a worldwide arms embargo and the release of political prisoners including Aung San Suu Kyi, recipient of the 1990 Sakharov prize, are among the demands of MEPs in a resolution adopted today by the House. The Burmese military junta led by General Than Shwe intends to hold a referendum on a new Constitution on May 10, 2008.
According to the new Constitution, 56 military officers will be guaranteed places in the 224-member lower house of parliament. And 110 seats out of 440 in the upper house are also reserved for the military.
MEPs deplore the fact that the constitutional referendum process is devoid of any democratic legitimacy and condemns the rejection by the Burmese Government of the proposals made by the UN Special Envoy, Mr Ibrahim Gambari, to allow an open and inclusive campaign in the run-up to the constitutional referendum. The resolution was adopted with 551 votes in favour, 7 against and 8 abstentions.
Broadened and more targeted sanctions
MEPs urge the Council to renew its targeted sanctions, and to broaden them, focusing on restrictions on access to international banking services for military-owned companies, conglomerates and businesses closely linked to the military or whose earnings benefit the military, and restrictions on access to personal business opportunities, health care, shopping, and foreign education for their children for selected generals and their immediate families. The resolution also urge the Council to comprehensively and explicitly prohibit selected individuals and entities from making any financial transactions that pass through clearing-house banks or otherwise using financial services in the EU's jurisdiction.
MEPs also call on the Council to consider further targeted sanctions, such as a complete ban on new investment, a ban on the provision of insurance services for investment in Burma, and an embargo on trade in key commodities that provide significant revenue to the military government.
Political prisoners and September crackdown
The resolution calls for the "immediate and unconditional release" of political opponents of the regime and more than 1,800 political prisoners, including Aung San Suu Kyi, the leaders of the ’88 Generation Students, and the leaders of the Shan Nationalities League for Democracy arrested in 2005.
MEPs calls for the regime to account for all casualties and missing persons from last September’s crackdown on protests by Buddhist monks and democracy activists and to establish the whereabouts of missing monks and nuns.
The resolution calls on the Council to review sanctions against specific human rights benchmarks such as: the release of political prisoners and all other persons arbitrarily detained for exercising their basic human rights to free expression, association and assembly; an accurate official accounting of the numbers, whereabouts and conditions of individuals killed, arrested, and detained by the security forces.
Worlwide arms embargo
MEPs urge the EU to campaign for a worldwide arms embargo on Burma. The EU arms embargo on Burma is ineffective, as the military government purchases its military goods in China, Russia and India, says the resolution.
On the current trade negotiations with ASEAN countries, the resolution urges ASEAN to put substantive pressure on the Burmese authorities to bring about democratic change. MEPs support the efforts of the EU's special envoy on Burma, Piero Fassino, to promote dialogue with ASEAN countries.
20080423IPR27459 Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 24 April) Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070906FCS10161 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
