MEPs set out priorities for 2009 including reducing administrative burdens
Institutions
2008-04-24 - 13:21
In adopting a joint resolution on the Commission’s Annual Policy Strategy for 2009, MEPs support Commission proposals aimed at reducing administrative burdens, recalls its determination to reach, and support for reaching, the goal of a 25% reduction in administrative burdens by 2012, and urges tangible results sooner rather than later. The House regards this as a key priority, in particular for SMEs, and as an essential contribution to reaching the Lisbon targets.
Parliament urge the Commission to submit a legislative proposal on the European Private Company Statute and draw attention to the need for an overall review together with a review of the General Product Safety Directive. The resolution was adopted with 304 votes in favour, 240 against and 23 abstentions.
The House points to the overriding importance of safeguarding the stability of financial markets and reassuring consumers in the light of the current financial crisis. MEPs note that the current crisis shows the need for the European Union to develop oversight measures in order to increase investor transparency, establish better valuation standards, improve prudential supervision and rate the role of rating agencies.
Parliament also points out that the EP will be examining the consequences of the recent ECJ ruling on the Viking, Laval and Rüffert cases, starting with a debate in plenary, followed by Parliament’s report on challenges to collective bargaining.
MEPs regret the low priority given by the Commission to culture and education matters in the 2009 Annual Policy Strategy.
Inclusion of maritime and inland waterway in emissions trading scheme
The House welcomes the Commission’s wish to reduce emissions related to the transport of goods and calls on the Commission to submit a legislative proposal on the inclusion of maritime and inland waterway transport in the emissions trading scheme.
Parliament takes the view that cohesion policy should remain a Community policy in accordance with the Treaty and the solidarity principle, and therefore rejects all attempts to renationalise this policy.
Cross-border healthcare directive awaited
The European Parliament awaits the Commission’s proposal on cross-border health, whilst underlining that the Member States’ competences in this area must be respected. MEPs looks forward to the pact on mental health and also reiterates its commitment to improving health care in Europe, including support for an EU strategy dealing with the fight against cancer, cardiovascular diseases and other common serious diseases, as well as rare diseases.
Communicating Europe
MEPs call on the Commission to place the citizen at the centre of the European project. The House urges the Commission to further focus its efforts in the development of an effective communication policy in order to provide citizens with the means to understand the EU better, especially in the year of the European elections.
Finally, Parliament underlines the importance of swiftly implementing the right of initiative for citizens as provided for in the Treaty of Lisbon and reminds the Commission of its commitment, in the light of the proposed regulation amending Regulation (EC) No 1049/2001 on access to documents, to develop greater transparency and access to documents.
20080423IPR27466 Annual policy strategy - debate in Strasbourg plenary 11 March 2008 Annual policy strategy for 2009 Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 24 April)
EN
2
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/atwork/synthesis/doc/aps_2009_en.pdf
EN
3
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//TEXT CRE 20080311 ITEM-007 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
