A "precautionary approach" to deep-sea fish stocks
Fisheries
2008-05-08 - 12:09
The European Parliament adopted a report on the management of deep-sea fish stocks. MEPs note "a certain lack of symmetry between the situation described in the Commission communication and the actual situation", calling on the Commission, the Member States and the fishing industry to "fill in the gaps" that exist so that effort control measures can be adapted to each fishery, recognizing that most deep-water fisheries are mixed fisheries.
"These are mixed fisheries where the situation for most stocks is uncertain, given the scant information available, and where several of the species, such as sharks, orange roughy and blue ling, are not fished directly. Since they straddle Community waters and the regulatory area of the North East Atlantic Fisheries Commission, disagreements sometimes arise over management arrangements", explains Rosa MIGUÉLEZ RAMOS (PES, ES).
MEPs point out to the Commission that, "even where total allowable catches (TACs) and effort limitations for these fisheries have been fixed arbitrarily owing to the lack of biological knowledge, the precautionary approach to and the exploitation of each species considered as a deep-water species must be observed and TACs must be set accordingly, on the basis of precise scientific studies".
Given that many of these stocks are managed in international waters, measures must be coordinated within the various RFOs [Regional Fisheries Organisations] so that the measures adopted take account of all fleets operating in these fisheries, notes the report. According to the EP, "all restrictions should apply to fishermen from all contracting parties, in order to prevent disadvantages from arising".
A ban on discards in the deep-water fisheries
The European Parliament stresses the need to "introduce a ban on discards in the deep-water fishery", which would enable scientists to study with more precision the complex diversity of species, "many of them inedible, being landed".
The Commission, within the framework of measures to reduce by-catches and eliminate discards, "should vary the levels of fishing effort according to the species targeted and those caught merely by accident, whilst at the same time strengthening monitoring and control procedures", MEPs say.
MEPs deleted the part of the committee report referring to the imposition of a ban on all fishing activity over seamounts, hydrothermal vents and within five miles of all identified coldwater corals, as well as the reference that bottom-trawling at depths below 1000m should be banned.
New programmes for the collection of scientific information
The EP calls on the Commission to introduce new programmes for the collection of scientific information, if necessary using research vessels. "One example might be that undertaken by the Spanish fisheries administration in the regulatory area of the North East Atlantic Fisheries Commission, mapping the Hatton Bank, where deep-water species are caught", says the report. The research focused on the distribution of seamounts, cold-water coral reefs and hydrothermal vents in order to identify sensitive zones in the areas in which fishing fleets operate.
The report was adopted with 579 votes in favour, 49 against and 4 abstentions.
20080505IPR28212 Management of deep-sea fish stocks Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 8 May)
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5484602
EN
2
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
