Trade and economic relations with the countries of South East Asia (ASEAN)
External/international trade
2008-05-08 - 13:07
The EP is in favour of concluding a free-trade accord between the EU and the 10 countries of the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN). However, say MEPs in the committee, the agreement must meet certain conditions regarding sustainable development, the fight against fraud and respect for human rights.
The report, drafted by Glyn FORD (PES, UK) and adopted by an overwhelming majority, supports plans for a free-trade agreement with ASEAN subject to WTO rules and the outcome of the Doha development round. Glyn Ford said: "ASEAN is an increasingly important power in the world. ASEAN is the EU's 5th largest trading partner, ranking ahead of Japan. This EU-ASEAN FTA would be beneficial to both sides, including to poor countries in the region. For obvious reasons, Burma will not be part of that trade agreement".
MEPs voice concern at the slowness of the negotiations launched in April 2007, believe that it should be possible to suspend preferential custom tariffs granted under the agreement if key points of the partnership and cooperation agreement are violated, in particular the human rights clauses.
Food prices
Parliament expresses concern about the consequences of higher rice prices, particularly for poorer households in rice-importing ASEAN countries. The House calls on both sides to give priority in the negotiations to the need to stabilise the price of commodities, in particular the price of food, and to approach the issue of agro-fuels with great caution.
Sustainable development
The planned agreement should ask the ASEAN countries to ratify and apply the basic conventions of the International Labour Organisation (ILO), according to the EP report. MEPs particularly emphasise the need to ban child labour and forced labour.
Measures to combat the destruction of tropical forests should also be included in the agreement, says the report. The ASEAN countries who try to stem the illegal exploitation of forests should be supported, say MEPs in the committee, who also want to give preference to environmentally-friendly biofuels and cut customs tariffs on environmental and/or fair-trade products.
Intellectual property rights and the anti-counterfeiting measures
The report highlights the need to observe intellectual property rights (IPR), especially for models and designs, sound recordings and other cultural goods, as well as the fight against the counterfeiting of drugs and medicines. It also calls for protection of and respect for geographical indications and labels of origin, as well as more transparency in the award of public contracts, state aid and other subsidies.
Burma
"The current situation in Burma makes it impossible for that country to be included in the agreement", argues the Trade Committee's report. At joint hearing held in early April by the EP Development Committee and Human Rights Subcommittee, the EU was urged to target better its sanctions on the Burmese junta.
Least developed countries
The report also stresses the situation of the least developed countries (LDCs) in the region: Cambodia, Laos and Burma. At present the Commission's negotiating mandate does not provide for negotiations with the LDCs. If these countries wished to join the free-trade agreement with the EU, the Council would have to revise the mandate it has given the Commission.
For the other poorer countries who are members of ASEAN but do not belong to the LDC group, the report urges flexible arrangements - more or less equivalent to those envisaged in economic partnership agreements (EPAs) - to enable these countries to cope with the loss of customs revenue.
Corruption
In order to promote good governance, transparency and the rule of law, the Parliament wishes to see intervention from Member States and the Commission in cases where their is clear legal evidence that officials from ASEAN countries are involved in corruption cases related to natural resources. The House ask the Commission to report to the Parliament on any action it will undertake in this regard.
Banking secrecy
A resolution to the problem of banking secrecy in Singapore is "essential if there is to be a real prospect of a region-to-region [free-trade agreement]", argues the report.
Lastly, MEPs point out that, since the Lisbon Treaty is due to enter into force before the end of the negotiations, the approval of the European Parliament will be needed once the negotiations are completed.
The members of ASEAN are: Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar (Burma), the Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Vietnam.
20080505IPR28210 Trade and economic relations with the countries of South East Asia (ASEAN) Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 8 May)
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5565162
EN
2
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
