MEPs review progress on human rights in the world in 2007
Human rights
2008-05-08 - 12:09
MEPs review progress on human rights in the world in 2007
The European Parliament adopted by an overwhelming majority on Thursday its 2007 annual report on human rights in the world. One positive development identified in the report is the UN's call for a moratorium on the death penalty. However, human rights abuses in many countries, notably China, Iran and Russia, continue to give cause for concern. The report also evaluates EU's efforts to promote human rights through its own policies.
The report, drafted by Marco Cappato (ALDE, IT), was approved by 533 votes to 63 with 41 abstentions.
Death penalty, women's rights and children's rights
The death penalty is one of the main topics highlighted. The adoption in 2007 of a UN resolution calling for a global moratorium on the use of the death penalty is seen as a huge step forward. However, MEPs still want to see "the eradication of capital punishment in Europe" and ultimately its universal abolition.
Women's rights is another key issue, which Parliament says should be raised in all EU human rights dialogues, with the aim of combating "discrimination and violence against women and girls, including, most prominently, gender-selected abortion, all forms of harmful traditional or customary practices, for example female genital mutilation and early or forced marriage".
Among other subjects addressed are children's rights (including the special problem of children and armed conflict), torture, the protection of human rights defenders and the rights of minorities and the disabled.
China, Iran and Russia
Several countries are singled out for special attention. The EP "expresses its disquiet at the serious human rights violations in China and stresses that, despite promises made by the regime with a view to the forthcoming Olympic Games, the situation on the ground regarding human rights has not improved". Moreover, China "still carries out the greatest number of executions worldwide".
MEPs are "deeply concerned that respect for fundamental rights in Iran , especially freedom of expression and assembly, continued to deteriorate in 2007". Iran is condemned for its "increasing use of capital punishment" and the arrest of thousands of men and women for "immoral behaviour", and is urged to resume the human rights dialogue with the EU interrupted in 2004.
In Russia , the situation in Chechnya is highlighted, together with the persecution of journalists, human rights defenders and political prisoners, and Russia's unwillingness to admit election observers. There is disappointment at the "lack of results from the European Union-Russia consultations on human rights".
Among other countries highlighted are Sudan (Darfur), Uzbekistan, Burma and Pakistan. MEPs also call on Cuba to allow two past winners of the EP's Sakharov Prize for human rights to come to the EP.
Human rights work of the UN and international community…
Turning to the work of international actors, the EP stresses "the crucial role" of the new UN Human Rights Council within the overall UN architecture as "the sole body monitoring and addressing human rights violations".
In the belief that the international community should do more to support democracy, MEPs call for the creation of "a genuine network of democracies around the world" by strengthening existing institutions.
… of the European Union …
The German and Portuguese EU presidencies are congratulated on their achievements in 2007, such as progress towards finalising EU guidelines on the rights of the child. However, Parliament says "the European Union is still far from conducting a coherent and hard-hitting policy to uphold and promote human rights around the world". Moreover, assessing the human rights impact of its policies is not easy, partly owing to a lack of data. The committee calls for "quantifiable indices and benchmarks" to measure their effectiveness.
More broadly, Mr Cappato's report argues that the "non-violent" defence of human rights should be specifically promoted as "a priority objective in EU human rights and democracy policy".
All EU states that have failed to sign certain international human rights conventions are urged to do so, including the Czech Republic as "the only remaining EU Member State not to have ratified the Rome Statute" on the International Criminal Court. Romania is urged to rescind its Bilateral Immunity Agreement with the USA on the ICC.
…and of the European Parliament
Lastly, human rights play a prominent role in the work of the European Parliament itself. A high-profile example last year was the report of the EP temporary committee on the alleged use of European countries by the CIA for "rendition flights". Another is the holding of regular "urgency" debates and resolutions on human rights. The report calls on the Council to attend these debates and for the resolutions be translated into the languages spoken in the target areas. Finally, it calls for the EP to be involved in the EU's human rights dialogues and consultations with partner co untries.
20080430IPR28010 Annual Report on Human Rights in the World 2007 and the EU's policy on the matter Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 8 May)
EN
1
PHOTO
20080506PHT28301.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5571032
EN
3
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
