European Charlemagne Youth Prize - London festival of Europe scoops second prize
Youth
United Kingdom
2008-05-14 - 15:14
Second prize goes to London's festival of Europe
The London Festival of Europe took second prize in the brand new European Parliament Charlemagne Youth Prize. The UK winner, the London Festival of Europe, is the brainchild of Niccolo Milanese and Lorenzo Marsili and a team of young Europeans living in London. The second London Festival of Europe took place in March this year, with a third Festival planned for March 2009.
Why did they decide to set up a Festival of Europe in London of all cities?
Lorenzo says " We felt there was both a lack and a need. We are a group of six people from six different countries : France, UK, Italy, Romania, Germany and Turkey living here in London - a city which has a legitimate claim to be called the most cosmopolitan city in Europe if not the world and a truly European City. It is a hugely fertile mix of people living here today and yet London is also surely the most Eurosceptic capital in Europe. There is some sort of mismatch between what it could be and how it actually capitalises on this position." Niccolo adds: " I travel round Europe a lot and there is a widespread expectation that London, as such an exciting place with so much energy and cultural activity at the moment, must be deeply engaged with Europe and in discussion about where the future for Europe lies. Recently there was a sense of there being a pause for reflection in many European countries. What does a reunited Europe really mean? The implication of much of the festival is that the level and terms of our discussion need to catch up. Following rapid globalisation we need new ways of thinking about the world. Now is the time for intelligent and cultural thought to come into the debate."
On receiving the second prize of 3.000 euros Niccolo Milanese said: "When we set up the London Festival of Europe in 2007 it was to try and bring together Europeans in London and Britain and create a genuinely pan European event which reflects both a mobility of the imagination and the nomadic way many young people live now. The most rewarding thing about receiving this prize is meeting other young people from all the 27 Member States and talking to them about setting up collaborations across the Continent. Working across borders is what the future of Europe will be all about. The Charlemagne Youth Prize is all about our Utopianism and Energy and sometimes we can be a little impatient and somewhat frustrated at how slowly things seem to move in European politics :)!"
The free newspaper Europa is published by the same group who run the Festival and it features many of the ideas discussed during the Festival. Styled a European Journal of transnational thought, the current issue out now looks at The Future of European Presidents, Europe after the Italian Elections, European Feminism, and presents Seventeen Theses for a European Cultural Movement and an Interview with Claudio Magris.
20080505IPR28138 To read more from the founders of the Festival on why they took the initiative to set it up in 2007 The Third London Festival of Europe will take place in March 2009 'European Charlemagne Youth Prize'
EN
1
PHOTO
20080514PHT28905.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.europarl.org.uk/outreach/Page07E+I-02Festival.htm
EN
3
LINK
http://www.euroalter.com/londonfestival.html
EN
4
LINK
http://www.e-adagio.eu/CYP/CYPintro_en.html
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
