EU maritime policy: A European vision for the oceans and seas
Transport
2008-05-19 - 17:25
Balancing marine ecosystems and economic growth
Surrounded by 2 oceans and 4 seas, with a continental mass a third of Africa and a coastline 3 times its length, maritime policy remains key to the European Union. Marine industries and services account for around 5% of EU gross domestic product and more than 5 million jobs. So how can policy makers help to safeguard ocean ecosystems and coastal regions at the same time as ensuring maritime and coastal economies?
Is it possible to develop a comprehensive EU policy striking a balance between these competing challenges and what would be included? And how do we tackle the problems of over-fishing and the threat overdevelopment of coast regions poses to the ecosystem? Tuesday the first ever European Maritime Day will be inaugurated, so we take a look at the parliament's maritime policy proposals, included in a report by German Socialist Willi Piecyk.
Report supports integrated policy
Last year Parliament backed calls for an integrated holistic maritime policy, to develop a thriving maritime economy and the full potential of sea- based activities in an environmentally sustainable manner. The Commission has come forward with proposals now under examination in Parliament.
The Piecyk report supports an integrated maritime policy since the maritime regions, particularly its outermost regions, play a very important role in guarding against criminal acts like illegal immigration, terrorism and smuggling, but at the same time are exposed to environmental disasters, says the rapporteur..
Mr Piecyk says Europe's oceans and seas should be the cleanest in the world, with the most stable biodiversity, the most profitable economy and the most modern and cleanest shipping.
Following a Commission green paper on better ship dismantling, he urges the Commission to help EU countries set up plans to survey and map wrecked ships and submerged archaeological sites, to allow them to be properly preserved.
The House will discuss a report on ship dismantling Tuesday evening, which focuses on the environmentally damaging practices and dangerous working conditions under which cargo ships are dismantled, primarily in Bangladesh, India and Pakistan. Up to 600 large cargo ships are dismantled worldwide a year and MEPs warn that the current poor working conditions at scrapping sites are bound to deteriorate because action should have been taken 10 years ago.
Maritime day
To celebrate the achievements and potential of Europe's ocean and seas, the EU has declared 20 May "European Maritime Day". The official launch ceremony will be held in Strasbourg on Tuesday with the presidents of the Parliament, Commission and Council. The aim is to highlight the crucial role that oceans and seas play in the everyday life not only of coastal communities, but of all EU citizens, and their important for Europe's sustainable growth and jobs at large.
20080519STO29188 Watch the plenary live The Piecyk report European Maritime Day
EN
1
PHOTO
20070322PHT04485.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/faces/live/live-video.jsp?language=en
EN
4
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/maritimeaffairs/maritime-day-2008_en.html
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A6-2008-0163 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
