This week in the EP: environment, peace, employment at the plenary
Institutions
2008-05-19 - 13:18
Environment, Burma, China on plenary agenda
It's the Strasbourg plenary and among the issues on a packed agenda are environmental protection, employment policy, road transport and the disasters in Burma and China. European Maritime Day will launched on Tuesday, when better ship dismantling and road transport will be on the plenary agenda.
Monday
The session starts with a report on the protection of the environment through criminal law . Seriously damaging the environment should be made a criminal offence in all EU Member States, so as to ensure that EU legislation is properly enforced, says the Legal Affairs Committee. Bairbre de Brún (GUE/NGL, Northern Ireland, Sinn Féin) presents a report on the evaluation of the Peace Programme (in Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland) and strategies for the future. The experience gained from the peace programmes in Ireland, positive results and best practice, what may be improved, challenges still to be faced and lessons to be learned are set out in an own-initiative report. Lessons from these programmes could help elsewhere. The possibility of creating a Europe-wide network of regions and cities living with, or emerging from, conflict and exclusion is now under discussion. MEPs will debate a report on EU consumer strategy (2007-2013), which says that since the greatest obstacles to the development of an internal market in retailing include uncertainties regarding consumer contracts, it supports the Commission in its efforts to introduce standard on-line conditions and contracts having force in all Member States. Tuesday Tuesday starts with a debate on the guidelines for employment policies . Tax-benefit structures should not discriminate against women, and workers should be encouraged to prolong their working lives, says the Employment Committee's report, which also mentions targets to be reached by 2010, such as an average rate of early school leavers of no more than 10% and a rise in the effective retirement age by five years. British Liberal Liz Lynne will outline her report on the progress made in equal-opportunities and non-discrimination in the EU . The report calls for a "comprehensive directive" to combat any discrimination on grounds of sex, racial or ethnic origin, religion or belief, disability, age or sexual orientation. It also demands effective sanctions and support for victims. EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering , Council President Janez Janša and Commission President José Manuel Barroso will officially launch the first European Maritime Day .
On Tuesday afternoon, UK Socialist Arlene McCarthy for will be asking the Council, on behalf of the Internal Market and Consumer Protection Committee, about misleading 'Directory companies' (e.g. 'European City Guides' ) Over the past years, a number of so-called 'Directory companies' have been operating cross-border in several EU Member States applying misleading and fraudulent business practices. Parliament will debate and vote on proposals to modernise the rules governing admission to the occupation of transport operator and access to the road transport market . Commission proposals provide for compulsory training for transport managers, an enforceable definition of cabotage and mechanisms for imposing sanctions across national borders. MEPs are negotiating a first-reading deal with the Council. Next up is a report on the selection and authorisation of systems providing mobile satellite services - such as broadband internet or mobile TV . Parliament will vote on a first-reading compromise package, negotiated with Council, which says each system must provide services in at least 60% of the EU's total area when it starts operating and should cover at least half of each Member States' population after seven years at the latest. Tuesday evening sees MEPs debate a second-reading agreement on metallic mercury under which t he export of mercury and mercury compounds from the EU will be prohibited from 15 March 2011. The House will also debate a report on a better ship dismantling . The focus is environmentally damaging practices and dangerous working conditions under which cargo ships are dismantled, primarily in Bangladesh, India and Pakistan. The report calls on the Commission to set up a list to register and monitor "pre-waste ships" and a list of preferred ship recycling facilities
Wednesday The key topic of the week is a report on the scientific facts of climate change : findings and recommendations for decision making . In an interim report, the Climate Change Committee criticises “scientifically unsubstantiated efforts” to discredit studies on the causes and effects of climate change, call for additional research on the impact of biofuels, and warn that current policies will not suffice to stem global warming in the long term. The House will then debate a report on Turkey progress. Transform priorities and time-lines into reform plans," the Foreign Affairs Committee urged Turkey, in its latest progress report. The committee welcomes several recent legislative activities, while insisting that the speed of reforms must pick up. The report "welcomes the commitment of Prime Minister Erdogan that 2008 is going to be the year of reforms" and "urges the Turkish government to fulfil its promises" by implementing them. Parliament will then debate the recent cyclone in Burma and earthquake in central China . MEPs will vote on two separate resolutions on these topics . The House will debate a new animal health strategy for the EU (2007-2013). The Agriculture Committee supports the objectives of the Commission's Animal Health Strategy for the EU, but calls for more ambitious targets and stresses that they can only be achieved with a sufficient and clearly defined budget. It also strongly supports vaccination, which it says should be recognised as one of the more important methods to prevent diseases. Thursday
MEPs will debate the follow up of the Paris declaration of 2005 on aid effectiveness . Simplifying aid procedures and phasing out economic policy conditionality are among the demands of the EP Committee on Development in a report on aid effectiveness to developing countries. To be more efficient, aid should also be disbursed according to partners´ own priorities and timetables, says the report. The report also underlines the necessary fight against corruption. The session ends with human rights debates on Sudan and the International Criminal Court, detention of political opponents in Belarus and increasing tensions in Burundi.
20080519STO29182 Watch the plenary live Press briefing
EN
1
PHOTO
20060607PHT08796.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/faces/live/live-video.jsp?language=en
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080430BRI28007 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
