The European Parliament calls on the US to end discrimination between EU citizens on visas
Visa policy
2008-05-22 - 14:08
MEPs call for Member States involved in bilateral talks with the US on visas to respect EU law and for the US to end discrimination among Member States in a resolution adopted today. They also recall that the EU could temporarily restore a visa requirement for US citizens if reciprocity is not reached. Members adopted a resolution by 511 votes in favour, 29 against and 7 abstentions.
MEPs take note of the bilateral talks going on between the US and several Member States (Czech Republic, Hungary, Slovakia, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania) on participation in the American "Visa Waiver" programme, which could allow their citizens to travel to the US without a visa. They recall that the EU Council is responsible for establishing rules on this matter and that it has exempted US citizens from a visa requirement, while the US still maintains it for nationals of some member states. MEPs also adopted an amendment asking the Commission to ensure, in its negotiations with the US, that HIV positive travellers would also benefit from the Visa Waiver program, from which they are excluded.
MEPs therefore consider that any form of discrimination between European citizens should be forbidden, even outside the EU and call on the US authorities to observe the principle of reciprocity and to ensure the same rights for citizens of all Member States. Otherwise, MEPs warned, the Council would be allowed to restore temporarily a visa requirement for third country citizens.
Concerns about data protection
MEPs say that several elements of the upcoming agreements could fall under Community and EU competence, notably the treatment of PNR data or Schengen crime-related data. They recall that access for the US to EU databases should be fully agreed by the EU.
On April 18 2008, the Council agreed on the one hand on a "twin track" approach, giving a mandate to the Commission to negotiate on all community-related issues, and on the other hand adopting "red lines" that the member states must respect in their dialogue with the US,.
Members support the Commission in its negotiations and the “red lines” defined by the Council to be respected by member states. They urge the EC and the US to conclude negotiations before June 2009.
20080521IPR29632 Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 22 May)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
