This week: Globe Awards, Energy, Balkans, Middle East
Institutions
2008-05-26 - 12:59
26 May: Energy Globe Award
The week begins with show business glamour as international stars join Kofi Annan and Mikhail Gorbachev for the annual Energy Globe Awards. The political and economic state of the EU-hopefuls in the Western Balkans will also be debated whilst a group of young people from both sides of the Israeli-Palestine dispute meet to discuss identity and politics. Industry Committee MEPs vote on the 3rd energy package and the Emissions Trading Scheme. Follow it all here on parliament's website.
Energy Globe Award: This week's dominant topic is the Energy Globe Awards gala on Monday. Find out what the guests of honour think about climate change and the efficient exploitation of alternative sources of energy. From the world of politics, we will hear from former Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev and former UN Secretary General of the Kofi Annan. From the world of music and film, read what singers Alanis Morissette, Zucchero and Dionne Warwick have to say, as well as Indian actor Aamir Khan.
The gala will be followed by a conference on Tuesday. Read about it on Thursday and catch up on the whole event on Friday in our special feature, which brings all the contributions together.
Energy package: Also on energy, three reports forming part of the "energy package" will be voted on by MEPs in the Industry Committee on Wednesday.
Emissions Trading Scheme: Tuesday, Members of the Environmental Committee examine the EU's Emissions Trading Scheme and look at ways to seek reductions in the amount of CO2 produced by airlines.
Western Balkans: On Wednesday read about an important meeting about the situation on the Western Balkans and the prospects of sustainable peace and stability in the region.
Young people from the Middle East: This week sees 21 young people from Europe, Israel and Palestine come together in the European Parliament to talk about identities and politics. The event is being held under the aegis of parliament's president Hans-Gert Pöttering.
Baltic Sea gas pipeline: A report on the environmental impact of the "Nordstream" gas pipeline will be voted on by MEPs in the Petitions Committee on Tuesday.
Telecoms: The Parliament is working on a new piece of legislation for the Telecom sector. What is it all about and how will it affect our lives? Read more on Thursday.
20080526STO29849 Agenda Watch online
EN
1
PHOTO
20080526PHT29920.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/faces/live/live-video.jsp?language=en
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080526IPR29832 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
