The Week Ahead - 26 May-1 June 2008
Institutions
2008-05-26 - 09:21
Committee meetings – Brussels
Energy Globe. Eminent guests - including Kofi Annan and Mikhail Gorbachev - will take part in the ninth "Energy Globe Awards", which will be presented inter alia by President Pöttering - with a press conference attended by President Pöttering, Mr Gorbachev and Manika Gandhi (Monday and Tuesday).
Energy package. Three reports completing the "energy package" will be put to a vote in the Industry Committee, including on the European Agency for the Co-operation of Energy Regulators (Wednesday).
Emission trading scheme and aviation. In the Environment Committee's second-reading look at this proposal, MEPs will be seeking reductions in airlines' CO2 output - and presenting amendments rejected by the Council (Tuesday).
Criminal records. The Civil Liberties Committee will vote on the exchange of data extracted from criminal records, a topic linked to the Fourniret trial, a case study in cross-frontier co-operation (Thursday).
Nordstream. The Petitions Committee will vote on a report on the environmental impact of the proposed Baltic Sea gas pipeline (Tuesday).
WTO Director General. Pascal Lamy is expected at the 7th thematic session of the Temporary Committee on Climate Change and at the Trade Committee for an item on the Doha Agenda (Thursday).
Turkey. Foreign Affairs Minister Ali Babacan will attend an EP Foreign Affairs Committee meeting on Wednesday and the 59th EU-Turkey parliamentary meeting (Wednesday and Thursday).
Young people and the Middle East. Under the aegis of President Pöttering, 21 young Europeans, Israelis and Palestinians will work together at the EP from 25 to 28 May on relations between identities and politics.
Middle East. An EP delegation goes to Israel and Palestine to meet Knesset MPs and local authorities (Monday-Friday).
Official visit to Portugal. European Parliament President Hans-Gert Pöttering will pay an official visit to Portugal (Friday).
20080526IPR29832 For details of all the week's events, see "The Agenda"
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20082200AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
