Statesmen and stars celebrate clean energy at EP Gala
Energy
2008-05-27 - 16:59
A representative of Fronius receives the global award
A mixture of statesmen, actors and singers joined MEPs and a large audience for the annual Energy Globe Awards in the European Parliament on Monday night. Hosted by actress Désirée Nosbusch the event saw Alanis Morissette and Dionne Warwick perform songs old and new. Mikhail Gorbachev picked up a lifetime achievement award whilst Kofi Annan presented the water award.
As the event opened parliament's president Hans-Gert Pöttering spoke of the energy and environmental legislation currently going through the House. He told the audience that "the EU must take the leadership in the fight against climate change - it is our obligation to live at peace with our environment".
In picking up a special lifetime achievement award former Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev received a standing ovation from the crowd. He thanked those present and urged collective action on climate change saying "we will never achieve our goals alone".
Air and water: "Earth for future generations"
The Air award went to Austria's "Fronius" company who pioneer CO2-free transport. It later picked up the global award voted by the audience. Presenting it president of the European Commission José Manuel Barroso urged Europe to embrace the environmental targets it had set itself to reach by 2020.
When presenting the water award to a drinking water projects in Mozambique former UN Secretary General Kofi Annan used an African proverb to stress the fragility of life. He told the hushed audience that "the earth is not ours its something we hold for future generations".
Fire and earth with Dionne Warwick and Aamir Khan
The Andasol solar power station in Spain and a rubbish-sorting project in Peru picked up the fire and earth prizes respectively. Legendary soul singer Dionne Warwick presented the fire award then treated the crowd to a rendition of "What the world needs now is love". Italian star Zucchero and Canadian singer Alanis Morissette also entertained the crowd.
An energy and sustainability programme that supports environmental learning in young people in South Africa picked up the "Youth" award. The last words should go to Bollywood actor Aamir Khan who struck a reflective note saying that people had to realise that earth is neither "a money making machine nor a rubbish dump".
20080526STO29847 Energy Globe 10 minutes of Glasnost with Gorbachev
EN
1
PHOTO
20080527PHT30076.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.energyglobe.info
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080526STO29867 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
