Approving the Commission: a fair and transparent process in Parliament
Institutions
2008-05-27 - 16:59
The Constitutional Affairs Committee has backed plans to set out in detail in Parliament's rules of procedure the process of hearings, evaluations and the vote by which MEPs decide on whether to approve or reject the appointment of a new European Commission. The changes to the rules, which for the most part codify existing practice, will enter into force at the beginning of next parliamentary term if they are adopted by the full Parliament.
A report drafted by Andrew Duff (ALDE, UK) and endorsed unanimously by the committee on Tuesday, amends Parliament's Rules of Procedure to incorporate the process for MEPs' approval of the Commission. It sets out detailed guidelines on the hearings, the evaluation of Commissioners-designate and the final vote on approval of the proposed Commission without which it cannot take office.
Parliament, says the approved text, must evaluate Commissioners-designate for their competence, European commitment and personal independence. In doing so, Members will pay particular attention to gender balance and may comment on the allocation of portfolios.
Hearings: a pluralistic political dialogue
The Commissioners-designate, according to the proposed rules, have to appear before relevant EP committees for a public hearing. Hearings must guarantee full disclosure of relevant information, including financial interests. The new rules also ensure that candidates enjoy an equal and fair opportunity to present their opinions during the hearing. The aim is to have a "pluralistic political dialogue" between MEPs and Commissioners-designate.
In case of a change in the composition of the Commission or a substantial reallocation of portfolios, the new Commissioners-designate, or those Commissioners taking on substantially different roles, will go through the same procedure. Video recordings of the hearings will be made public at the latest within twenty-four hours.
Public statements of evaluation
The Constitutional Affairs Committee also proposed rules concerning the evaluation phase and the plenary debate.
The committees involved in the hearings, after a discussion in camera , will adopt their statements of evaluation which will be made public and also discussed at a joint meeting of the Conference of Presidents of Political Groups and the Conference of Committee Chairs.
The Commission President-elect then presents the whole college to the plenary to allow Members a full exchange of views and to debate any motions for resolution tabled by political groups or 40 individual MEPs. Following the vote on the resolution(s), MEPs vote on whether give or not to approve the appointment of the Commission.
2008-05-26 Committee on Constitutional Affairs In the Chair Jo LEINEN PSE DE
Procedure: REG (amendment of Rules of Procedure, art. 202)
Plenary: July, Strasbourg
20080526IPR29905 Committee on Constitutional Affairs website
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=AFCO
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
