Economic MEPs speak on financial market turmoil
Economic and monetary affairs
2008-05-28 - 15:42
The grim view from Frankfurt in January this year
Leading MEPs on the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee have given a gloomy prediction of the state of the financial markets. "After 10 long months, we see no end to the crisis...it is spreading beyond the financial sector," was how Committee Chair Pervenche Berès described the situation. We spoke to two MEPs on the committee - Dutch Socialist Ieke van den Burg and Lithuanian Liberal Margarita Starkevičiūtė. Closer supervision and control of banks are just two steps they propose.
Margarita Starkevičiūtė : The financial system provides blood for the economy. Any disruption has an impact on the real economy. Now we feel some problems in the different sectors of the body of the economy, mainly in the housing and construction sector, which influence the wealth of people.
European Central Bank response: injections or transfusion?
Over the last 10 months the ECB has been injecting liquidity into the troubled financial market. Last August it committed a first huge €95 billion loan to head-off the crisis and to help the banks. These interventions have since continued on a regular basis.
Ieke van den Burg : These are liquidity injections to be paid back in the short-term. They are also available for banks outside the Euro zone. The ECB is solving a big part of the problems in the UK.
MS : In the EU we have two different banking models. The first relies mostly on retail deposits. With the assistance of ECB or national central banks these banks can manage the crisis well, because they still have a constant source of deposits.
The second model relies on wholesale markets and uses the originate-to-distribute model. Since the wholesales markets have been disrupted because of the subprime mortgage crisis in the US these banks cannot longer have access to financing and have to find new ways to make money. This is a huge, long-term problem and the ECB or other EU central banks should not bail out these banks and act as a remedy for their long term problems.
Banks gamble, but do we end up paying the bill?
An issue that has caused some disquiet among the public across Europe has been the extent to which governments may have to use public money to bail out banks - the majority of which are private companies that make large profits when times are good.
IvdB : This is what we call moral hazard: the rewards and bonuses are private, but the losses are transferred to the community. However, we can not just say: 'Let them solve it themselves and let the shareholders bleed'. For instance, in the case of Northern Rock, if it had collapsed, the consequences would have been disastrous. That is why governments need to take measures.
Will taxpayers have to prop up the existing system?
Ieke van den Burg and Romanian Liberal Daniel Dăianu are are currenly preparing a report on the Future Structure of Supervision. It analyses market, regulatory and supervisory failures which have been highlighted by the crisis and it sets out options for reforms.
IvdB : We need tighter control on the banks and that should be focused on the big players – they form the major systemic risk for financial stability. In the EU there are around 40 of them, based mainly in London. I would prefer supervision at European level.
MS : I am in favour of so called college of supervisors approach. We need better coordination for the supervision of banks that operate in several countries. For example in the Baltic States the Nordic banks are very active. The national authorities have to give appropriate resources and rights to national supervisory authorities to make those colleges operate efficiently. It is not possible to have one single regulator which could go into detail in all the 27 states because otherwise we would have to create a huge bureaucratic apparatus on the EU level.
Call on McCreevy to be "more pro-active"
IvdB : I really regret that Commissioner McCreevy (Commissioner for Internal Market and Services) is not more pro-active and ambitious: he proposed a roadmap for improvement but this is a non-binding exercise. The Council is too focused on national interests, e.g. the UK is afraid their financial sector may have to deal with more regulation and supervision and might turn its back on the City. They are obviously blocking progress.
How can we shore up consumer spending?
MS : We have to create a good comprehensive and coherent system of deposit insurance, so that if banks fall in future, the customers will be sufficiently protected and governments won’t have to intervene. Parliament is suggesting a national financial ombudsman, like in the UK. People could apply to him when they have problems with banks it would protect their rights. Financial problems are quite complicated and an ordinary citizen does not necessarily know everything.
20080526STO29858 Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee press release Working document on Lamfalussy follow-up: future structure of supervision (30 April 2008) Commissioner McGreevy speech in EP: 1 April 2008
EN
1
PHOTO
20080528PHT30242.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/document/activities/cont/200805/20080505ATT28196/20080505ATT28196EN.pdf
EN
3
LINK
/meetdocs/2004_2009/documents/dt/721/721888/721888en.pdf
EN
4
LINK
http://europa.eu/rapid/pressReleasesAction.do?reference=SPEECH/08/162&format=HTML&aged=0&language=EN&guiLanguage=en
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
