London Festival of Europe meets MEPs at the Culture Committee
Culture
United Kingdom
2008-06-03 - 14:34
London Festival of Europe meets MEPs in Brussels
The UK-based second prize winners of the European Charlemagne Youth Prize, London Festival of Europe, told MEPs in the Culture Committee meeting in Brussels that there needs to be more critical discussions on Europe and European culture needs to be promoted outside the EU. The London Festival of Europe was among the three final Youth Prize winners invited to the European Parliament to have an exchange of views with MEPs. Festival representatives also met with EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering.
The London Festival of Europe is an annual two-week series of events engaging with contemporary European politics, society and cultures, promoting public discussion of European issues and celebrating cultural exchange. In the first year, 2007 European Alternatives, the organisers of the event, started the festival without any financial assistance. They managed to convince the performers and speakers to participate for free and the venues collaborate through good-will. There were two small private sponsors donating £1000 each that went towards marketing the festival.
The 2008 Festival followed on the success of the event in 2007 which was attended by over 1500 people and included several outreach events staged in Warsaw, Milan and Rome to add a trans-European aspect to the festival.
Lorenzo Marsili, one of the founders of the London Festival of Europe, said the project was initiated to "stimulate discussions on Europe in a critical manner" and that these discussions and the promotion of European culture should "not necessarily be contained to European countries", but can be promoted by extending European civil society projects outside Europe.
European Parliament President Hans-Gert Pöttering said: " I was delighted to me e t on Tuesday the representatives of the three projects which won the first edition of the Youth Charlemagne Prize. During our meeting I thanked them for their personal engagement for European integration, promoting understanding and fostering the development of a shared sense of European identity and encourage them to continue on this path in the future. The p rojects they are involved in serve as a role model for young people living across Europe. The prize winners as well as all other projects, over 400 in total, that have participated in this first competition are an encouraging sign that young people are on the move in Europe. If we will keep up with the interest, in several years, this prize will have the chance of developing into a major event for young people acro s s the European Union ."
Positive reaction
When receiving the European Charlemagne Youth Prize, the event organisers said they chose to hold the festivals in London because "it is a hugely fertile mix of people living here today and yet London is also surely the most Eurosceptic capital in Europe". However, when holding the events in London Lorenzo Marsili said that people show a positive reaction when the important issues being discussed at a European level are shown.
Speaking at the Committee meeting, Lissy GRÖNER (PES, DE) said the project was "an important step if we are going to gain a new audience among young people in Europe" and emphasised the role similar projects can play in encouraging young people to vote and get involved in the 2009 European elections.
Doris PACK (EPP-ED, DE) said the problem with describing experiences outside Europe is something MEPs feel concerned about and that such projects are needed "if we want to give a soul to Europe".
There will be another festival scheduled for March 2009 and events are planned by the organisers to promote the European elections and give political parties the chance to present their manifestos.
20080603IPR30668 To read more from the founders of the Festival on why they took the initiative to set it up in 2007 The Third London Festival of Europe will take place in March 2009 European Charlemagne Youth Prize
EN
1
PHOTO
20080428PHT27862.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.europarl.org.uk/outreach/Page07E+I-02Festival.htm
EN
3
LINK
http://www.euroalter.com/londonfestival.html
EN
4
LINK
http://www.e-adagio.eu/CYP/CYPintro_en.html
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
