Highlights of the Brussels plenary 4-5 June 2008
Institutions
2008-06-04 - 15:16
The session opens with a joint debate on foreign policy, security and defence. High Representative for Foreign Affairs Javier Solana will take part in the debate. Parliament will debate the forthcoming EU-US Summit to be held in Slovenia on 9-10 June. The House turns its attention to the EU system against illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing. An oral question on forced prostitution and human trafficking, for the purpose of sexual exploitation during the European football championship.
Selected highlights of the Brussels plenary session 4-5 June 2008 include:
Wednesday 4 June 2008
The session opens at 3pm with a joint debate on foreign policy, security and defence . High Representative for Foreign Affairs Javier Solana will take part in the debate. The Foreign Affairs Committee highlights the increased effectiveness the Lisbon Treaty could give to the EU's foreign policy, while also pointing to the need for increased parliamentary scrutiny and democratic legitimacy in the Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP) and the European Security and Defence Policy (ESDP). The Committee's stance is set out in two own initiative reports.
Parliament will debate the forthcoming EU-US Summit to be held in Slovenia on 9-10 June . The summit will centre on the following key areas: Regional and political issues, global security issues, present-day global challenges and bilateral transatlantic partnership. The House will also vote on a resolution on this topic.
The House then turns its attention to the EU system against illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing . MEPs in the committee propose several amendments concerning the Community list of IUU fishing vessels, the inspections to be carried out and the sanctions and other measures to be imposed by Member States.
MEPs will then debate competition, retail and financial services . Consumers should have more choice in, and pay less for, banking and financial services. This could be achieved in part by removing the obstacles to cross-border products. One way to do this is to reduce the differences between national regulations. The reports also stress the importance of improving financial literacy among consumers.
The last point on Wednesday evening is an oral question to the Commission on forced prostitution and human trafficking, especially of women for the purpose of sexual exploitation during the European football championship 2008 . Within the framework of events it organised to mark International Women's Day on 8 March 2006, the European Parliament's Committee on Women's Rights and Gender Equality launched a campaign to alert the public to the need to prevent and combat trafficking and forced prostitution during the FIFA World Cup 2006 championship.
Thursday 5 June 2008
The session opens on Thursday with MEPs debating the Barcelona Process: Union for the Mediterranean after hearing statements from the Council and Commission. The European Commission adopted proposals on 20 May 2008 for upgrading relations with its Mediterranean partners through the Barcelona Process: Union for the Mediterranean. The relationship is likely to be a priority of the French Presidency during the second half of 2008. MEPs will vote on a resolution on this topic.
Parliament will vote on a report on international carriage of passengers by coach and bus . Representatives of industry and trade unions on 21 May 2008 agreed a deal on the key issue of the "12 day rule" for occasional cross-border services. This would allow drivers of tourist coaches from 1 January 2009 to work on 12 consecutive days - something that would not be allowed under the general rules on rest days for drivers of passenger vehicles.
MEPs will vote on a resolution on the deteriorating situation in Georgia following a previous plenary debate held on 7 May in Brussels.
20080603IPR30704 Briefing for Brussels plenary session - 4.5 June 2008 Final draft agenda - 4.5 June 2008 - Brussels plenary session Watch the sitting live
EN
2
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?reference=2008-06&language=EN
EN
3
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/faces/live/live-video.jsp?language=en
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080516BRI29012 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
