Young farmers need more incentives say MEPs
Agriculture
2008-06-05 - 12:16
The European Parliament adopted an own initiative report by Donato Tommaso VERALDI (ALDE, IT), calling on the EU to boost its incentives for young farmers with a view to effect generation change and make the agro-food sector more dynamic. The report was adopted with 571 votes in favour, 31 against and 39 abstentions.
In recent years there has been a trend towards the depopulation of rural areas in the EU, which is more marked in remote areas, together with a steady ageing of the rural population. More than 50% of EU holdings are run by farmers over the age of 55, and 25% by farmers over the age of 65.
However, farms run by young people are, on average, more profitable and young farmers are more willing to adopt innovative solutions, use environment-friendly farming methods and adjust to market requirements. MEPs feel the "health check" of the CAP is a good opportunity to tackle the issue.
Therefore, the report drafted by Donato Tommaso VERALDI (ALDE, IT) on the future of young farmers under the ongoing reform of the CAP calls on the EU to boost its incentives for young farmers and remove obstacles to their settlement, making the sector more attractive to young people. These incentives include:
• improving setting-up support as these policies no longer meet farmers' needs or reflect the difficulties involved in taking over / setting up in problem farming areas;
• solving high indebtedness and credit access problems which makes it difficult for young farmers to establish a good competitive position;
• facilitating succession and land policy measures including facilitating succession arrangements for non-family members and looking into the "considerable increase in land prices"; and
• improving training and access to research by, for example, increasing support for lifelong training for farmers and improving farmers' access to research findings and the latest innovations relating to production methods and tools.
UK and Ireland
In 2005 young farmers (under the age of 35) in the UK represented 5.6% of the total farming workforce and in Ireland they represented 10.5%. The EU average was 8.3%. In 1995, the proportion of young farmers in the total farming workforce was significantly higher, representing approximately 10% in the UK and 14% in Ireland.
Pilot programme for developing countries
Lastly, the House calls for the elaboration of a pilot project to facilitate an exchange programme between young farmers in developing countries and young farmers in the EU to enable them to gain firsthand understanding of the functioning of their respective markets, of their respective use of technology and their methods of adapting to the prevailing climatic conditions.
20080604IPR30754 Future of young farmers under the ongoing reform of the CAP Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 5 June)
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5531332
EN
2
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
