European Parliament looks forward to working with new US President
External relations
2008-06-05 - 13:36
In adopting a joint resolution on EU-USA relations ahead of a key summit on 9-10 June, MEPs looks forward, in the light of the forthcoming US presidential election, to working with the new US President and hopes for a strengthened US commitment to multilateralism and to peace and democracy worldwide. MEPs are also of the view that the US plan to establish an anti-missile system in Europe at this time may hamper international disarmament efforts.
MEPs are aware that on some subjects, such as the International Criminal Court and the Kyoto Climate Change Protocol, transatlantic differences of approach still persist. The House hopes that the next President of the United States engages his Administration in solving these problems.
The resolution was adopted with 552 votes in favour 68 against and 23 abstentions.
Climate change
The European Parliament urges the US to do its utmost to wrap up work on its domestic climate legislation by the December 2009 UN conference in Copenhagen. The House also invites the US to persist in its efforts to establish a carbon trading system that in the future could be linked with the EU Emissions Trading Scheme, since both the environment and industry generally will be best served if the emerging carbon market mechanisms throughout the world are compatible and interoperable.
Parliament welcomes, therefore, the provision in the EU ETS draft proposals to allow linking up to other mandatory cap-and-trade systems, including sub-national systems. In this context, the House is encouraged by the emergence of regional carbon trade systems within the US.
Guantánamo Bay
The House is c oncerned that the very existence of the Guantánamo Bay detention centre and the practice of extraordinary arrests and renditions continues to send out a negative signal as to how the fight against terrorism is being pursued. Parliament urges the Council to issue a clear and forceful declaration calling on the US Government to put an end to the practice of arbitrary arrests and extraordinary renditions and to request the United States Government to try or else release the remaining detainees and to resettle and compensate them in full compliance with international law and standards and to give clarifications regarding the existence of secret prisons outside US territory.
Extraordinary renditions
The European Parliament Urges the Council and the US Government to issue a clear and forceful joint declaration to put an end to the practice of arbitrary arrests and extraordinary renditions and requests the US Government to try or else release the remaining detainees in full compliance with international law and standards and to give clarifications regarding the existence of secret prisons outside US territory.
Anti-missile system
MEPs are of the view that the US plan to establish an anti-missile system in Europe at this time may hamper international disarmament efforts.
Nuclear proliferation, missile defence, arms control and NATO
Parliament welcomes the close cooperation between the EU and the US on the Iranian nuclear issue leading, on 3 March 2008, to the adoption by the UNSC of Resolution 1803, which imposes new sanctions on Iran. The House calls on the US, following its diplomatic success in the negotiations with North Korea, to participate directly in negotiations with Iran along with the EU, since the US is in a position to offer additional security guarantees which take account of Iran's security concerns; stresses the importance of cooperation with the US, Russia, China and non-aligned countries with a view to considering complementary concepts aimed at achieving a comprehensive agreement with Iran on its nuclear facilities and their use.
20080604IPR30753 Council and Commission statements - EU-United States summit (click on 4 June) Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 5 June) Audio, 16:05
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/cre/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
2
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
3
MULTIMEDIA
20080604MLT30912.asf
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
