Citizens' Agora on climate change: Parliament asks for citizens' input
Institutions
2008-06-05 - 14:53
On 12 and 13 June, the European Parliament will host its second Citizens' Agora debate - on how to tackle climate change - with 500 civil society representatives. The Agora will complete an intensive programme of parliamentary work on the subject and contribute to future initiatives.
After the last year's inaugural edition - on the future of the EU - Parliament is now hosting a two-day Agora on climate change. 500 representatives of selected European civil society organisations will exchange views with MEPs, key EU decision makers and international experts and make their recommendations to the European institutions.
Climate change: EP's priority for 2008
The June Agora follows the publication of a first interim report by the EP Temporary Committee on Climate Change (Florenz report) and the Energy Globe Awards ceremony held on 26 May. It also comes against the backdrop of the European Parliament's legislative work on the "climate change package", as well as preparations for upcoming international summits: Poznan in late 2008 and Copenhagen in late 2009.
As the EU develops its next initiatives, European civil society organisations are invited to express their views and put forward their proposals. The Agora conclusions, to be drafted by the civil society representatives, will be submitted to European and national institutions.
Keynote speakers to join debates
The various aspects of this issue will be addressed from a number of angles in five workshops (Resources, Techniques, Solidarity, Economies and Education).
MEPs, Commission and Council decision makers, government representatives and international experts will join the plenary debates and the workshops. Panels will feature Jeremy Rifkin, President of the Foundation on Economic Trends, Jacqueline McGlade, Executive Director of the European Environment Agency, Victoria Tauli Corpuz, President of the UN Permanent Forum on Indigenous Issues, and Cecilia Ugaz, Deputy Secretary at the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).
For details of the programme, workshop content and practical arrangements for the Citizens' Agora on climate change, please see the "Further information" links below.
20080605IPR30975 Citzens' Agora website Forum
EN
1
LINK
/parliament/public/staticDisplay.do?id=70&language=EN
EN
2
LINK
/agora
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
