June 2 day Plenary: Security, US relations and Mediterranean on agenda
Institutions
2008-06-09 - 10:22
EU foreign and defence policy was debated In a plenary session held in Brussels on 4-5 June MEPs debated the state of relations between the EU and the US as well as considering the Union's relations with its Mediterranean neighbours. In the Chamber Members also voted to back separate reports that call for more measures to counter illegal fishing and forced prostitution. The security and defence policy of the Union was also debated with the EU's High Representative for Foreign Affairs Javier Solana.
A full round-up of the session is available here online by clicking on the next two sections. The next plenary session of the European Parliament opens on 16 June in Strasbourg.
20080605FCS30922
Wednesday Plenary: Washington relations, security, defence debate
EU foreign policy Chjef Javier Solana makes his point Europe's relations with Washington ahead were the subject of a debate in parliament on Wednesday of an EU-US summit next week. Security and the need for parliament and Congress to have closer links were stressed. The day also saw MEPs debate two reports on Europe's emerging security, defence and foreign policy with EU foreign policy chief Javier Solana, including the effect of climate change on international stability. Measures against illegal fishing and forced prostitution were also debated.
Parliament's President Hans-Gert Pöttering opened the session drawing the attention to "Green week" which is taking place at the European Parliament in Brussels, Luxembourg and Strasbourg.
EP-Congress links stressed ahead of EU-US summit
Transatlantic partnership, global challenges and security measures are some of the items on the agenda for the annual EU-US summit in Slovenia on 9-10 June. In the debate several speakers emphasised the importance of closer links between parliamentarians on both sides of the Atlantic.
British Conservative James Elles said that "we need to build some forms of common approach to the security dimension and begin to match that (European Security Strategy) up with US security strategy". He added: "We now need to plan for a transatlantic assembly where you can get the main legislators on both sides of the Atlantic to talk to each other and come to common initiatives together."
For the Greens, German MEP Cem Özdemir stressed the "need to strengthen the parliamentary dimension, which means involving the US Congress and the European Parliament".
EU foreign policy: new era of Lisbon and emerging threats debates
Debating two reports on the EU's foreign, security and defence policy with the Union's High Representative for Foreign Affairs Javier Solana, many speakers emphasised the importance of the Lisbon Treaty. Mr Solana said the main point of the Treaty is to make EU work efficient and visible, especially in foreign and security policy. "The first priority for all of us is to get the treaty ratified".
The report on the Common Foreign and Security Policy was drafted for the foreign affairs committee by Chair, Polish MEP Jacek Saryusz-Wolski (EPP-ED), while German Socialist Helmut Kuhne drew up the report on the implementation of the European Security Strategy.
There was agreement by the rapporteurs and Mr Solana that "new" and emerging security threats needed to be weighed up - namely effects of the climate change on international security, energy security, illegal migration, information security.
Many MEPs took to the floor to stress the importance of stability in the Western Balkans and the need to strengthen Europe's Neighbourhood policy, which deals with relations with non EU states.
Wednesday also saw debates on the need to combat illegal fishing and forced prostitution (see separate stories). Retail financial services also featured.
Press service: EU - United States Summit 9-10 June in Slovenia EU – USA Summit More cross border financial services under consideration A more effective EU foreign policy in prospect, but more parliamentary scrutiny needed Forced prostitution - counter measures debated by MEPs Illegal fishing - MEPs debate EU wide regulation to fight it
Thursday in plenary: Union for the Mediterranean
MEPs voting in Brussels Peace, security and prosperity in the wider Mediterranean region were on MEPs' minds as they debated the relaunch of the "Barcelona Process" on Thursday. In the offing is a "Union for the Mediterranean" to upgrade relations between partners around the sea (750 million people, 39 governments). Promoted by French President Nicolas Sarkozy, it is likely to be a priority of the upcoming French Presidency of the EU. MEPs had their first say today.
"Mediterranean friends" As the debate on EU relations with Mediterranean countries opened, European Commissioner for External relations Benita Ferrero-Waldner spoke of many challenges and opportunities for renewed co-operation with countries she called "our Mediterranean friends". She said the relaunched initiative would strengthen political partnership, improve the sharing of responsibility in multilateral relations and encourage regional infrastructure and energy projects. Most MEP welcomed the new impetus for partnership and expressed support for President Sarkozy's and the Commission's initiative. Members also called for a focus on partnership and people rather than structures and underlined the importance of the Euro-Mediterranean assembly. They also supported the Euro-Mediterranean University to be launched in Slovenia on 9 June, the Erasmus Mundus programme and more action on human rights. People, not structures Speaking for the EPP-ED group Italian MEP Vito said, "President Sarkozy deserves our applause" for calling for a Mediterranean Union. He also spoke of the importance of multilateral projects, a free-trade area by 2010 and reminded his fellow MEPs of existing tension in the Western Sahara and Middle-East. For the Socialist group, leader Martin Schulz underlined three central challenges: the need for social stability as precondition for peace, the need for multilateralism and the importance of not launching parallel processes -"we don't need new institutions and more red tape". Importance of trade, human rights underlined British Liberal Graham Watson called for joint investment in infrastructure and people to bring them closer, adequate financing and the abolition of agricultural tariffs saying that "if we don’t take what they produce, we will end up taking their people". For the Greens/EFA French MEP Hélène Flautre spoke of nuclear energy security in Mediterranean basin and urged guaranteed functioning of all mechanisms of control for human rights Francis Wurtz for the (GUE/NGL) group said "it could be the future of peace that's at stake in this relationship". He regretted the lack of prosperity in the region and spoke of humiliation and discrimination of migrants in Europe. Eastern dimension not to be forgotten Konrad Szymański, a Polish Member of the UEN, underlined support for the "southern dimension", but said the EU must not forget policy towards the East. Outright opposition in some quarters Finally, Graham Booth for the (IND/DEM) group spoke against freedom of movement extending across the Mediterranean region and called the idea of a Mediterranean Union "an insane attempt, a disastrous idea". Also on Thursday Hygiene of foodstuffs was debated and voted. For information on today's votes, see reports on this site.
Barcelona process Resolution on Barcelona process
EN
1
PHOTO
20080605PHT31007.jpg
EN
2
PHOTO
20080603PHT30732.jpg
EN
4
LINK
http://www.eu2008.si/en/Meetings_Calendar/Dates/June/0610_EUTrojka_ZDA.html?tkSuche=ajax&globalDatum=27.05.&multiDatum=26.06.&veranstaltungsart=&globalPolitikbereich=&visiblePath=/htdocs/en
EN
9
PHOTO
20080605PHT31011.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080516BRI29012 ITEM-002-EN NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080415STO26629 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080516BRI29012 ITEM-001-EN NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080530STO30465 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080530STO30466 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080516BRI29012 ITEM-004-EN NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT MOTION P6-RC-2008-0281 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
