CAP "health check": EP debates new challenges, aid models and market instability
Agriculture
2008-06-10 - 11:42
The European Commission's responses to the climate change challenge and agricultural market instability are inadequate, whereas new support models for farmers have yet to be defined, said MEPs and experts at a hearing on the CAP "health check" held by the EP Agriculture Committee on Monday.
"The health check is key moment for the future of the CAP. Food price rises are a cause of concern to society, and increase our political responsibility," stressed European Parliament rapporteur Luis Manuel Capoulas Santos (PES, PT), who will present his draft report at the start of July. "We must make proposals that will reassure public opinion and farmers. We cannot afford the luxury of getting it wrong and must gather the right information, to enable us to take the right decisions," he stressed.
How to respond to new CAP challenges?
Climate change, the problems of water resources and the loss of biodiversity pose new challenges to the CAP. The majority of participants in the hearing felt that the solution proposed by the European Commission, namely progressively increasing levies on direct aids to farmers so as to provide funding for Member States' own rural development policy programmes, was inadequate.
Allan Buckwell (Country Land & Business Association, United Kingdom) , observed that the climate change challenge is not new and that the Commission proposal neither specifies what measures are to be taken on farms nor imposes any obligation on Member States. Furthermore, the environmental cost of rising demand, which works against efforts to reduce intensive farming is entirely ignored, he stressed. "The real new challenge is to maintain Europe's contribution to world food security by producing with less impact on the environment," he said in reply to questions from Katerina Batzeli (PES, EL) and Mairead Mc Guinness (EPP-ED, IE) .
"Climate change is a challenge to the whole of society, not just to European farmers," affirmed Karl Bauer (Landwirtschaftskammer Österreich - Austrian Chamber of Agriculture) , who advocated developing a dedicated policy with its own budget and a research drive. The co-financing difficulties of certain Member States must also be taken into account, he replied to Agnes Schierhuber (EPP-ED, AT) , who stressed this difficulty in rural development policy.
Ioannis Tsiforos, representing the Panhellenic Confederation of Unions of Agricultural Co-operatives , judged that the complexity of the problems posed calls for a panopoly of policies to keep European agriculture sustainable, starting climate impact studies for the EU's various farming regions.
What model for the decoupling system?
Decoupling subsidies to farmers from specific crops was a key component of the 2003 CAP reform. Some Member States chose to fix payments per hectare by region, whilst others calculated them on the basis of support previously received by farmers during a reference period. The Commission would like progressively to replace these historic reference periods with a new, more uniform, per-hectare model which would be easier to justify, but objections have been raised, not least because the geography of some regions' administrative limits do not reflect agricultural reality.
Jesús González Regidor, of Madrid University , proposed a "territorial flat rate per new entitlement", i.e. a new payment entitlement that would vary depending on the agricultural and rural area where the farmland is located, which he said, would enhance the EU's territorial cohesion and hence the CAP's social legitimacy, as well as making it easier to agree multilateral trade agreements. Bernhard Osterburg (Von Thünen Rural Studies Institute, Braunschweig) , felt that the system proposed by the Commission would not make it possible to apply the CAP more uniformly across the EU, given the diversity of situations in different Member States. Instead, he suggested retaining the status quo until 2013, which is when the simplified system of per hectare payments put in place by most Member States who have joined the EU since 2004 will expire.
Joseph Daul (EPP-ED, FR ), felt that a total "regionalisation" of aids would be fraught with risks: "if we give the money to regional authorities, then we risk privileging electoral infighting and funding wild hamster protection rather than our farming apparatus. We cannot gamble the CAP on a regional election every five years," he stressed. Lutz Goepel (EPP-ED ), highlighted the merits of certain German regions, which "encourage green farming with per-hectare premiums, whatever the crop."
Gert Karkov of the Danish Farmers' Union favoured replacing historic reference periods with a per-hectare system of premiums that differ from region to region. Mr Karkov also stressed the need to continue decoupling subsidies from specific crops. "Coupled aids should be only short-term solutions to a given societal problem in a specific area," he said. He was backed by Kyösti Virrankoski (ALDE, FI) , who said that farmers should be rewarded for rendering services to society - if they were not, then European agriculture would weaken. By contrast, Friedrich Wilhelm Graefe zu Baringdorf (Greens/EFA, DE) , advocated introducing a coupled premium to protect the environment in sectors such as sheep and goat production.
How to tackle market instability?
Growth in food demand worldwide, food price rises and current instability on agricultural markets have renewed debate on EU intervention mechanisms. The Commission proposes abolishing intervention for durum wheat, rice and pork; replacing it with a tendering mechanism for common wheat, butter and skimmed milk powder, and reducing it to zero for fodder cereals. It also proposes introducing a system for insuring harvests against natural disasters and mutual funds for dealing with animal diseases.
Daniel Perrin , of the Association for the Development of International Exchange of Food and Agricultural Products and Techniques , favoured retaining today's butter and milk powder intervention mechanisms, which he said had helped to stabilise markets without encouraging excessive surpluses. For the cereals sector, he felt that current instruments should evolve towards a safety net system. He objected to the Commission's proposed tendering system on the grounds that it would drive down prices.
"It's also a question of food security. Community stocks have come in very useful recently and may be a geostrategic asset," Mr Perrin replied to Agriculture Committee Chairman Neil Parish (EPP-ED, UK) , who was asking about the usefulness of maintaining intervention instruments in a period of rising prices. "The European Commission's vision does not reflect the reality of how the food crisis affects agriculture. You don't need to be an expert to see that we must produce more to feed everyone," stressed Janusz Wojciechowski (UEN, PL).
Finally, Andrzej Czyzewski (Poznan University) , stressed the need to put in place mutual insurance for more than just harvests, as is already done in the USA, Canada and Australia. "The European Commission must give a clear signal to insurance companies, because there will be business to be done in this area," he said.
Procedure: consultation -- Agriculture Committee vote: October -- Plenary vote: November 2008-06-09 Commission de l'agriculture et du développement rural Président Neil PARISH EPP-ED UK
Hearing of experts on the CAP "health check"
20080609IPR31061 EP Agriculture and Rural Development Committee web site CAP "health check": Commission diagnosis right, but therapy still to be established, say MEPs European Commission proposals on the CAP "health check"
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do;jsessionid=45EBFDDD6685856E0C24EB00527A989D.node2?body=AGRI&language=EN
EN
2
LINK
/document/activities/cont/200806/20080609ATT31038/20080609ATT31038EN.doc
EN
3
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/agriculture/healthcheck/index_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
