Former UN human rights chief debates with MEPs
Human rights
2008-06-10 - 17:38
Robinson: human rights a "birthright" for world's poor Human rights need to be at the centre of globalisation - this was the message former UN high Commissioner for Human Rights Mary Robinson brought to parliament on Monday. Promoting her Ethical Globalisation initiative she told Members of the human rights sub-committee that it was important the poorest thought of human rights as a "birthright". Ms Robinson also stressed the need both for accountability and capacity building.
Using her time at the UN (1997-2002) and experience as the first female President of Ireland (1990-1997), Ms Robinson stressed two aspects of protecting human rights. She told MEPs that "very often human rights people focus on standing up to violators and bullies" - but she stressed the need to use these rights to help form a "values-led globalisation". In her message on the need to help the poor she also noted that the poorest people are often outside the realm of the rule of law.
Expanding on her theme of human rights being something we are born with she noted that the Universal declaration of human rights was addressed not just to governments but "as a common standard of achievement for all peoples and all nations". On a note of optimism she did say that human rights in Europe "were the strongest in the world".
UN membership "can be a learning experience"
During the debate, Italian Liberal Marco Cappato asked Ms Robinson her views about reform of the UN. He noted that the UN has the constraint of vetoes by powerful members and has dictatorial regimes as members. He also mentioned the idea mooted by Republican Presidential candidate John McCain for a "league of "democracies".
In response Ms Robinson said she was not in favour of giving the "League of democracies" an institutional context as "there are a lot of double standards and ambiguity about what constitutes strong democracy". She said "the strength of UN is that it includes all countries and that UN membership can be a learning experience" noting that "every country has human rights problems".
"Stories need to be told"
The debate also included an exchange about the best way to deal with the legacy of history. Estonian Socialist Katrin Saks talked about the experience of Stalinism and wondered how important the honest evaluation of history is - "or we should just leave that because we have enough problems now?" The former Irish President replied that to move forward "stories need to be told in a structured way that is respectful and recognises the pain".
The need to look to the future was raised by Hungarian MEP Kinga Gál (EPP-ED). She spoke of Hungary, which has a parliamentary commissioner responsible for future generations, whose role is to connect issues such as ecology, demography and human rights. Ms Gál asked if a similar initiative would be possible at international level. Ms Robinson agreed that "the importance of understanding that our footprint is potentially very damaging for the future generations". She added "human rights voice and vision" is necessary for decisions over climate changes. She also said she was glad to notice big changes in the approach in the last years. Finally she stressed that in this area "the European Parliament could do really good work. To read more about the Ethical Globalisation initiative see the first link below.
20080605STO30953 Realising rights Declaration of Human Rights Human Rights sub-committee The Elders
EN
1
PHOTO
20080610PHT31193.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.realizingrights.org/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=46&Itemid=88
EN
3
LINK
http://www.un.org/Overview/rights.html
EN
4
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=DROI
EN
5
LINK
http://theelders.org/elders/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
