The Week Ahead 16-22 June 2008
Institutions
2008-06-13 - 10:35
Plenary Session – Strasbourg
Immigration. Parliament will vote at first reading on plans for common rules on the return of illegally resident third-country nationals (debate Tuesday, vote Wednesday).
Commission hearings. Following hearings with, respectively, the Civil Liberties and Transport committees (Monday), Parliament will vote on the change in portfolio of Commission Vice-President Jacques Barrot and on the appointment of Antonio Tajani to the European Commission (Wednesday).
Energy package. MEPs will decide whether to back the Industry Committee in supporting full ownership unbundling of electricity networks (debate Tuesday, vote Wednesday).
EU summit. Parliament will discuss the 19-20 June European Council with the Slovenian Presidency and the Commission (Wednesday). At the summit itself, EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering will as usual address EU leaders on behalf of Parliament (Thursday, Justus Lipsius building, Brussels).
Waste reduction and water quality. Two pieces of environmental legislation come to second reading: one on waste reduction and management, the other concerning water quality (debate Monday, vote Tuesday).
Oil prices. MEPs will debate the impact of rising oil prices (Wednesday). A second debate will consider the effects on the fishing industry (Wednesday, vote Thursday).
Slovakia/euro. Parliament will have its say on Slovakia’s application to adopt the euro on 1 January 2009 (Tuesday).
Road safety. There will be first reading votes on protecting pedestrians (debate Tuesday, vote Wednesday) and standards for road infrastructure safety (debate Wednesday, vote Thursday).
Chlorinated chicken. MEPs will raise with the Commission the issue of imports of poultry treated with chlorinated water (debate Tuesday, vote on resolution Wednesday).
Asma Jahangir. The UN Special Rapporteur on freedom of religion or belief will address MEPs. She is the latest guest speaker for the Year of Intercultural Dialogue (Wednesday).
20080613IPR31563 For details of all the week's events, see "The Agenda"
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20082500AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
