IDAY: call to invest in the education of young Africans
Institutions
2008-06-12 - 19:50
Access to basic education for African young people is a right and must therefore be guaranteed, stressed speakers at International Day of African Youth (IDAY), which was celebrated on Thursday at the European Parliament. The role of African diasporas in this context was the focus of debate between MEPs and their guests. IDAY, which was officially sponsored by EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering, is part of European Year of Intercultural Dialogue.
EP Vice-President Luisa Morgantini (GUE/NGL, IT), who chaired today's event, said: "The second Millennium Development Goal will not be achieved without true political determination from the international community and a serious commitment by African governments. We must demonstrate that we have learnt the lesson from the two Guinean teenage stowaways who froze to death on a Sabena flight from Conakry to Brussels and who left a moving letter saying 'we want to study'."
For his part, President Pöttering said: "Investing in education is the key to securing a better future for Africa. We must give African youth hope to escape from the poverty traps that have hampered the development of the continent. Europe must strengthen its partnership with Africa to help it achieve this goal."
The purpose of IDAY is to raise awareness among the public and the authorities of the need to guarantee basic education to all African young people by 2015, which is one of the Millennium Development Goals.
The diaspora: a breath of fresh air for education
The diaspora is regarded by the African Union as the "sixth region" of Africa. But "can it replace the sovereign mission of the state?", asked Romuald Dzomo Nkongo, President of IDAY France. "With its twin-track approach - coming both from here and from over there - the diaspora can contribute to diagnoses of educational needs", he argued.
Moïse Essoh, representing Moja, a group of intellectuals from the diaspora, appealed to Europe to set up educational exchange programmes with Africa.
Hauwa Ibrahim, 2005 Sakharov Prize winner, Ousmane Sy (Mali), winner of the King Baudouin International Development Prize 2004-2005, and Salih Osman, 2007 Sakharov Prize winner, were present at today's conference.
Barbara Hendricks, Honorary Ambassador of the UNHCR, sent a video message, while Baaba Mal, the famous Senegalese musician and UNDP Ambassador, performed at the closing session.
20080611IPR31358 IDAY website
EN
1
LINK
http://www.1606.eu/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
