Hauwa Ibrahim: "The EU can be the torchlight to show us the way"
Development and cooperation
2008-06-13 - 15:05
Hauwa Ibrahim at the European Parliament in Brussels, 12 June The aspirations of young people in Africa were discussed on 12 June when the EP hosted a seminar on International Day of African Youth. It drew together speakers who addressed the problems that young people face. Chaired by Italian Parliament vice-president Luisa Morgantini (GUE/NGL), the event was held under the patronage of EP President Pöttering. Nigerian lawyer Hauwa Ibrahim, winner of Parliament's 2005 Sakharov prize was one of the speakers. We later put a few questions to her.
What do young Africans really want? What are their hopes and aspirations?
Young Africans want to contribute to peace, freedom and human dignity. They want the opportunity to be and to use their minds creatively. They want the opportunity not to think about what they are eating tomorrow, to be free of things that slow them down - like poverty. They want the opportunity to make a positive change for their society, for their countries and for the world.
What can the EU and the EP do to help young Africans?
It's such an honour that the EP organises a day such as an International Day for African youth! A huge statement has been made: "We can give you a voice, we can give you opportunity. We'll bring you here to see what we have done differently and how you can go and make a difference in your place". We hope that the EU and the EP especially will not look at Africa as a unit, but as a huge continent. When you see an entity with a huge problem, you should take it piece by piece; solve one problem after the other.
One of the issues that we are facing in my country (Nigeria) is that government policies have not been consistent. The EU and the EP can help, since they are institutions that make policies. I suggest that the EU takes the time to visit the continent once in a quarter to have the sense of what is reality. We have infrastructures that are absolutely inadequate.
For example, you have a school that used to have 500 or 600 students, and they now have more than 1000 in less than 10 years, while facilities have not been expanded. This affects the morale of the teachers and of the students. Another issue is the training of teachers, who need to be more motivated. The EU could invite teachers to see how classrooms, books and laboratories are here or train them in sciences, mathematics and so on. The EU can be the torchlight to show us how to get there.
Is Europe a model for African youth? Can it offer hope and if so in what way?
Absolutely! You have passed through so much as a region! The way you (Europe) have overcome the problems, what you have done and how you can think about the future and plan for today are lessons that we could learn from you. This beautiful Parliament is fascinating. How did you come to this end? We may not get there but maybe the new generation will.
What difference did your winning the Sakharov Prize for freedom of thought make in Nigeria and in Africa?
It made a huge, huge difference. It gave me a louder voice, credibility and above all a global stage and recognition. Since my passion is education, we created a charity, "Foundation for Literacy", with the money that I got with the Sakharov prize. And the funds have multiplied, because other people decided to give more money. We put it in a bank and we got (5%) interest. With the 5% we sent 32 children back to school, elementary school but also to university.
Moreover, while I was teaching law in Abuja University, I noticed that there were about 3000 students there who only had 200 useful law books. The government wanted to remove our accreditation as we didn't meet the standards. At about that time I got the Sakharov prize. I was invited in Minnesota to give a speech and I told them about our lack of books. They decided to give us 8000 new books. I used part of the money I got with the Sakharov prize to ship the books from America to Nigeria. So I can say that the EP saved the ability of Abuja University to award degrees that have international recognition.
In the context of the EU importing natural resources like wood from Africa, overfishing and immigrants leaving Africa for the EU, what can Europe do to help Africa?
There are issues about politics and there are issues about economy. The fundamental human rights should lie between the two. If you go to a virgin land in Africa and pick something, or remove their fish, what do you give them in return? Do you want to completely remove their fish? And leave them with nothing? Is that your ultimate objective? I think we should temper economy with humanity. We should temper globalisation with dignity. What we want is a world that is free of terrors, secure. And we do not want to create the opposite through our policies. Whether you are taking the wood or the fish, remember to temper global politics with humanity, dignity and respect for human life.
The event was held as part of the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue. Hauwa Ibrahim was awarded the prize in recognition of her stand in defending Nigerian women who face being stoned to death for adultery and young people who face amputation for theft under Islamic Sharia law.
20080605STO30959 European Year of Intercultural Dialogue website Ladies, Ibrahim and Reporters joint Sakharov prize winners 2005 2007 Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought
EN
1
PHOTO
20080612PHT31433.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.interculturaldialogue2008.eu/405.0.html?&tx_ttnews%5Btt_news%5D=206&tx_ttnews%5BbackPid%5D=333&cHash=c40149df1a
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20051017FCS01528 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070906FCS10161 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
