Climate change: civil society Agora calls on the EU to act fast
Future of Europe/European integration
2008-06-13 - 18:49
Immediate action by the EU, its Member States and citizens is needed to halt climate change and protect future generations, agreed participants in the second Citizens' Agora debate, hosted by the European Parliament on 12 and 13 June. The event brought 500 civil society representatives together with MEPs, key EU decision makers and international experts to make recommendations, which included a call for an EU commitment to cut CO2 emissions by 30% from their 1990 level by 2020.
"Tackling climate change ... is about the future of Europe and of the whole world. We must take our responsibility for the next generations, and the European Union must be the leader in this struggle", said European Parliament President Hans-Gert Pöttering at the opening session, adding that "this Agora is the way the European Parliament wants to answer to those concerns and reinstitute a tradition from ancient Greece".
"This Agora is a very special thing, in its ability to surpass barriers between political groups, sectors of civil society and also between national interests," said European Commission President José Manuel Barroso, agreeing that "Europe must lead by example and that needs a horizontal political consensus" and observing that "the current energy package is a road-map, a way to change to a low-carbon economy."
Slovenia's Environment and Spatial Planning Minister and Environment Council President Janez Podobnik, called for "larger efforts to achieve the third industrial revolution. We need innovation and the symbol of this industrial revolution should be the sun, the main source of low-carbon energy", he said, underlining underlined that "Citizens are the ones who can promote or hold back what happens."
The Agora is "the right thing at the right moment," said Guido Sacconi, Chairman of the European Parliament temporary Committee on Climate Change, adding that "we are working to bring about the energy package in preparation for the year 2012. We need to keep a co-ordinated and integrated vision in Europe, since this is a long-term project."
Smart grids, energy-positive buildings and efficiency are part of the solution
Smart grids, energy-positive buildings and efficiency are the future, Jeremy Rifkin, President of the Foundation on Economic Trends, Jacqueline McGlade, Executive Director of the European Environmental Agency (EEA) and Claude Lenglet, a member of the European Construction Technology Platform, told participants in the opening session. Action is needed by all of us, individually, collectively, by governments and on a global scale, and the European Union has to take the lead, they said.
The world is in the "long-lasting sunset of the oil, coal and uranium era", said Mr Rifkin, who took the view that the "third industrial revolution" will have four pillars: renewable energy, the use of buildings as positive power plants, the storage of the excess energy produced as hydrogen and its distribution through "smart grids" (which involve re-engineering the European power grid to enable everyone to share energy).
Ms McGlade said "we are approaching points in our consumption and waste production that, if we reach them, can cause the loss of the social fabric of life. ... I can see three plans for this: the global one of the Copenhagen meeting in 2009, the national one of what our governments do, and the personal, individual one. "
Architects and engineers are beginning to realize their responsibility for turning houses first into zero-energy consumers, then into energy producers, said Claude Lenglet. "The problem is that only 2 % of the buildings in Europe get renovated each year. We need massive change and support from public financing", he said.
Citizens call for 30% cut in CO 2 emissions by 2020
Four of the five thematic workshops shared the view that the EU should undertake to reduce its C02 emissions by 30% by 2020 compared to the 1990 level. Their detailed conclusions are summarised below.
Nuclear energy not the solution to climate change, says Resources workshop
The "Resources" workshop called for a full "internalisation" of environmental costs across the economy. It recommended extreme caution in promoting biofuels and asked the EU to refrain from adopting targets before their full global impact has been fully assessed. The workshop advocated progressively establishing an economy-wide system for carbon pricing and a fundamental reform of EU policies that use natural resources. Nuclear energy is not a solution to climate change because of its many problems, concluded the participants.
Cut car CO2 emissions to 120 g/km by 2012 and 80 g/km by 2020, says Techniques workshop
The "Techniques" workshop, by contrast, noted that views differ as to how much nuclear energy can contribute to solving the climate change problem. Participants raised concerns as to whether the target of biofuels accounting for 10% of all transport fuel by 2020 can be achieved sustainably. They called on the EU and its Member States to impose mandatory emission standards for passenger vehicles of 120 g CO2/ km by 2012 and 80 g CO2/km by 2020. The EU should also include aviation in the EU emissions trading scheme (ETS), introduce kerosene taxes and also set strict standards to reduce emissions from maritime transport, they said.
Development aid needs to be "climate proof", says Solidarity workshop
The "Solidarity" workshop called on EU Member States to take timely measures to ensure that social cohesion is not jeopardised by oil price rises within the EU. Development aid should be made "climate proof and climate friendly," and at least half the revenue from ETS permit auctions should go to developing countries, it said. To enable consumers to act responsibly, the institutions should work together towards "traceability instruments" that clearly indicate the climate impact and compliance with social standards of products, it said.
EU should explore "personal carbon quotas", says Economies workshop
The "Economies" workshop backed the aims of a 30% reduction in greenhouse gas emissions, renewables making up 30% of all energy consumption and a 30% increase in energy efficiency, all by 2020. They suggested that the EU should explore the feasibility of "personal carbon quotas" as a way to reduce emissions and called on national decision makers to promote fiscal and non-fiscal incentives for business to expand sustainable production.
Teach climate change in school, says Governance workshop
The "Governance" workshop advocated "mainstreaming climate protection in all major areas of governance." It said that climate protection should be taught at all school stages, noting that this could also help to promote intergenerational solidarity. Finally, they proposed establishing an EU regulatory to arbitrate in major cross-border environmental disputes and impose sanctions in the event of harm to the environment.
At the closing event, Parliament's Vice-President Gerard Onesta expressed the wish that civil society be given more opportunities to express its views. "We need to make civil society permanently present in the European Parliament" and to "make the Agora a new institutional tool of the European Union," he concluded.
20080609IPR31065 Full details of the even on the Citizens' Agora on the website
EN
1
LINK
/parliament/public/staticDisplay.do?id=70&language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
