What's on the Strasbourg agenda 16-19 June?
Institutions
2008-06-16 - 11:22
The return and custody of illegal immigrants will be debated by MEPs The week MEPs will debate measures to offset rising oil prices, steps to liberalise Europe's energy market and the length of time illegal immigrants can be held in custody. The key debate is preparation of the EU Summit later in the week - with the future of the Lisbon Treaty likely to dominate. New EU-wide recycling targets and the state of water pollution also feature. As part of the year of Intercultural Dialogue, the UN rapporteur for religious freedom Asma Jahangir will address the house.
Monday 16 June
Recycling of waste: The session starts on Monday with a debate on the revision of the framework directive on waste. New waste legislation includes targets for re-use and recycling of waste to be attained by 2020, if a compromise between Council and Parliament is adopted in plenary.
Water pollution: Parliament then turns its attention to environmental quality standards for water. A total of 33 pollutants - mainly pesticides and heavy metals - likely to be found in rivers, lakes and coastal waters - will be subject to environmental quality standards.
40 years of customs union: The House will mark 40 years of the customs union which was established on 1 July. It abolished customs duties at internal borders and put in place a uniform system for taxing imports.
Poverty and exclusion: Parliament then turns its attention to a report on 2010, the European Year for combating poverty and social exclusion. Over 78 million EU citizens live at risk of poverty, 19 million of them children. Barrot-Tajani hearings: On the sidelines of the plenary two Commission hearings take place. Vice-President Jacques Barrot from 1730 CET in front of the Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs and the Committee on Legal Affairs. A delegation from the Women's Rights Committee will also participate. Second, the hearing of Commissioner-designate Antonio Tajani from 2015 before the Transport Committee. A delegation from the Budgets Committee will participate. After the hearings, the relevant parliamentary committees will communicate their assessment to the President of the European Parliament, and to the chairman of the Conference of Committee Chairmen, in the form of an evaluation letter with a view to the final vote in plenary. A vote on both will take place on Wednesday 18 June at midday by the whole European Parliament.
Tuesday 17 June "Return directive": Tuesday morning is dedicated to the "return directive" establishing common standards and procedures for the return of third-country nationals residing illegally. This draft legislation lays down a maximum period of custody and a ban on re-entry into the EU by deportees, while seeking to safeguard the basic rights of the individuals concerned. Parliament has been working on the directive on an equal footing with the Council under the co-decision procedure. Slovakia's Euro bid: Later on Tuesday morning, MEPs will debate whether to approve Slovakia's bid to adopt the euro on 1 January 2009.
Electricity market: Tuesday afternoon starts with a joint debate on the energy market with particular focus on the electricity market. The Industry committee backs the rapporteur's preference for full ownership unbundling, which is also the European Commission's preferred option. This would stop companies or countries from simultaneously exercising control over electricity generation and supply.
Energy Agency: The Industry Committee is insisting that the Agency for the Cooperation of Energy Regulators - proposed as part of the energy package - should have regulatory powers, contrary to the Commission's original plan. In the vote on three related first-reading reports, overwhelming majorities on the committee backs a strong decision-making role for the Agency. Wednesday 18 June
Debate ahead of Europe Council: The key debate of the week is on the preparation of the Brussels European Council to be held on 19 and 20 June. The meeting of the European Council will be preceded by a statement by EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering, followed by an exchange of views. The main topics to be debated by heads of State and government are the Lisbon Treaty, freedom security and justice, policy implications of high food prices, economic social and environmental issues, the Western Balkans and external relations. Action on oil prices debated: MEPs will debate measures to take in the short-and medium to combat rising oil prices after hearing statements from the Council and Commission. Oil prices have risen to over $130 a barrel. Fuel protests triggered by rising oil prices have spread to more countries across Europe, with thousands of fishermen on strike. Marine fuel prices have gone beyond €0.7/l in most European harbours, an increase of around 240% since 2004. European Ombudsman: The House will vote on a report on the statute of the European Ombudsman. Proposed changes in the rules governing access to information held by EU bodies and evidence given to him by EU civil servants.
UN rapporteur on freedom of religion: At midday, the UN Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Religion or Belief, Asma Jahangir, will address a formal sitting of the House as part of the EP's programme of events for the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue 2008. EU-Russia summit: MEPs will debate preparations for the EU-Russia summit after hearing statements from the Commission and the Council. The summit will be held in Khanty-Mansiysk Siberia on 26-27 June, when new president Dmitry Medvedev, will represent Russia for the first time.
MEPs then debate Sovereign Wealth Funds, government-owned investment vehicles that invest surplus state funds, which are growing rapidly; as are the political controversy and potential risks they give rise to, according to a question to the Council and the Commission from the Economics Committee. Thursday 19 June First Intelligent Car: Parliament debates the First Intelligent Car report. Intelligent car technologies need to be cheaper and better publicised to increase their use, says an own initiative report. If fully deployed with the necessary infrastructure, Intelligent Vehicle Systems could save thousands of lives and alleviate congestion, environmental and health problems. As usual the session end with three debates and votes on human rights around the world, on this occasion the topics are: Burma: ongoing detention of political prisoners, Somalia: civilian murders - an everyday occurrence and Iran: execution of minors.
20080613STO31584 EP Press service Plenary Agenda Live from 5
EN
1
PHOTO
20080613PHT31639.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/news/expert/default_en.htm
EN
3
LINK
/activities/plenary.do?language=EN
EN
4
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/faces/live/live-video.jsp?language=en
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
