Italy's Antonio Tajani - from MEP to EU Commissioner
Institutions
2008-06-18 - 18:04
Tajani: rights for air passengers a priority Just ahead of the vote by MEPs confirming Italian Antonio Tajani as the new EU Transport Commissioner, we caught up with him for a quick interview. He put road safety and air passenger rights as two of his priorities. Mr Tajani knows the Parliament well as he was previously an MEP for the centre right EPP-ED group. He will also be a Vice-president of the Brussels-based Commission.
On Monday 16 June at the hearing you said: "In my heart I will always be an MEP". How strong is your commitment to Europe after this change? Being an MEP for the last 15 years has brought me really close to the citizens, and it's thanks to this experience that I learned how important what people ask us and what they expect from us is. Even when we cannot give concrete answers, we have to prove our firm political will, that the EU Institutions are for the citizens, not against them.
My commitment to Europe remains the same, a Europe of the citizens. We need an EU that can give concrete answers to the questions and concerns of its citizens - not a Europe of bureaucracy that does not allow people to understand that we all benefit from the great European project.
We have to work to strengthen what we already have achieved, and also to understand that we also have a role during difficult times, like now, with energy price problems.
What can citizens expect from you in the remaining 1½ years of the current Commission?
I will continue the work started by my former colleagues, Loyola de Palacio and Jacques Barrot. I will do my utmost to come up with some concrete initiatives like the open sky directive (cheaper air transport and better service for citizens). We have to find concrete solutions that allow us to save energy.
We also have to address the road transport issue and Galileo. But most of all, we have to resolve road security problems and grant air passengers rights. We have to stop the slaughter each Saturday night on Europe's roads, when hundreds and hundreds of young people die because there are not enough police checks, young drivers are inadequately trained or because they drive under the influence of drink or drugs.
Why did you choose the aviation sector and the one sky directive as priorities?
Air transport represents the future. As a former air traffic controller, air transport has always been in my heart. It's surely a big challenge but I am confident because of the work already done by the transport directorate...I am convinced that thanks to this reform we will come up with concrete answers on cost reduction and security for the millions of EU citizens who use air transport daily.
20080616STO31803 Hearings Focus European Commission
EN
1
PHOTO
20080617PHT32046.jpg
EN
3
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/commission_barroso/index_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080612FCS31557 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
