Human rights: Burma, Somalia, Iran
Human rights
2008-06-19 - 16:41
In its three human rights resolutions adopted on Thursday in Strasbourg, the European Parliament criticises the Burmese government's treatment of its own people, voices concern at the high civilian death toll in Somalia's civil war and condemns the executions of juveniles in Iran.
Burmese junta condemned
Parliament's resolution on Burma deplores the continuing oppression by the junta, the renewed house arrest of Aung San Suu Kyi, the government's actions following the recent cyclone and the ineffectiveness of EU sanctions on Burma.
The resolution condemns "the decision by the Burmese authorities to extend the house arrest of Aung San Suu Kyi" and the detention of the group of political activists demanding her release, and expresses shock at the calls in official newspapers for the public flogging of Aung San Suu Kyi.
In the wake of "reports that the Burmese army murdered political prisoners in the aftermath of Cyclone Nargis", Parliament "calls for a judicial investigation under UN auspices" into these claims. It also "deplores the ongoing imprisonment by the Burmese authorities of victims of Cyclone Nargis who attempt to seek aid from international aid organisations in Burma". The government is urged to allow international humanitarian workers and supplies unhindered access to the areas affected by the cyclone and "to stop official interference in the delivery of aid and to cooperate fully with humanitarian organisations".
Call on government and ASEAN states to promote democratic change
The holding by the junta of the referendum on the constitution only days after the cyclone is criticised and its results dismissed as "lacking credibility". MEPs call on the authorities "to lift all restrictions on peaceful political activities in the country and to move towards an inclusive process of national reconciliation and restoration of democracy, the rule of law and full respect for human rights".
Given the evidence of continuing violations of human rights in the country, the resolution "urges the Burmese authorities to enter into close dialogue with the UN Special Rapporteur and to accept his request to visit Burma". It also calls on ASEAN countries "to put serious pressure on the Burmese authorities to bring about democratic change".
Tougher EU sanctions needed
Lastly, Parliament believes that the EU’s targeted sanctions against the Burmese junta are still having a limited effect on the regime, thus falling short of the objectives sought. It therefore reiterates its call on the Council "to take further steps and effectively hamper access by the junta to the EU’s financial system" and "calls on the Council and the Member States to monitor closely, and ensure the effective application of, the targeted sanctions".
* * *
Routine killing of civilians in Somalia
In a resolution on Somalia, MEPs look at the prolonged civil war and its implications for the peace and reconciliation process in the country, as well as for the security and stability of the Horn of Africa as a whole.
Since February 2007, some 856,970 Somalis have fled fighting in Mogadishu, while 2.6 million Somalis - about 35 per cent of the population - are in need of humanitarian assistance.
The EP resolution calls for a halt to the fighting and the widespread atrocities committed by all parties to the conflict, with the loss of life of many civilians, and it demands investigations into all human rights violations. It urges all sides to ensure unhindered humanitarian access and assistance to affected populations and to ensure the safety of local and international humanitarian workers.
The peace deal reached between the Transitional Federal Government of Somalia (TFG) and the Alliance for the Re-liberation of Somalia (ARS) is welcomed, but MEPs stress the need for "a genuine reconciliation process".
They also call on the Somali Transitional Government, in collaboration with the UN and the African Union, "to use all available means to prevent, deter and suppress piracy and armed robbery committed from the Somali coast against vessels, especially those carrying humanitarian aid".
Key role for the international community
The role of the outside world will be crucial in bringing peace to this region. The EP urges that neighbouring Kenya be pressed to play a constructive role. As to the European Union, MEPs call for "all donors, and the EU in particular, to increase the provision of humanitarian assistance" and for the Commission "to ensure that EU aid is not being misappropriated".
The UN Security Council is asked "to strengthen the UN arms embargo on Somalia" and "to ensure that the embargo is fully respected by states in the region" as well as "to investigate and impose targeted sanctions on all individuals accused of committing war crimes and crimes against humanity in Somalia, including possible referral to the ICC".
The resolution backs the UN Security Council resolution, adopted on 15 May 2008, calling for the possible deployment of a 28,500-strong UN peacekeeping force but it urges that peacekeepers "be mandated to protect civilians, including women, children and internally displaced persons, and include a strong human rights component, with the capacity to monitor, investigate and report human rights violations".
* * *
Executions of juveniles in Iran
The use of the death penalty in Iran, particularly for minors, is condemned in yet another EP resolution on the deteriorating human rights situation in that country. EU states are urged not to deport to Iran any people whose lives could be in danger there.
According to the resolution, "Iran and a few other countries still execute minors, but Iran is known to have executed more juvenile offenders than any other country in the world, and according to reports more than 100 individuals are on death row in Iran for crimes allegedly committed when under the age of 18".
The EP "strongly condemns the death sentences and executions in Iran, in particular those imposed or carried out on juvenile offenders and minors". Indeed, it stresses that "juvenile death sentences are in direct contravention of the Islamic Republic of Iran’s international obligations and commitments".
Turning to individual cases, Parliament condemns the execution of Mohammad Hassanzadeh, who was under the age of 18 when executed, and urges the authorities to halt the executions of Mr Behnoud Shojaee, Mr Mohammad Fedaei, Mr Saeed Jazee, Mr Behnam Zaare and all other juvenile offenders sentenced to death.
The members of the newly elected Majlis are called upon "speedily to pass the pending reform of the Iranian penal code, with the aim, notably, of abolishing stoning and executions of child offenders, to move towards a moratorium on the death penalty and to bring Iranian legislation into line with international human rights obligations". The resolution also "calls for the decriminalisation of same-sex relations in Iran".
Lastly, Member States are urged "to suspend the expulsion to Iran of persons who are threatened with execution or torture".
20080618IPR32142 Full texts of adopted resolutions will be available here (click on 19 June)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
