Round-up of June plenary in Strasbourg
Institutions
2008-06-23 - 12:20
The rising price of fuel was one issue discussed by MEPs High oil prices and reform of Europe's energy market were just two items MEPs debated during their sitting in Strasbourg from 16-19 June. After the vote Members voted to support liberalisation of the energy market through the 3rd energy package as well as supporting measures to help vulnerable groups like fishermen. The future of the Lisbon treaty after the Irish No vote and directives on waste (to boost recycling) and water (to reduce toxins) were also debated by the House.
Also in Strasbourg MEPs supported the creation of an energy Charter so that consumers know their rights. Read on for a full round-up of the session. The next plenary session of the parliament opens on 7 July.
20080616FCS31814
Monday in Plenary: Irish referendum, Middle East, poverty and social exclusion
Mr Pöttering called for the ratification of the Lisbon treaty to continue The June plenary opened with a statement by Parliament's president Hans-Gert Pöttering on the Irish "No" vote on the Lisbon Treaty. He called on EU leaders meeting in Brussels for a summit on 19-20 June to ensure that the Treaty becomes a reality. He underlined that the ratification process must continue. He also told the House of the outcome of a recent delegation of MEPs to the Middle East. Poverty and exclusion and 40 years of the customs union also featured.
Mr Pöttering opened the session by saying that "the result of the referendum of 12 June 2008 in Ireland confronts the European Union with one of the most difficult challenges in its history". He went on to point out that "the Lisbon treaty is the answer to citizens' criticisms of the European Union. This treaty brings the European Union closer to its citizens".
As to what he believes should happen now Mr Pöttering told the House that "it remains our goal to see the Lisbon treaty enter into force before the elections of June 2009 to the European Parliament".
The whole Parliament will debate the "No" vote in the Irish referendum on Wednesday morning ahead of Thursday and Friday's summit of EU leaders and heads of state.
Delegation to Middle East pessimistic about Annapolis goals
A delegation of MEPs has just returned from Israel and the Palestinian Territories and Mr Pöttering told the House of their conclusions. He began by stating the need for concrete measures to realize the objectives laid down by the recent Annapolis conference - namely the achievement of a two-state solution by the end of the year. However, his comments were leavened by realism: "despite some encouraging progress, there is little reason for optimism in realizing the ambitious goals of Annapolis: this is the conclusion of the delegation" he said.
40 years of the customs union
A statement from the Commissioner for taxation and customs union László Kovács marked 40 years of the European customs union. Established on 1 July 1968 it has meant that there are no customs duties at internal borders between the EU Member States and common customs duties on imports from outside the Union. It has also led to the disappearance of many internal border controls.
Make 2010 a year for tackling poverty say MEPs
Approximately 78 million EU citizens – or 16% of the population – live at risk of poverty. Of these 19 million are children and 1 in 10 live in households where nobody works. Ahead of the start of the 2010 European year for combating poverty and social exclusion, a report by Greek MEP Marie Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou, (EPP-ED) calls for the year to focus on fighting child poverty and to pay special attention to large families, single parents, families caring for a dependent person and children in institutions. MEPs will vote on the report on Tuesday.
Waste and water directives
Also debated by MEPs on Monday evening in Strasbourg were two separate waste and water directives. The former sets strict new targets for recycling across the EU to be met by 2020 whilst the latter lists 33 pollutants for which higher health standards are required. A full look at the issues raised by these directives can be found in the second link below. A vote will take place on Tuesday on these draft directives.
Watch live Less waste and cleaner water in Europe by 2020? Hans-Gert Pöttering on Irish vote European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion Pöttering on the Middle East:
Tuesday in Plenary: return directive, euro, energy, waste
MEPs supported Slovakia's euro ambitions Tuesday opened with a debate on the "return directive", which aims to establish norms across the EU for the amount of time illegal immigrants can be detained. The day also saw MEPs vote to back Slovakia's ambitions to join the euro. The proposed liberalisation of Europe's energy market through the "3rd energy package" was also on the agenda. This would separate production from supply in an effort to boost competition and allow consumers more choice.
Illegal immigration - 6 month detention agreed
Parliament voted Wednesday to support a compromise reached with EU ministers on illegal immigration that says 6 months should be the maximum immigrants can be detained. At present the period of time varies dramatically from one country to another.
During Tuesday's debate, Parliament's Rapporteur for the directive - German Christian Democrat Manfred Weber - assured the House that the legislation includes protection for "children and unaccompanied minors, access to health and education systems and the use of detention only when necessary". However, there were still concerns over human rights with French Socialist Martine Roure telling fellow MEPs that the compromise does not provide adequate protection of fundamental rights.
Bratislava braced for the Euro
Although a final decision falls to EU leaders meeting this week, MEPs approved Slovakia's ambition to become the 16th country to adopt the euro. A report on the issue by Maltese MEP David Casa (EPP-ED) said that although Slovakia met the criteria, care should be taken about the level of inflation. Equally it said that more efforts are needed to explain the benefits of the euro to citizens. It also called for prices of staple goods to be monitored to avoid unnecessary prices rise.
Reform of Europe's energy market
As oil prices rise to record levels, the reform of Europe's electricity market was on the agenda. The "3rd energy package" aims to liberalise the energy market by separating production from supply. In practical terms this would mean that state operators would have to give up their monopoly positions. Advocates say that it will lead to greater competition, more investment in infrastructure and that it could make the European Emissions Trading Scheme workable in the long term. MEPs vote Wednesday.
Wednesday afternoon, the House will debate the recent rise in oil prices. Watch all the debates live here on the Parliament's website.
Debate on illegal immigrants Updated story on illegal immigrants Euro in Slovakia Waste Water quality
Wednesday in plenary: EU Summit, oil prices, Russia, illegal immigrants
Thumbs up for the Return directive MEPs started Wednesday's sitting by discussing preparations for the European Council meeting following the Irish referendum. Starting on Thursday, the summit will wind up the Slovenian presidency of the EU. After a number of important votes, including on the sensitive issue of illegal immigration, attention turned to rising oil prices and the upcoming EU/Russia summit in Siberia on 26-27 June.
The UN's rapporteur for religious freedom Asma Jahangir addressed the House in a special sitting. She was there as part of a series of speakers celebrating the year of intercultural dialogue. We will publish an interview with her on Monday, 23 June
Lisbon, Dublin and Brussels
Council and Commission representatives told MEPs of their disappointment with the results of the Irish vote, underlined respect for the will of Irish voters but emphasised that the Lisbon treaty is still needed by the EU and its citizens.
For the Council, Slovenia's Janez Lenarčič presented the main topics for the European Council: a timeline for further steps after the Irish vote and long-term measures to mitigate soaring food and oil prices.
The great majority of MEPs expressed respect for the result of the Irish vote, but urged:
respect for the will of other states and a move ahead with ratification
the need to listen to ordinary people and better explain the purpose of Europe
the need to find solutions and respond to challenges at the European level
Members spoke of a crisis of confidence and reminded EU countries that their responsibility does not end with signing treaties, but also includes constant communication and explanation.
Some speakers said the text of the Lisbon treaty had been presented in a "difficult and incomprehensible" way, while a small group of MEPs implacably antagonistic to the treaty demanded an end to the ratification process.
EU-Russia summit
Next, MEPs discussed the EU-Russia summit which will take place in Siberia on 26-27 June. They expressed concerns about deteriorating human rights conditions in Russia, increasing attacks on ethnic, racial and religious minorities and Moscow's actions in Abkhazia and South Ossetia. The discussion also focused on the current negotiations with the Russian Federation on a new Partnership and Cooperation Agreement.
MEPs expressed their satisfaction "that it has finally been possible to overcome the obstacles to reaching an agreement on the mandate for negotiations with the Russian Federation on a new Partnership Agreement". They believe that it will help create "a secure and transparent framework for energy relations", deal with problems in Transnistria and human rights violations, thus helping promote the rule of law within Russia .
Oil prices
Later, MEPs debated oil prices and how to combat their rise and the crisis in the fisheries sector with the Council and Commission. The rise has given many fishermen and fishing businesses no choice but to cease activities, leading to protests that have spread throughout Europe. MEPs expressed concern about the consequences of rising oil prices in different sectors: financial industry, transport, aviation and tourism for example.
Voted on Wednesday
Three eagerly awaited votes were held on Wednesday (see our full reports on this site)
In a vote on the so-called " Energy Package ", Parliament voted new legislation according to which production and supply of electricity would be separated, signalling the end of remaining national monopolies,
A majority of MEPs backed the so-called " return directive " laying down a range of provisions on the detention and return of illegal immigrants by EU Member States.
Parliament approved by large majorities the choice of Commission Vice-President Barrot to take over the Justice, Freedom and Security portfolio, and the appointment of outgoing MEP Antonio Tajani as the new Commissioner for transport.
Parliament's press releases Pöttering hopeful reforms still achievable before 2009 Euro-elections EU-Russia relations Energy package focus
Thursday plenary: energy rights, oil prices, Russia, human rights
As oil prices climb fishermen are under pressure The closing day of the June plenary session saw MEPs back a report calling for a European charter of rights for gas and electricity consumers. The right to change supplier free is one demand. A resolution calling for more state aid to help the fishing industry in the face of high fuel costs was also supported by MEPs. Plans to develop "intelligent" cars and better roads were two measures also supported by Members. Debates on human rights in Burma, Somalia and Iran rounded off the session.
Energy Consumers must have charter of rights say MEPs
In a week that has seen Europe's energy market under the spotlight with MEPs backing liberalisation and greater competition, Thursday saw Members vote to support the creation of a "European Charter on the Rights of Energy Consumers". In backing a report by Belgian Socialist MEP Mia de Vits, the House wants people to be able to change gas or electricity supplier free of charge, be billed for only the energy they use and have clearer energy bills to make price comparison more straightforward. Free price information and disconnection being the last resort are among the measures backed by MEPs Thursday.
A lifeline to Europe's fishermen
As oil prices hover around 140 dollar a barrel then one industry that is really feeling the financial pain is Europe's fishermen. In a resolution adopted by a large majority MEPs called for extra financial aid to be given to them. In particular it wants the European Commission to reconsider it rules of state aid (outlawed by EU law) and allow a maximum of 100,000 euros of aid per boat rather than by fishing company. At present this ceiling of possible aid for fishing companies only. MEPs also want financial encouragement given to fishermen to reduce CO2 emissions over the next 7 years- based on the current price of € 25 per ton of CO2.
Are we close to the first intelligent car?
Parliament debated the "First Intelligent Car" report which says that such cars " reduce congestion, pollution and the number and seriousness of road accidents". It also welcomes negotiations on the inclusion of "eCall" in all new cars from 2010 (eCall automatically calls emergency services in the event of an accident). Several MEPs stated that these technologies should be affordable for everyone. The rapporteur told the house that yearly over 41,000 European are killed in road accidents and that this technology can help save lives. There was also concern among the MEPs that intelligent technologies may lead to drivers getting a false sense of safety.
Also on road safety MEPs adopted a directive that aims to improve road safety across the European Union. Assessing the impact on safety of new road building, better road signs and parking areas on main roads for people to rest are all suggested. German MEP Helmuth Markov (GUE/NGL) was parliament's rapporteur.
Human rights in Burma, Somalia and Iran
In its traditional end of session debate on human rights around the world the situation in Burma, Somalia and Iran were debated. MEPs condemned Burma's military Junta for its refusal to allow large scale international aid in the wake of the cyclone. In Somalia civil war and social breakdown has contributed to a humanitarian crisis. MEPs called on the EU's institutions and member countries to do all in their power to bring Somalia's warring factions together. On Iran, Members condemned Tehran's continuing use of public execution for young people under 18.
Russia, public health and support for sheep, goat farmers
Also Thursday: With the European Union due to hold a Summit with Russia at the end of the month MEPs passed a resolution identifying human rights conditions in Russia and Moscow's actions in Abkhazia and South Ossetia as particularly worrying. MEPs also passed a resolution emphasising their opposition to the import (mainly from the US) of chlorinated chicken into Europe on public health grounds. Finally, the House backed a report that calls for Europe's sheep and goat farmers to be given more financial support.
Towards a European Charter on the Rights of Energy Consumers Intelligent car technology take-up too slow, says European Parliament MEPs adopt legislation on higher safety standards for road infrastructure EU-Russia Summit Sheep, goats Chlorinated chicken
EN
1
PHOTO
20080623PHT32416.jpg
EN
2
PHOTO
20080616PHT31890.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/faces/live/live-video.jsp?language=en
EN
8
PHOTO
20080617PHT32054.jpg
EN
14
PHOTO
20080618PHT32263.jpg
EN
15
LINK
/news/expert/default_en.htm
EN
17
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/external_relations/russia/intro/index.htm
EN
19
PHOTO
20080618PHT32265.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080616STO31731 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080613STO31667 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A6-2008-0173 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080616IPR31871 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080616IPR31741 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080616STO31733 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080616IPR31743 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080616IPR31745 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080616IPR31747 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080613STO31667 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080616FCS31737 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A6-2008-0202 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080618IPR32116 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080619IPR32289 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080618IPR32138 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080618IPR32130 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080618IPR32120 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
