EU actions in Afghanistan are a "test case for international development assistance", say MEPs
External relations
2008-06-24 - 18:41
International reconstruction work in Afghanistan must be much more closely harmonised among all institutions involved, says the Foreign Affairs Committee in a report it adopted on Tuesday. It calls for a much larger political role for the EU in Afghanistan and stresses the need to maintain the distinction between military and civilian actions by all actors.
The own-initiative report by André Brie (EUL/NGL, DE), notes that "in Afghanistan, the EU is primarily known as a humanitarian organisation," but considers that "there is also a need for the EU to be seen as having a stronger political influence." To achieve this, the committee argues that "a major strengthening of political will and commitment is necessary," and that "this should be followed up not only by a willingness to provide additional combat troops in the most difficult areas, unrestricted by national caveats, but also by urgent and reinforced civil reconstruction efforts."
Winning the war while building the peace
The committee "supports the efforts of NATO forces to improve security in the country and tackle local and international terrorism, and considers the presence of these forces to be essential in order to ensure the country's future." Nevertheless, MEPs also say that "Afghanistan's security problems are more complex than just a war on terror and therefore they require more than a military solution."
The report is especially concerned about the effects of military actions on humanitarian aid and development. It notes that "although security and development are interdependent in Afghanistan, there is a clear line between military and humanitarian action that should be maintained." In particular, MEPs consider "that 'Operation Enduring Freedom' could be perceived as counterproductive if the military pressure on the insurgents is not matched by a strengthened political process through which the Afghan authorities reach out to all segments of the population that recognise the Constitution and lay down their weapons."
Media freedom, civil society, judiciary reform
The report notes that several areas are absolutely crucial for rebuilding Afghanistan. It underlines that "in order to overcome the prevailing 'culture of violence' within Afghan society, the international donor community should lend financial and technical support to local projects aimed at reconciliation." The committee also "emphasises that media freedom is essential in creating a democratic society," and "is very concerned about the rising number of attacks on journalists and calls on the Afghan authorities to seriously investigate these violations."
The report also draws attention to the fact that the mandate of the EU Police Mission (EUPOL) provides opportunities for it to support and train the Afghan Ministry of the Interior, a key priority for establishing the rule of law in Afghanistan. In this context, it strongly criticizes EU Member States for failing to contribute enough personnel to allow EUPOL to be deployed at full strength, and asks the Council to urgently examine this situation.
The Brie report was approved in committee with 51 votes in favour, 4 against and 3 abstentions.
2008-06-23 Committee on Foreign Affairs In the Chair Jacek SARYUSZ-WOLSKI EPP-ED PL
Procedure: own-initiative -- Plenary vote: July
20080623IPR32459 Committee on Foreign Affairs website
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=AFET
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
