Erasmus Mundus II: MEPs seek to facilitate access and sharpen focus on languages
Education
2008-06-24 - 15:20
To help enhance the quality of university teaching and attract the best foreign students and academics to Europe, MEPs are fine-tuning phase two of the EU's Erasmus Mundus university co-operation and student mobility programme (2009-13). A report adopted by the Education and Culture Committee on Tuesday says it should be made easier for Erasmus students from third countries to obtain visas, and that tuition fees should not be imposed in countries that do not currently charge them.
"Europe's higher education must be competitive to attract the many foreign university students and teachers who previously went to study in the United States. The quality of higher education, its ability to disseminate knowledge and expertise, will make Europe a must, thanks to the centres of excellence to be developed through this programme. The aim is not to organise the brain drain, but, on the contrary, to train the future generations of emerging countries", said said Parliament's rapporteur, Marielle De Sarnez (ALDE, FR), after Tuesday's first-reading vote on her report on the Erasmus Mundus II programme (2009-2013).
The €950 million Erasmus Mundus II programme aims to promote EU as a centre of academic excellence. It seeks to attract the best-qualified students and academics from third countries by offering high-quality master's or doctoral programmes created by consortia of universities from at least three different countries. The programme also seeks to create partnerships between universities within and beyond Europe, as well as promoting European higher education internationally.
MEPs suggest an "Erasmus Mundus" visa
For the second edition of the programme, Culture and Education Committee MEPs stress the need to focus on academic excellence and attracting the best students. To facilitate exchanges within the programme, they encourage Member States to consider introducing a specific visa for Erasmus Mundus beneficiaries. MEPs also stress that third country students should be informed of their study destination at least 6 months before their departure, to give them time to obtain visas.
Linguistic diversity and access for all
As linguistic diversity is a high priority for the Community in higher education, the report says that programmes should provide for the use of at least two EU languages, and the students should be offered language preparation. To strengthen relations between the EU and the Western Balkans, MEPs advocate promoting the participation of universities from these countries. MEPs also wish to facilitate access to the programme for persons from poor or minority backgrounds.
Tuition fees
As tuition fees are vary greatly among Member States, MEPs say that if a group of universities behind an Erasmus Mundus programme claim tuition fees, these fees should always comply with the national legislation, so that universities in countries like Denmark, where these fees are forbidden, are not excluded.
Phase two Innovations
The second phase of Erasmus Mundus (2009-13) is expected to start in 2009. Its key new features are the inclusion of joint doctoral programmes, more scholarships for European students and stepping up structural cooperation with third-country higher education institutions. Phase two also includes a mobility programme for all levels of higher education.
The new programme, which has a budget of about €950 million, consists of three actions:
creating joint master's degrees and doctorates (€450 million). These should be of a high academic standard, and each involve at least three European universities,
establishing partnerships between European and third country universities (managed by the European Commission directorates-general for external relations and external co-operation - about €460 million), as a basis for structural co-operation exchange and mobility, including a scholarship scheme, and
promoting European higher education (€16.5 million).
In the previous programme, 4424 scholarships were granted from 2004-2008 to students from third countries and 323 universities took part, 265 of them in Europe.
The rapporteur and the Council will now start negotiations for a first reading agreement.
2008-06-23 Committee on Culture and Education In the Chair Katerina BATZELI PES EL
Procedure: co-decision -- De Sarnez report approved with 33 votes in favour, 2 against and one abstention -- Plenary vote: September II or October
20080623IPR32467 Committee on Culture and Education website
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=CULT
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
