UN's Asma Jahangir speaks of need for understanding between religions
External relations
2008-06-23 - 14:52
Asma Jahangir on religious tolerance: "Europe has a leading role to play" Pakistani lawyer Asma Jahangir is the UN's Special Rapporteur on the Freedom of Religion or Belief. On 18 June she spoke to a plenary sitting of the European parliament where she delivered a call for great understanding between religions. Whilst in Strasbourg we caught up with her and asked her about the role. She speaks of the need to get people to interact naturally with one another and believes that the "dignity of human beings must lie at the centre of all freedoms".
Ms Jahangir, the term "intercultural dialogue" has a somewhat academic ring. What does it mean in practice and why should it matter for ordinary people?
I believe that we should not have just an academic approach to it, but an activist one. Intercultural dialogue is all about opening up spaces for a variety of diverse voices to be heard and diverse ways of living. It is not just about talking but also about interaction, it is creating an environment where you naturally interact with each other, rather than putting different races and religions in different "ghettos".
What can institutions such as the EU and the UN actually do to broaden intercultural dialogue (including between religions) and enhance religious tolerance in the world?
When people feel that they will not be heard or understood, they resort to violence. In this sense, interaction is very important in order to prevent violence. Europe, as well as the global community, should also give a very clear message that violence cannot be given impunity - especially to those governments inclined to give impunity to violence committed "in the name of religion". Europe has a leading role to play, as it is a largely democratic region and can thus show us how you can deepen democracy by being truly pluralistic.
What is the most important factor in promoting intercultural dialogue: education, family, international organisations or the media? Are than any other factors not mentioned?
They are all equally important. The media have played an important role and have very rarely had a negative role. Culture is another way of promoting intercultural dialogue. I talked this morning about how films in India have done a great service for public education on communal harmony. Education is also very important, because it is through education that people form their personalities. So is family: it is not just about upbringing, but about preventing families and communities from putting restrictions, beyond a certain level of which you cannot have exchanges.
For example, arranged marriages still exist and are often a taboo, even in many so-called civilised societies. It is also important that politicians are open and talk openly about things. The dignity of human beings must lie at the centre of all freedoms - whether it is religions freedom, freedom of expression or freedom from being exploited.
Today you cited former UN Secretary-General Boutros Boutros-Ghali: "We are, at one and the same time, the same and different". In what ways are we the same? How can the ordinary European citizens do to improve cultural understanding?
I worked in the past with one of the most underprivileged sections in the society and for them their dignity is as important as the dignity of anyone else who is more privileged. If you humiliate someone - regardless of colour or religion- the kind of feeling they have is universal. So in that way we are all the same. However, we can be different in our beliefs, our approaches to life and our spiritual ideas. So we are the same in many respects, but also different.
Europe is a very privileged region and citizens have a lot of skills. The citizens have first of all to be the leaders of their political leadership rather than the other way round. Ordinary citizens are the ones that should be showing the direction, bringing forward the right role models even if it means taking unpopular stands. It is more possible for citizens in Europe to do it than elsewhere.
It is sometimes said that conflict is interesting while harmony is boring. How can the media be persuaded to pay attention to intercultural dialogue as well as to religious violence?
The media will bring to the people what the people want to see. If there is a conflict in dialogue, the media will pick it up. If it is a boring dialogue or a dialogue where people are batting each other's back, the media is not likely to pick it up. When people have done creative work, the media has in general picked it up. Films have been made on even very small local movements that have done heroic work.
So you are optimistic about the future?
I am optimistic because wherever I have been I have seen that the vast majority of people are willing to live in diversity. It is often a minority that has taken all the others hostage. Therefore I think that when governments and public opinion makers make strategies, they have to give voice to that majority that is against violence, against discrimination and against religious persecution.
20080623STO32401 European Year of Intercultural Dialogue EP Culture Committee Focus: 2008: Year of Intercultural Dialogue More articles dealing with culture
EN
1
PHOTO
20080623PHT32410.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.interculturaldialogue2008.eu/
EN
3
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=CULT
EN
5
LINK
/news/public/documents_par_theme/906/default_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080211FCS20948 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
