MEPs and their memo to President Sarkozy
Institutions
2008-06-25 - 13:11
France and its President Nicolas Sarkozy take over the EU Presidency on 1 July Tuesday 1 July sees Nicolas Sarkozy's France take on the Presidency of the European Union. It will put them in the Chair of meetings of EU Ministers until the end of the year. The Irish "No" vote to the Lisbon treaty is probably not the backdrop Mr Sarkozy would have liked to what is being billed as an ambitious Presidency. We asked the leaders of Parliament's main political groups and some French MEPs what they think the French Presidency should concentrate on over the next six months.
For the French leader of the centre right EPP-ED group Joseph Daul, "the French presidency must unblock the process of ratification of the Treaty of Lisbon after the Irish no. Europe needs this treaty. The priorities of the French presidency coincide with the priorities of our political group: security for Europeans, the fight against terrorism, better control of immigration and greater social cohesion".
Mr Daul added, "another problem is food security in the context of rising grain prices. It is also important that Europe adopt a policy of defence."
Martin Schulz, the leader of the Socialist PSE group, expects the French Presidency will do its best to "get the EU out of its current stagnation".
Alain Lamassoure of the EPP-ED group noted that "a year ago, the future French presidency promised to be another highlight, to enable Europe to continue its momentum in preparing the agenda of the new institutions born in Lisbon. Now with the financial, oil and food crises and the political uncertainty created by the failure of the referendum in Ireland in June the French presidency is in a completely different climate."
French Socialist Guy Bono called on the Presidency "to establish a social agenda on issues such as energy, employment and purchasing power".
Mr Bono went on to call for a reconnection with people. "Most European citizens are not aware of the achievements made possible thanks to the policies and EU funding and, conversely too often unaware that anything that comes out of Brussels is also because countries wanted it".
Graham Watson - leader of the Liberal ALDE group told us that "France is gearing up for an efficient term at the helm of the EU with climate change, immigration, defence and agriculture high on the legislative agenda."
He went on to say, "however, presidencies are often blown off course by the unforeseen. France will inherit the explosive mix of rocketing fuel and food prices in the context of an on-going financial crisis. It is also tasked with charting the way ahead after the Irish "No" to the Lisbon Treaty".
Francis Wurtz for GUE/NGL group said "the French presidency will have a heavy responsibility to prepare the European Council in October, which is supposed to provide answers to the Irish no. In this regard, the experience of the past three years must serve as a lesson: trying to ignore the symptoms of the crisis of confidence revealed by the French and Dutch no."
For French Green Marie Anne Isler Béguin , "France must convince Europeans that the European Union still has some meaning after the Irish vote. With the energy crisis afflicting the full brunt of our citizens, the package "Energy-Climate" is in my view the flagship of the French presidency. I expect an ambitious proposal to conserve energy, promote renewable energy and reduce CO2 emissions".
For the Irish perspective Brian Crowley - co-Chair of the Union Europe for the Nations said that "key issues which must be dealt with by the French Presidency of the European Union include defining the EU response to rising food and oil prices and putting in place new measures to communicate to the citizens of Europe".
Mr Crowley stressed the importance of "completing an EU climate change package, leading the global effort to implement the millennium development goals, building peace in the Balkans, promoting a strong EU neighbourhood policy and continuing close political dialogue between the European Union and China, India and America respectively".
20080625STO32670 French Presidency Council of the European Union
EN
1
PHOTO
20080624PHT32613.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.ue2008.fr/
EN
3
LINK
http://consilium.europa.eu/cms3_fo/showPage.asp?lang=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
