Zimbabwe: MEPs call for transitional government
External relations
2008-06-25 - 12:53
A transitional government of national unity would help end the climate of terror sweeping Zimbabwe since the first round of the presidential elections on 29 March. This government should also have a mandate to organise fresh presidential elections, says a draft resolution adopted on Wednesday by the EP Development Committee.
The government of national unity, which would include members of the MDC, the party of Morgan Tsvangirai, and members of ZANU-PF, should also help to stabilise the economy, resolve the humanitarian crisis, draft a new constitution and create the right conditions for fresh presidential elections.
Lift restrictions on humanitarian aid
MEPs call on Robert Mugabe's government to lift all restrictions on the delivery of aid, in the wake of the orders given to humanitarian aid organisations to suspend their operations.
The EU is urged to channel its aid through local and international NGOs without passing via the Harare authorities. Around two million people in Zimbabwe are under threat of famine, poverty and disease.
Beef up sanctions against Mugabe regime
The Council is called upon to tighten up the sanctions against members of the Mugabe regime and others responsible for grave violations of human rights, if mediation efforts by the Southern African Development Community are not accepted and the state-sponsored violence is not ended, and to press for sanctions to be adopted at UN level, including an arms embargo.
The draft resolution also calls on EU Member States to reject international recognition should Robert Mugabe be sworn in as President for another term. China and Libya are urged to cease their support for the Harare regime.
Frijthof Schmidt (Greens/EFA, DE,) stressed that it was time "to stop the double-talk with China and South Africa", while Glenys Kinnock (PES, UK), argued that "the mediation embarked upon by Thabo Mbeki, who is proposing a transitional government headed by Mugabe, is not an option that the EU should endorse".
During the committee debate, MEPs highlighted the lack of a firm response to the situation from the Council and Commission. Gay Mitchell (EPP-ED, IE), suggested inviting the Ambassador of Zimbabwe in order to hand him the resolution in person.
The second round of the presidential elections is due to take place this Friday, 27 June.
2008-06-24 Committee on Development Chair Josep BORRELL FONTELLES PES ES
Procedure: resolution -- Plenary vote: July (Strasbourg)
20080623IPR32488 Webpage of Development Committee
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=DEVE
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
