Working time directive takes centre stage in talks with French Presidency
Institutions
2008-06-26 - 08:48
MEPs went to the heart of debate on the working time directive during a discussion on Wednesday with French employment minister Xavier Bertrand, who presented the French Presidency's priorities to the EP Employment and Social Affairs Committee. Fresh legislative proposals and relaunching the European social agenda, two of the presidency's objectives, were also discussed.
"The social dimension of Europe is crucial", said Mr Bertrand, adding that following the Irish vote, "we need a practical, protective Europe which is close to our citizens".
The minister stressed the need to reach a compromise on the proposed directive on the portability of supplementary pension rights, in addition to those reached on working time and temporary work. He also announced plans for new legislation on European works councils, discrimination and reconciling work and family life.
The French Presidency wishes to "renew the European social agenda" around "four planks: return to employment, flexicurity, solidarity on the internal market - with a roadmap for social services of general interest - and the fight against poverty and discrimination", he said.
Working hours directive
Mr Bertrand welcomed the Council compromise on the working time and temporary work proposals, which he said had previously become "symbolic of the bogged-down social dialogue". On working time, he stressed that progress had been made compared with the previous situation, since the compromise "caps weekly working hours at 60-65 rather than 78". On the "opt-out" clause, which permits exceptions to the 48-hour limit on the working week and on-call time, "the compromise offers additional safeguards", but the "balance of power in the Council is insufficient to enable us to put an end to the opt-out", said the minister.
This view was not shared by EP rapporteur Alejandro Cercas (PES, ES), who "sees no improvement in this compromise". "The facts are there - you have accepted a directive with a ceiling of 60-65 hours per quarter, which means workers will be able to work 48 hours one week and 78 hours the next. What is more, this compromise does not require a review of the opt-out", he declared.
Bernard Lehideux (ALDE, FR), asked the minister why the French government had changed its position on this directive, and said he would "rather have seen France in the abstainers' camp". "We sought to achieve maximum progress. We were not the only country to change position, and there were no votes against this compromise", replied the minister.
Promote returning to work
Ilda Figueiredo (GUE/NGL, PT) asked Mr Bertrand "how we can promote returning to work?", given that "the jobs created these days are precarious, leading to poverty situations". This concern was echoed by Philip Bushill-Matthews (EPP-ED UK), who would like to see how the French presidency plans to "encourage employment". "I believe in the Europe's flexicurity mission", which aims to make it easier for Member States to take up common flexicurity principles", replied the minister, who stressed that "social progress is inseparable from economic progress".
Finally, replying to a question by Anne Van Lancker (PES, BE) and Elisabeth Lynne (ALDE, UK) on the growing problem of "so-called 'self-employed' workers", Mr Bertrand said he would like to clarify the notion of "autonomous" employees.
2008-06-24 Committee on Employment and Social Affairs Président Jan ANDERSSON PES SE
20080625IPR32706 Employment and social affairs committee web pages
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do;jsessionid=89E1C65DA51AA736D0855C3D9639BFBA.node1?body=EMPL&language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
