1-4 July online at the European Parliament
Institutions
2008-06-30 - 10:26
Events at the Arc de Triomphe on Tuesday begin France's 6 month EU Presidency The management of the EU's borders and how to feed the world's growing population are just two issues being discussed this week in Brussels. Ahead of the plenary sitting of the Parliament in Strasbourg which opens on 7 July, Committees and the political groups will be meeting to discuss a number of issues. Also this week Europe's Economics Commissioner Joaquín Almunia will give his assessment of the state of the economy. You can follow the events this week here on the europarl website.
The management of the EU's borders and how to feed the world's growing population are just two issues being discussed this week in Brussels. Ahead of the plenary sitting of the Parliament in Strasbourg which opens on 7 July, Committees and the political groups will be meeting to discuss a number of issues. Also this week Europe's Economics Commissioner Joaquín Almunia will give his assessment of the state of the economy. You can follow the events this week here on the europarl website.
Europe's borders under discussion
On Monday this week MPs from around the EU will join MEPs from the Civil Liberties Committee for a round-table debate on management of the EU’s borders. Speakers will discuss current and future challenges for the management of the EU borders, as well as data protection issues.
Also on Monday, three days before the ECB decides whether to raise interest rates, Economics Commissioner Joaquín Almunia will give his assessment of the EU economy to the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee. Issues to be discussed include the current economic situation - in particular oil price developments - and policy initiatives responding to higher commodity prices.
EP hosts conference of food security
On Tuesday President Pöttering will attend a ceremony at the Arc de Triomphe in Paris with French President Nicolas Sarkozy , Commission president José Manuel Barroso and Slovenian Prime Minister Janez Janša to launch the French presidency of the EU.
It is expected that energy issues will be at the forefront of the agenda for France's tenure as Chair of meetings in the Council.
On Thursday President Pöttering will welcome participants to the Parliament in Brussels for a conference on global food security entitled " Who will feed the world?" The increase in agricultural prices highlights the acute issue of food security. How to double the world's agricultural production by 2050 to feed a growing population while preserving the future of the planet will be among the central questions. We will report on this event on Friday.
Preparations for Strasbourg
This week sees the 7 political groups hold policy meetings and last minute discussions ahead of next week's plenary session in Strasbourg. The sitting of 7-10 July will see MEPs debate the gas market, food additives, air ticket pricing and the inclusion of aviation in the emissions trading system. The week also sees an address from President Nicolas Sarkozy as France takes over the EU's rotating Presidency.
20080627STO32875 EP Agenda Who will feed the world?
EN
1
PHOTO
20080627PHT32926.jpg
EN
3
LINK
http://www.parlonsagriculture.com/content/page.view/-/code/feedtheworld
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20082700AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
