The Week Ahead 7-13 July 2008
Institutions
2008-07-04 - 10:44
Plenary Session – Strasbourg
Nicolas Sarkozy. The French President will debate the priorities of his country’s presidency of the Council with MEPs and join EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering for a press conference (Thursday).
Gas market. Parliament votes on the extent to which gas suppliers should be separated from gas distribution networks, as the remaining legislation in the energy package comes to first reading (debate Tuesday, vote Wednesday).
Aviation/carbon. The inclusion of aviation in the EU’s emissions trading system looks set for second-reading approval after an agreement on the details between Council and Parliament representatives (debate and vote Tuesday).
Jean-Claude Trichet. The President of the European Central Bank will debate Parliament’s annual report on the ECB, in the context of rising prices and the ECB’s decision to raise interest rates (debate and vote Wednesday).
Food additives. A package of reforms to EU rules on food additives has a second reading debate, with MEPs seeking to improve consumer protection and streamline procedures (debate Monday, vote Tuesday).
Air ticket pricing. The price advertised for air travel should include all taxes and charges in future, with MEPs voting at second reading on new rules to ensure clear information (debate Tuesday, vote Wednesday).
Foreign Affairs. Zimbabwe and China will both be the subject of debates with Commission and Council (Wednesday, vote on resolutions Thursday), with MEPs also considering a report on Afghanistan (debate and vote Tuesday).
EU enlargement. Parliament will set out its view on the strategy for future enlargement of the EU (debate and vote Wednesday).
Telecoms. The Industry Committee and Internal Market Committees will vote on the telecom package (Monday).
Euromed-Paris. President Pöttering will chair a meeting of the Bureau of the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly in Paris (Saturday), before addressing the summit of the Barcelona Process-Union for the Mediterranean (Sunday).
20080704IPR33382 For details of all the week's events, see "The Agenda"
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20082800AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
