Selected highlights of the Strasbourg plenary session 7-10 July include:
Institutions
2008-07-07 - 18:10
Sarkozy to launch French Presidency on Thursday 10 July at 10am in Strasbourg, Zimbabwe: MEPs call for transitional government, Liberalising the gas market - Industry Committee backs Commission compromise, Modernising the rules on food additives and labelling of azo-dyes, All-inclusive air fares just around the corner Safety of small children in plane seats, MEPs and Council Presidency reach deal on airline emissions, ECB praised for reaction to financial turmoil, caution advised on rate rises.
Sarkozy to launch French Presidency at 10am on Thursday 10 July
French President Nicolas Sarkozy will launch the French Presidency of the EU at 10am on Thursday 10 July in Strasbourg in a speech to MEPs and the European Commission. The four French presidency priorities are likely to be: immigration, climate change, European defence and agricultural policy. France will hold the presidency of the European Union, on the second semester of 2008 (Jul 1 - Dec 31). France will also have to deal with the consequences of the Irish No vote.
Liberalising the gas market - Industry Committee backs Commission compromise
The Industry, Research and Energy Committee is supporting the liberalisation of the gas market along the lines of a recent Commission compromise proposal, which aimed to address concerns of countries opposed to "full ownership unbundling" (the complete separation of gas suppliers from gas transmission networks) without going as far as the so-called "third option" supported by those countries.
European Strategic Energy Technology Plan needed to achieve 2020 energy climate objectives, say MEPs in the Industry Committee
MEPs in the Industry and Energy Committee say energy efficiency needs to be included in the European Strategic Energy Technology (SET) Plan in an own initiative report by Jerzy BUZEK (EPP-ED, PL). The report also makes recommendations to the Commission's SET Plan on the inclusion of intensified research into biofuels, and supports the plan to include research in nuclear power and carbon capture and storage (CCS).
Modernising the rules on food additives and labelling of azo-dyes
EU rules for authorising food additives, flavourings and enzymes will be updated and simplified provided Parliament endorses an informal second- reading agreement reached between EP and Council negotiators on a package of four draft regulations. The new procedures will assist the free movement of food within the EU and also give better health and consumer protection, including clearer labelling of certain food colourings. The new "common authorisation procedure" in a report by Åsa WESTLUND (PES, SE) will contribute to the free movement of food within the Community and to the protection of human health and consumer interests. A second report by Åsa WESTLUND (PES, SE) deals with additives such as sweeteners, colourings, preservatives, antioxidants, emulsifiers, gelling agents and packaging gases.
The report by Mojca DRČAR MURKO (ALDE, SI) concerns flavourings and certain food ingredients with flavouring properties. The food industry uses many natural and artificial flavourings, about 2,600 of which are currently registered. As with additives, under the new rules, enzymes will be authorized only if they do not mislead the consumer. The compromise specifies that misleading the consumer relates to the freshness, nature and quality of ingredients and the naturalness and nutritional quality of the product. Avril DOYLE (EPP-ED, IE) drafted the EP report on enzymes.
All-inclusive air fares just around the corner
Air travellers will soon be able to see at a glance exactly what they have to pay for their tickets, assuming Parliament approves new EU rules in Strasbourg next week. Air fares as displayed will have to include all taxes, fees and charges added to the basic ticket price and known at the time of publication.
Safety of small children in plane seats
MEPs and the Commission will discuss ways of improving the safety of children's seating arrangements in aircraft, particularly in the event of a crash.. Children under two years of age are not entitled to a seat of their own and the two commonest methods of protecting them - loop belts and lapholding - are regarded as unsatisfactory.
Europe-wide authorisation of railway rolling stock, but heritage railways exempted
Parliament is set to nod through an agreement reached with the Council on the EU-wide approval of different types of railway rolling stock. Under the new legislation, any rolling stock already approved for use in one Member State will have to be accepted in the other states. This will cut red tape and should boost the development of rail transport in Europe.
European Railway Agency
For the Rail Safety Directive to work, centralised procedures and data will be needed. This is the task of the European Railway Agency. Under the amended regulation on the European Railway Agency, this body is mandated to develop a reference document with information on all the national rules on the placing in service of rolling stock. It will also play a coordinating role in efforts to streamline the number of national safety rules.
Public support, good neighbourhood policy and greater institutional efficiency needed for continued success in EU enlargement
The Foreign Affairs Committee reiterates its “firm commitment to all candidate countries and to those which have been given clear membership prospects,” but also notes that "future enlargements will require more stable democratic support from the EU’s population," in a report it tabled to plenary. It also says that more substantive policies are needed to bridge the gap between the Union’s neighbourhood and enlargement policies.
China after the earthquake and ahead of the Olympics
MEPs, the Commission and Council will debate the situation in China following the earthquake that killed tens of thousands of people in May, and ahead of this summer's Olympic Games in Beijing. There will be a vote on a resolution. Parliament has recently adopted resolutions on both these topics. In the resolution of 22 May on the earthquake, all political groups expressed their sympathy and condolences, and called on the Commission to help alleviate the humanitarian disaster.
EU actions in Afghanistan are a "test case for international development assistance" say MEPs
International reconstruction work in Afghanistan must be much more closely harmonised among all institutions involved, says the Foreign Affairs Committee in a report. It calls for a much larger political role for the EU in Afghanistan and stresses the need to maintain the distinction between military and civilian actions by all actors.
Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails
Luisa MORGANTINI (GUE/NGL, IT) and a number of other MEPs will be asking both the Council and Commission questions on Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails. In the last report on the situation of human rights in the Palestinian territories, the UN Special Rapporteur, John Dugard, states that 'since 1967 over 700,000 Palestinians have been imprisoned. At present, there are some 11,000 prisoners in Israeli jails, a number which includes 376 children, 118 women, 44 members of the Palestinian Legislative Council and some 800 administrative detainees.
ECB praised for reaction to financial turmoil, caution advised on rate rises
The European Central Bank has done “excellent work” in managing the financial turmoil, enhancing its reputation, says the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee in its annual report on the ECB. MEPs also call for the ECB to monitor exchange rates and take action if necessary, and to be cautious about raising interest rates to avoid endangering growth. This report will now be debated by the full Parliament and with the participation of ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet.
Investigate environmental risks of Nord Stream pipeline
The planned Nord Stream pipeline under the Baltic Sea is just one of many infrastructure projects needed to meet the EU's growing demand for natural gas. Its likely environmental impact should be carefully investigated, and possible alternative overland routes should be assessed first, says an own-initiative report proposed by the Petitions Committee. MEPs also want the EU to play a bigger role in supervising the project.
MEPs and Council Presidency reach deal on airline emissions
Following a series of meetings between MEPs and the Slovenian Presidency of the Council, the two sides have agreed details of how to include aviation in the EU Emissions Trading System. The compromise agreement reached still needs to be formally endorsed by the full Council and is now being put to a second reading vote at Parliament's July plenary session in Strasbourg.
The EU answer to the challenge of sovereign wealth funds
Sovereign Wealth Funds, government-owned investment vehicles that invest surplus state funds, are growing rapidly; so also are the political controversy and the potential risks they give rise to, according to a question to the Council and the Commission from the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee.
MEPs' reflections on the Commission's 2009 Preliminary Draft Budget
In response to the Commission's 2009 Preliminary Draft Budget, MEPs in the Budgets Committee call for finances to be available for the EU to respond to new financial needs, for the budget to include a proper reflection of the climate change priority and for the budget to be easier for EU citizens to understand.
Airbus/Boeing WTO disputes - MEPs to quiz European Commission
Helmuth MARKOV (GUE/NGL, DE), on behalf of the Committee on International Trade, will be asking the Commission questions on the Airbus/Boeing WTO disputes.
Reliable space assets needed for an independent European Security and Defence Policy
The European Union needs a common approach to defending its interests in space, says an own-initiative report by Security and Defence Subcommittee Chair Karl von WOGAU (EPP-ED, DE). The report underlines "the need for space assets in order that the political and diplomatic activities of the European Union may be based on independent, reliable and complete information”.
Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the EC and Mauritania
The Fisheries Committee adopted with 19 votes in favour and 2 against a report by Carmen FRAGA ESTÉVEZ (EPP-ED, ES) on the conclusion of the Protocol setting out the fishing opportunities and financial contribution provided for in the Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the European Community and Mauritania for the period 1 August 2008 to 31 July 2012. The fishing opportunities are allocated among Spain, Italy, Portugal, Greece and France.
Zimbabwe: MEPs to call for transitional government in resolution?
MEPs will vote on a resolution on the situation in Zimbabwe which says a transitional government of national unity would help end the climate of terror sweeping Zimbabwe since the presidential elections campaign started. This government should also have a mandate to organise fresh presidential elections, says a draft resolution by the EP Development Committee. The resolution also asks to tighten up sanctions against members of the Mugabe regime. The government of national unity, which would include members of the MDC, the party of Morgan Tsvangirai, and members of ZANU-PF, should also help to stabilise the economy, resolve the humanitarian crisis, draft a new constitution and create the right conditions for fresh presidential elections.
MEPs to call for more involvement by Parliament with the approval of the Commission
In a report drafted by Andrew DUFF (ALDE, UK), MEPs in the Constitutional Affairs Committee propose amendments to the European Parliament's Rules of Procedure to make "the entire college of the Commission subject to Parliament's vote of consent".
New rules on written questions
Richard CORBETT (PES, UK) will be putting forward a report on new rules for written questions. If endorsed by plenary, this report will introduce new guidelines for MEPs wanting to table a written question to either the Council or the Commission. According to the proposed changes, written questions will have to fall within EU's competences, be concise and not contain offensive language.
Formation of EP political group threshold to change?
The Constitutional Affairs' committee recommends rejecting a proposal to raise the thresholds for creating a political group. An amendment is proposed to introduce new rules on the possibility for a political group to continue to exist if it falls below the required threshold, under certain conditions. The report will be voted on Wednesday. Richard CORBETT (PES, UK) is again the rapporteur.
Human rights resolutions
The session ends with three debates and votes on resolutions relating to human rights around the world, on this occasion the topics are: the presumed presence of communal graves in the Indian administered part of Kashmir, the situation in Bangladesh and the death penalty, notably the case of Troy Davis (USA).
20080704IPR33451 Briefing - 7-10 July 2008 - Strasbourg plenary session Final draft agenda - 7-10 July 2008 - Strasbourg plenary session Watch the session on-line
EN
2
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?reference=2008-07&language=EN
EN
3
LINK
/eplive/public/default_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080624BRI32584 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
