Tuesday's plenary: Afghanistan, sovereign wealth funds, aircraft in ETS
Institutions
2008-07-09 - 12:44
Rebuilding Afghanistan: MEPs want the EU to play a larger role Efforts of the international community to stabilise Afghanistan were debated by MEPs Tuesday. Law and order and the level of humanitarian assistance were just aspects that were touched upon. Members called for the distinction between military and civilian actions to be continued. The day also saw debates on the growing power of sovereign wealth funds and the impact they could have on the European economy. In a key vote MEPs backed the inclusion of aircraft in the EU's emissions trading scheme.
Stabilising in Afghanistan debated
The House debated a report on the situation in Afghanistan. The report noted the bleak background to EU activities in that country - notably a rise in terrorist acts and a continued insurgency, a seriously deteriorating security situation and increased opium production.
It went on to point out that despite the efforts of the international community and the partial success as regards civil reconstruction, more than half of the inhabitants of Afghanistan are living below the poverty line and the country's economy is one of the weakest in the world, with 40% unemployment.
The debate dealt with the military situation on the ground and the state of humanitarian assistance. The debate also touched on law and order issues - in particular the EU's assistance programme to the Afghan police force. The policy of the United States towards poppy production and relations with Pakistan were also touched upon.
There was widespread recognition from around the House that the lasting effects of the wars that have taken place in the country: millions of victims, refugees and the material destruction of large tracts of the countryside.
German MEP André Brie (GUE/NGL) drafted the report but subsequently withdrew his name over the call for additional troops from EU countries voted by the House. He was one of several speakers to refer to the 7 July terrorist attack to the Indian embassy in Kabul: "The situation has gone worse over the last three years. There is a lot of corruption and criminality. The rule of law is poor" he said.
At the end of the debate, Parliament adopted the report calling for a larger political role for the EU in Afghanistan and stressing the need to maintain the distinction between military and civilian actions by all actors. Parliament also called on the US government to abandon its crop eradication policy and notably the use of hazardous chemicals for aerial sprayings.
Sovereign wealth funds: MEPs call for more openness
The issue of "sovereign wealth funds" was debated by the House Tuesday. Such funds are state owned investment funds that are frequently generated by oil revenue. Concerns have been raised as to the long-term implications for Europe of this flow of new investment from outside the EU.
MEPs called for more openness and clarity about how the funds operate, a global code of conduct and an analysis of the functioning of global financial markets. French Socialist MEP Pervenche Berès heads parliament's Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee, she opened the debate and spoke about the growing concern in SWF due to "the emergence of large funds from the "oil monarchies" and "other countries with large trade surpluses". MEPs vote Wednesday on a resolution on the issue.
Votes on aircraft emissions and Nord stream gas pipeline
The day saw two eagerly awaited votes, which could have far-reaching implications:
Aircraft emissions: Parliament voted legislation to include aviation in the EU Emissions Trading System (ETS). This would affect all flights starting and or landing in Europe (including intercontinental flights) to be included in the ETS from 1 January 2012.
Baltic gas pipeline: in response to citizens' petitions concerning the planned Gazprom "Nord Stream" gas pipeline linking Russia and Germany via the Baltic Sea, MEPs called for far more thorough environmental impact assessment of the pipeline by the Commission.
Read our separate reports on this website.
20080627STO32898 Watch live Report on Stabilisation of Afghanistan Parliament's Press Service MEPs to debate putting aircraft emissions in trading scheme Draft resolution on sovereign wealth funds
EN
1
PHOTO
20080704PHT33489.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/faces/live/live-video.jsp?language=en
EN
4
LINK
/news/expert/default_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A6-2008-0269 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080707STO33537 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT MOTION B6-2008-0304 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
