Strasbourg - view from the press conferences
Institutions
2008-07-09 - 18:51
Press conferences by the political groups are a feature of Strasbourg Part of the Strasbourg routine is for the political groups to hold press conferences to meet the press, set out their positions on matters before the House and field questions on the hot issues of the moment. Over Tuesday and Wednesday the press conference room fills with journalists in search of a interesting reply or a good quote. We were there too, listening in and picking up points of interest. This week French plans for the EU, the Olympics and Roma were on people's minds.
French presidency of the Union
As Parliament readies itself to receive President Sarkozy on Thursday morning, prospects for the French presidency of the EU were much discussed.
Joseph Daul , leader of the centre right EPP-ED group (288 MEPs) said the French priorities for the Presidency of the Union matches his group’s ones. "Of course, solving the Lisbon crisis is the key. We want the Treaty to be ratified by all and then see how Ireland can go on with the process. We don’t want a two-speed Europe" he said.
Martin Schulz , the leader of the rival Socialist PES group (216 MEPs) said that "the PSE expects the French presidency to be at the service of the Union - rather than of France."
Francis Wurtz of the GUE/NGL group (41 MEPs) is expecting "a lot of verbal demagogy", coupled with "orthodoxy on basic issues". Turning to initiatives on social policy he said "you can look but you won't find any".
The leader of the ALDE group (100 MEPs) Graham Watson touched upon a proposed Mediterranean Union - another French presidency brainchild. He welcomed any attempt to restore the "moribund Barcelona process".
Olympics - controversy over whether to attend opening ceremony
Many journalists were looking ahead to the summer - and in particular the Beijing Olympics, inquiring about the political groups' stance towards them.
Referring to the Olympics Graham Watson said that Mr Sarkozy in his role as President in office should not attend the opening ceremony - regretting that there was no official EU line on China.
Elmar Brok from the EPP-ED defended Mr Sarkozy’s decision to attend the opening of the Olympic Games, recalling that even the Dalai Lama called on people to go there. Mr Sarkozy will ask the Council about a common position, he said.
For the Greens Daniel Cohn Bendit condemned as "scandalous" the attitude of fellow groups the EPP-ED and PSE toward China. He said that concessions promised to Tibet by Beijing for good behaviour over the Olympics would come to nothing.
Situation of Roma
Much press attention was focused on the subject of a debate held on Monday on "the creation of a Roma fingerprints database in Italy" based on an oral question.
For the Greens/EFA Monica Frassoni launched into a passionate attack on the "emergency approach" she thought the Italian government was adopting. Pressed by a journalists about whether this was just an Italian question, she said it raised broader issues of "ethnicity and religion" and that the European Parliament was a good forum to consider these.
In the PES press conference, group leader Martin Schulz said he had spoke to Italian Foreign Minister Franco Frattini by phone who had assured him Rome would not take steps either against EU law or the Italian constitution.
At the UEN press conference, Roberta Angelilli described the current situation in Italy as a "social emergency" and called the remarks of some MEPs on the subject "misleading". She told journalists that no ethnic groups will be included in gathering of information and said the collection of data was "not just fingerprints", but would be used to ensure rights to protection and education facilities.
The other one of parliament's political groups, the Independence and Democracy group did not hold an official press conference.
20080708STO33739 Press service
EN
1
PHOTO
20080704PHT33491.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/news/expert/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
