Wednesday in plenary: China, Trichet, Galileo
Institutions
2008-07-10 - 13:16
ECB President Jean Claude Trichet presents the 2007 report Relations with China were discussed Wednesday with many MEPs urging greater dialogue between Beijing and the Dalai Lama. EP President Pöttering also confirmed he will not attend the Olympic opening ceremony. Wednesday also saw Europe's top Banker Jean Claude Trichet discuss the ECB's 2007 annual report with MEPs. The fate of Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails and the EU's enlargement process were also discussed. Votes on gas market liberalisation and clarity of air fares were also held.
China: MEPs discuss human rights, Olympics and Tibet
In the debate on China many MEPs spoke of their shock at the recent earthquake in China which claims thousands of lives. Turning to political matters many Members deplored human rights abuses such as torture and ill-treatment. A few MEPs spoke of the "improvement" they had noticed in the human rights situation in the country.
Many Members referred to the situation in Tibet and urged dialogue between the Dalai Lama and Beijing. They also called for improvements in the human rights situation. Many MEPs also called for the EU and China to continue to pursue closer links across many aspects of their relations including trade, cultural issues and human rights dialogue.
Several MEPs were critical of the decision of French President Nicolas Sarkozy to attend the opening ceremony of the Olympic Games (in his official role as President in Office of the Council).
On Wednesday Parliament's President Hans-Gert Pöttering announced on Wednesday that he would not attend the opening ceremony of the Beijing Olympics. He cited Parliament's resolution of 10 April and a lack of any progress in talks between representatives of the Dalai Lama and Chinese authorities.
Trichet outlines 2007 European Central Bank report to MEPs
Europe's central banker Jean Claude Trichet was in parliament earlier to present the 2007 annual report of the European Central Bank. His handling of the recent financial crisis was supported by representatives of the main groups. Swedish Liberal MEP Olle Schmidt - who acted as parliament's rapporteur on the issue said that "the ECB has the wind in its sails, pressure had been put on the Bank due to turmoil in the markets and inflationary pressures. We should be grateful that the ECB was there to tackle inflation."
Enlargement a "success" but many challenges ahead
Many MEPs spoke about past enlargements being a "success", the importance of enlargement, and about future challenges - notably given ratification complications with the Lisbon treaty.
The report was drafted by German MEP Brok who told the House that "we want to continue with the peace and prosperity that the EU has achieved and continue to enlarge as much as we can". A vote will be held on the report on Thursday.
Palestinian prisoners seen in a wider context
A debate was also held on the issue of the plight of Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails. The oral question tabled by a cross party group of MEPs noted that "there are some 11,000 prisoners in Israeli jails, a number which includes 376 children, 118 women".
Speaking in response to the issue representatives of the Commission and Council said the matter of the Palestinian prisoners should be evaluated and dealt with within the wider context of the solution to be found in the Middle East conflict.
Galileo deployment signed into law
EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering and the representative of the Council Jean-Pierre Jouyet signed on Wednesday the EU regulation on the deployment of Galileo. The new European satellite radio navigation system should be operational by 2013.
Key votes: Among other items, the House approved on Wednesday:
transparency in airline charges
gas market liberalisation
report by Austrian MEP Reinhard Rack (EPP-ED) on urban mobility
report by Olle Schmidt (ALDE) on the ECB annual report for 2007
resolution on Sovereign Wealth Funds
report by Jean Lambert (Greens/EFA, UK) on (proposal of a regulation on) the coordination of social security systems (after debate on Wednesday)
20080627STO32899 Plenary streaming ECB praised for reaction to financial turmoil, caution advised on rate rises Results of votes on Wednesday 9 July 2008 Agenda and documents of Wednesday
EN
1
PHOTO
20080704PHT33473.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/faces/live/live-video.jsp?language=en
EN
4
LINK
/news/expert/tous_les_epvotes/default/default_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080708IPR33689 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT AGENDA 20080709 SIT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
