July Strasbourg round-up: ETS, Sarkozy, gas, China
Institutions
2008-07-14 - 16:01
"Bonjour" - Nicolas Sarkozy waves as he arrives in Strasbourg The July session opened with President Hans-Gert Pöttering leading the tributes to the release of former hostage Ingrid Betancourt. The week also saw debates on China, Afghanistan and Palestinians in Israeli jails. Key votes on putting aviation in the Emissions Trading Scheme and liberalising Europe's gas market were also taken. Finally, the last day of the session saw French President Nicolas Sarkozy lay out his plans for his country's presidency of the EU over the next six months.
The opening debates saw the controversy over alleged Italian plans to fingerprint Roma children being debated. MEPs expressed concern that the measures could breach some fundamental rights whilst others defended the Italian government saying that some opposition Italian MEPs were using Parliament to make domestic political capital.
Also Monday MEPs gave their first assessment of the 2009 budget with many calling for the climate change priorities to be reflected in it.
Tuesday saw the situation in Afghanistan debated with many MEPs calling for the EU to play a larger role. In a key vote MEPs backed including aircraft emissions in the EU's Emissions Trading Scheme by 2012.
Wednesday saw MEPs vote to support liberalisation of Europe's gas industry through the separation of supply and production. Relations with China were also debated with calls for dialogue between the Dalai Lama and Beijing to be supported. MEPs also called for the European Union and China to building closer political, economic and cultural relations.
The day also saw a debate on the number of Palestinians held in Israeli jails (some 11,000), with MEPs calling on Israel to respect international law.
Thursday saw French President Nicolas Sarkozy address the House at the start of France's presidency of the Union. He stressed the importance of Europe developing distinct policies on climate change, energy, immigration and defence.
This has been just a taster of what happened in Strasbourg. For a full day-by-day round up see the links below.
20080627FCS32895
Monday: Ingrid Betancourt, budget 2009 and Roma
MEPs welcomed the release of former hostage Ingrid Betancourt Opening the July Strasbourg session EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering warmly welcomed the release of Ingrid Betancourt and her fellow Farc-hostages, calling it a sign that "one should never give up hope", and stressing that "we should never give in on terrorism". MEPs on Monday also debated the budget for 2009, Italy's plans to set up a Roma finger print database and new rules on food additives aiming at strengthening consumer protection.
Hans-Gert Pöttering welcomed the liberation of Ingrid Betancourt and told the House that he last week invited her to the EP as soon as she has recovered. Mr Pöttering appealed to Farc and all terrorist organisations to "release their prisoners" and "seek a peaceful solution". Creation of a Roma fingerprints database in Italy Later on, MEPs debated planned new measures by the Italian Government regarding the collection of fingerprints of Roma people and the creation of a special database for identifying and registering of Roma families in larger cities. Concerns have been expressed as to the compatibility of these procedures with EU non-discrimination rules and fundamental rights as well as the promotion of integration measures. In the debate, numerous members across a range of political groups expressed serious concerns over the possible nature of the measures envisaged by the Italian authorities, suggesting that they could breach fundamental principles of the EU, particularly as concerns discrimination by race. Other members intervened to defend Italian government action and complained that the debate was being exploited in order to use the European Parliament in pursuit of a national political agenda. Towards the end of the debate, Martin Schulz, leader of the PES group, informed the House of a call he had received from Franco Frattini, Italian Foreign Minister, to provide reassurances that the Italian government was in consultation with the Commission and would ensure that all action taken would of course be in accordance with both the Italian Constitution and the relevant EU laws and fundamental principles. Budget - MEPs give their first assessment The Parliament held its first discussion based on the formal draft EU budget for 2009. Parliament and Council share responsibility for adopting the budget with Parliament however having the last word. MEPs in the Budgets Committee (report by German Socialist MEP Jutta Haug) call for finances to be available for the EU to respond to new financial needs, for the budget to include a proper reflection of the climate change priority and for the budget to be easier for EU citizens to understand. A vote will be held Tuesday on the proposals. Also on Monday MEPs also debated the Airbus/Boeing WTO disputes over subsidies (where a resolution will follow Tuesday) and 4 proposals (co-decision recommendations for with a 2nd reading vote to be held Tuesday), on rules for authorising food additives, flavourings and enzymes. The new procedures will assist the free movement of food within the EU and also give better health and consumer protection, including clearer labelling of certain food colourings. You can watch all the debates live from Strasbourg here on the Parliament's website. Press release opening (07-07-08) Press release opening (07-07-08) Briefing Agenda with links to reports and oral questions Budget focus
Tuesday: Afghanistan, sovereign wealth funds, aircraft in ETS
Rebuilding Afghanistan: MEPs want the EU to play a larger role Efforts of the international community to stabilise Afghanistan were debated by MEPs Tuesday. Law and order and the level of humanitarian assistance were just aspects that were touched upon. Members called for the distinction between military and civilian actions to be continued. The day also saw debates on the growing power of sovereign wealth funds and the impact they could have on the European economy. In a key vote MEPs backed the inclusion of aircraft in the EU's emissions trading scheme.
Stabilising in Afghanistan debated
The House debated a report on the situation in Afghanistan. The report noted the bleak background to EU activities in that country - notably a rise in terrorist acts and a continued insurgency, a seriously deteriorating security situation and increased opium production.
It went on to point out that despite the efforts of the international community and the partial success as regards civil reconstruction, more than half of the inhabitants of Afghanistan are living below the poverty line and the country's economy is one of the weakest in the world, with 40% unemployment.
The debate dealt with the military situation on the ground and the state of humanitarian assistance. The debate also touched on law and order issues - in particular the EU's assistance programme to the Afghan police force. The policy of the United States towards poppy production and relations with Pakistan were also touched upon.
There was widespread recognition from around the House that the lasting effects of the wars that have taken place in the country: millions of victims, refugees and the material destruction of large tracts of the countryside.
German MEP André Brie (GUE/NGL) drafted the report but subsequently withdrew his name over the call for additional troops from EU countries voted by the House. He was one of several speakers to refer to the 7 July terrorist attack to the Indian embassy in Kabul: "The situation has gone worse over the last three years. There is a lot of corruption and criminality. The rule of law is poor" he said.
At the end of the debate, Parliament adopted the report calling for a larger political role for the EU in Afghanistan and stressing the need to maintain the distinction between military and civilian actions by all actors. Parliament also called on the US government to abandon its crop eradication policy and notably the use of hazardous chemicals for aerial sprayings.
Sovereign wealth funds: MEPs call for more openness
The issue of "sovereign wealth funds" was debated by the House Tuesday. Such funds are state owned investment funds that are frequently generated by oil revenue. Concerns have been raised as to the long-term implications for Europe of this flow of new investment from outside the EU.
MEPs called for more openness and clarity about how the funds operate, a global code of conduct and an analysis of the functioning of global financial markets. French Socialist MEP Pervenche Berès heads parliament's Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee, she opened the debate and spoke about the growing concern in SWF due to "the emergence of large funds from the "oil monarchies" and "other countries with large trade surpluses". MEPs vote Wednesday on a resolution on the issue.
Votes on aircraft emissions and Nord stream gas pipeline
The day saw two eagerly awaited votes, which could have far-reaching implications:
Aircraft emissions: Parliament voted legislation to include aviation in the EU Emissions Trading System (ETS). This would affect all flights starting and or landing in Europe (including intercontinental flights) to be included in the ETS from 1 January 2012.
Baltic gas pipeline: in response to citizens' petitions concerning the planned Gazprom "Nord Stream" gas pipeline linking Russia and Germany via the Baltic Sea, MEPs called for far more thorough environmental impact assessment of the pipeline by the Commission.
Watch live Report on Stabilisation of Afghanistan Parliament's Press Service MEPs to debate putting aircraft emissions in trading scheme Draft resolution on sovereign wealth funds
Wednesday: China, Trichet, Galileo
ECB President Jean Claude Trichet presents the 2007 report Relations with China were discussed Wednesday with many MEPs urging greater dialogue between Beijing and the Dalai Lama. EP President Pöttering also confirmed he will not attend the Olympic opening ceremony. Wednesday also saw Europe's top Banker Jean Claude Trichet discuss the ECB's 2007 annual report with MEPs. The fate of Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails and the EU's enlargement process were also discussed. Votes on gas market liberalisation and clarity of air fares were also held.
China: MEPs discuss human rights, Olympics and Tibet
In the debate on China many MEPs spoke of their shock at the recent earthquake in China which claims thousands of lives. Turning to political matters many Members deplored human rights abuses such as torture and ill-treatment. A few MEPs spoke of the "improvement" they had noticed in the human rights situation in the country.
Many Members referred to the situation in Tibet and urged dialogue between the Dalai Lama and Beijing. They also called for improvements in the human rights situation. Many MEPs also called for the EU and China to continue to pursue closer links across many aspects of their relations including trade, cultural issues and human rights dialogue.
Several MEPs were critical of the decision of French President Nicolas Sarkozy to attend the opening ceremony of the Olympic Games (in his official role as President in Office of the Council).
On Wednesday Parliament's President Hans-Gert Pöttering announced on Wednesday that he would not attend the opening ceremony of the Beijing Olympics. He cited Parliament's resolution of 10 April and a lack of any progress in talks between representatives of the Dalai Lama and Chinese authorities.
Trichet outlines 2007 European Central Bank report to MEPs
Europe's central banker Jean Claude Trichet was in parliament earlier to present the 2007 annual report of the European Central Bank. His handling of the recent financial crisis was supported by representatives of the main groups. Swedish Liberal MEP Olle Schmidt - who acted as parliament's rapporteur on the issue said that "the ECB has the wind in its sails, pressure had been put on the Bank due to turmoil in the markets and inflationary pressures. We should be grateful that the ECB was there to tackle inflation."
Enlargement a "success" but many challenges ahead
Many MEPs spoke about past enlargements being a "success", the importance of enlargement, and about future challenges - notably given ratification complications with the Lisbon treaty.
The report was drafted by German MEP Brok who told the House that "we want to continue with the peace and prosperity that the EU has achieved and continue to enlarge as much as we can". A vote will be held on the report on Thursday.
Palestinian prisoners seen in a wider context
A debate was also held on the issue of the plight of Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails. The oral question tabled by a cross party group of MEPs noted that "there are some 11,000 prisoners in Israeli jails, a number which includes 376 children, 118 women".
Speaking in response to the issue representatives of the Commission and Council said the matter of the Palestinian prisoners should be evaluated and dealt with within the wider context of the solution to be found in the Middle East conflict.
Galileo deployment signed into law
EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering and the representative of the Council Jean-Pierre Jouyet signed on Wednesday the EU regulation on the deployment of Galileo. The new European satellite radio navigation system should be operational by 2013.
Key votes: Among other items, the House approved on Wednesday:
transparency in airline charges
gas market liberalisation
report by Austrian MEP Reinhard Rack (EPP-ED) on urban mobility
report by Olle Schmidt (ALDE) on the ECB annual report for 2007
resolution on Sovereign Wealth Funds
report by Jean Lambert (Greens/EFA, UK) on (proposal of a regulation on) the coordination of social security systems (after debate on Wednesday)
Plenary streaming ECB praised for reaction to financial turmoil, caution advised on rate rises Results of votes on Wednesday 9 July 2008 Agenda and documents of Wednesday
Thursday: Sarkozy sets out priorities for French EU presidency
Thursday, 10 July, Strasbourg: Mr Sarkozy makes his point Nicolas Sarkozy gave an impassioned speech in the European Parliament Thursday spelling out the priorities of his country's 6 month tenure at the helm of the EU. Energy, climate change, immigration and the need for Europe to develop a defence policy were areas he identified as needing action. He also mentioned the need to find a way forward after the Irish "No" vote on the Lisbon treaty. The afternoon saw debates on human rights.
Both at the start and end of the 6-month presidency of the EU, the leader of the country comes to the European Parliament to set out their policies and vision of the Union.
Sarkozy lays out his policies
On energy and climate change Mr Sarkozy was adamant: "we are the last generation that can prevent a catastrophe - the world cannot wait, Europe has to show the way".
He called for a non-partisan approach to tackling the problem - "no right-wing, no left-wing priority but common sense".
Turning to immigration Mr Sarkozy asked "is it reasonable to have different immigration policies?" He went on to say that "Europe is not a fortress, Europe needs immigrants but it cannot absorb all the people".
Later in the speech the French Presidency called on the European Union to embrace a more active defence policy. "How can Europe become a political power with strong voice if it cannot defend itself? Europe has no military, no human resources to make enforce the decisions made together" he told MEPs.
On agricultural issues he said that "every 30 seconds a child dies from hunger. Is it reasonable to demand Europe to reduce food production?" he asked.
Mr Sarkozy also said that health, pensions and research into diseases would also be high priorities over the next six months.
Turns to Lisbon treaty, institutional impasse
Also during the speech Mr Sarkozy addressed the ongoing ratification of the Lisbon treaty and the complications thrown up by the Irish "No" vote. He said his first visit as President in office of the Council would be to Ireland where he would listen and talk to people. He told MEPs that he hoped to suggest a solution in agreement with Irish government by October or December.
He then turned to the importance of making sure that progress is made. He told the House that it was important to "reassure Europeans" and show that Europe is working for everyone.
He told the House that "we have an institutional problem" and that institutional issues are something for members of parliaments rather than for citizens. He said that if Europe wanted to enlarge further it needed new institutions and the Lisbon Treaty. Mr Sarkozy also stressed the need "to bring everybody on the board of the European family. A multi speed Europe only the last resort" he said.
Finally, he urged action saying that despite the institutional problems "we are not condemned to immobility - we have to act immediately".
Many political groups supported the French priorities, while some criticised the lack of social dimension and Sarkozy’s plans to attend the opening ceremony of the Olympic Games in Beijing.
Find out more about the reactions of the political groups, by clicking on the link below.
Human rights
Following the traditional Thursday afternoon debates on human rights the House adopted 3 resolutions calling for:
An investigation into alleged mass graves in Jammu and Kashmir. They also condemned unlawful killings, enforced disappearances, torture, rape and other human rights abuses in the area.
Bangladesh to lift the state of emergency and hold free elections.
The abolition of the death penalty and for the US State of Georgia to grant an amnesty to Troy Davis.
Other votes:
In the voting session, the House adopted a number of texts, notably on:
EU-China relations
Zimbabwe
"Space assets" for a European Security and defence policy
Census of the Roma on the basis of ethnicity in Italy
More on Sarkozy speech - MEPs reactions Texts adopted in the plenary Human rights
EN
1
PHOTO
20080704PHT33453.jpg
EN
2
PHOTO
20080704PHT33481.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/eplive/public/livebroadcast_en.htm
EN
8
PHOTO
20080704PHT33489.jpg
EN
9
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/faces/live/live-video.jsp?language=en
EN
11
LINK
/news/expert/default_en.htm
EN
14
PHOTO
20080704PHT33473.jpg
EN
15
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/faces/live/live-video.jsp?language=en
EN
17
LINK
/news/expert/tous_les_epvotes/default/default_en.htm
EN
19
PHOTO
20080704PHT33465.jpg
EN
21
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080704IPR33448 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080624BRI32584 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT AGENDA 20080707 SIT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080605FCS31027 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A6-2008-0269 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080707STO33537 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT MOTION B6-2008-0304 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080708IPR33689 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT AGENDA 20080709 SIT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080709IPR33856 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080709IPR33878 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
