Cleaning up heavy vehicle exhaust emissions: new Euro VI standards
Environment
2008-07-15 - 15:59
Proposed tougher limits on harmful exhaust emissions from trucks, lorries and buses, including ozone precursors such as nitrogen oxides and hydrocarbons as well as particles, were backed by the Environment Committee in a report voted on 15 July. MEPs want the new "Euro VI" regulation emission limits to apply de facto from 1.1.2014, nine months earlier than the Commission proposed.
The proposed Euro VI regulation, assessed in a first reading report by Matthias Groote (PES, DE), lays down harmonized technical rules for heavy vehicles over 2,610 kg, which all new vehicles will have to comply with in order to get the necessary type approval. The new emission limits are eventually to replace both the "Euro IV" limits (which have applied since November 2006), and the Euro V emission limits, which will apply from October 2008.
New limit value for NOx - on other pollutants, MEPs back the Commission
MEPs backed the Commission's proposed lower limit values for damaging emissions of pollutants, with the sole exception of that for nitrogen oxides (NOx), which they sought to raise to 500 mg/kWh from the Commission's proposed 400 mg/kWh, which would have meant an 80 % reduction compared to Euro V). The committee rejected amendments by the rapporteur that would have reduced the particle mass limit to 5 mg/kWh. Instead, they backed the Commission proposal of 10 mg/kWh - a 66% reduction compared with Euro V.
All new vehicles to comply with Euro VI standards from 1.1.2014 at the latest
MEPs adopted amendments which in practice would require all new heavy goods vehicles to comply with the standards from 1.1.2014, three months earlier than the Commission's proposal, but nine months later than the rapporteur had proposed. Thereafter, the registration, sale and putting into service of vehicles that do not comply with the standards will be prohibited. New types of vehicles must meet the standards one year earlier. The Commission is asked to adopt the associated technical regulation by the end of 2009, after which manufacturers will have 48 months to make the necessary technical changes to the vehicles.
Access to vehicle repair information and financial incentives
MEPs back the Commission's proposal to include measures relating to access to repair information in the regulation, so as to ensure effective competition on the market in repair and maintenance services. Similar measures already exist for the relevant legislation on passenger cars (Euro 5). The committee approved amendments to adapt those provisions to the particularities of heavy goods vehicles.
Finally, MEPs rejected the Commission's proposal to enable Member States to provide for financial incentives to accelerate the placing on the market of vehicles meeting the new requirements.
2008-07-14 Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety In the Chair Miroslav OUZKÝ EPP-ED CZ
Procedure: co-decision - Plenary vote: September --
The Groote report was adopted in committee with 51 votes in favour, none against and 1 abstention
20080714IPR34085 Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety website
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=ENVI
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
