From politics to love and war - MEPs and the books they write
Institutions
2008-07-17 - 12:28
Former EP Secretary General Julian Priestley at the launch of his book European politics, feminism, the Yugoslav secret service and love: These are just some of the subjects current MEPs have written books about. Some have written for pleasure, some for principle and some for profit. There are also books that have sought to persuade - or to set the record straight after an event. There are also books about the European Parliament, how it works and the battles that have shaped it. Here we take a look at a few of the authors and the works they have written.
One of the most recent books launched in the European Parliament was by its former Secretary General Julian Priestley. "Six Battles that shaped Europe's Parliament" looks at the political struggles which saw its emergence as a political force in Europe.
Former Prime Ministerial musings
There are a few former Prime Ministers who are now MEPs and they have been quite prolific in their writings.
Key moments in the 1990's and the history of the European Union are just two subjects that Slovenia's Lojze Peterle (PM 1990-92) and Belgian's Jean-Luc Dehaene (1992-1999) tackle in their books. Dehaene's has the ironic title of "There is still life after 16" in reference to the address of the Prime Minister's residence in Brussels.
"If the left would have known" was written by Socialist PM turned MEP Michel Rocard with Georges-Marc Benamou. It takes a look at a half century of French politics. Mr Rocard was France's Prime Minister from 1988-1991.
Lithuania's first post-Communist President Vytautas Landsbergis (1990-1992) takes a personal look at his country's struggles against Moscow, as well as his interest in piano playing in his autobiography. Former Latvian Prime Minister Guntars Krasts (1997-98) is now an MEP for the UEN group. He struck an optimistic note about Europe in his book "The future belongs to us".
Books written from personal experience
Czech MEP Jana Hybášková (EPP-ED) used her experience as her country's Ambassador to Kuwait at the time to speak of the diplomatic build-up to the 2003 US-led invasion of Iraq.
Estonia MEP Tunne Kelam has with his wife published a photographic account of Estonia's path towards independence from Soviet rule. Another former dissident - Polish MEP Bronislaw Geremek (ALDE) - last year penned a book with Robert Picht entitled "Visions of Europe". It would be the last book he wrote as in mid July this year Mr Geremek was tragically killed in a car accident.
Cem Özdemir is a Green MEP representing Germany but from a Turkish background. His book "Currywurst und Döner - Integration in Deutschland" has sparked a lively debate in Germany about the integration of the Turkish community. The role of the Yugoslav secret service during the battle for Slovene independence was a ground-breaking work by Slovene MEP Miha Brejc (EPP-ED).
Social issues and religion in Europe
Swedish MEP Maria Carlshamre of the Liberal ALDE group in Parliament penned a book called "The Unbeatable" about violence against women at home. Feminism is tackled by German Liberal MEP Silvana Koch-Mehrin who last year wrote a book "Sisters - A Pamphlet for a New Feminism".
Former Irish MEP Mary Banotti this year launched her book "There is something about Mary" which deals with the problem of abducted children. Italian MEP Mario Mauro (EPP-ED) has written a book entitled "God of Europe" about Europe, its identity and the road ahead for Christianity.
The European Parliament itself
As well as the "Six Battles that shaped Europe's Parliament" a number of books have looked at the workings of the Institution itself. British Liberal MEP Andrew Duff penned "The Struggle for Europe's Constitution" which looked in part at the Convention that met inside the parliament to draft the original document.
One of the most informative books about the ins and outs of the parliament itself is "The European Parliament" by writing trio Richard Corbett MEP (PSE), Michael Shackleton and Francis Jacobs. The success of the book among students of the parliament can be seen in the fact it has now reached its 7th edition.
Finally, books that leave out the politics
The "Pillow Book" by Hungarian Socialist MEP Katalin Levai is about a love story about a couple in Transylvania in Romania in the late1980s set against the backdrop of rapid political change.
Physics is the subject tackled by Slovenian nuclear engineer turned MEP Romana Jordan Cizelj (EPP-ED). In the science field she is joined by Bulgarian Liberal (ALDE) Vladko Panayotov who has a degree in chemical cybernetics and whose textbooks are used widely on the subject.
Finally Portuguse MEP Vasco Graça-Moura (EPP-ED) has published poetry since 1963. One of his latest books is "Night-time, my love".
20080717STO34624 Find your MEP
EN
1
PHOTO
20080715PHT34303.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/members/public/geoSearch.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
