Brussels and Beijing: a look back at EU/China articles
External relations
2008-07-22 - 15:23
Brussels to Beijing: The Chinese and European Union flag As Beijing prepares to host the Olympics we republish here some articles that have looked at the developing relations between China and the European Union. With a trade relationship that is growing rapidly, the importance of Chinese goods to Europe - and vice versa - is likely to grow as the century develops. In the past MEPs have expressed concern over human rights in China and especially the situation in Tibet which through its leader the Dalai Lama continues to struggle for freedom.
This focus looks at various aspects of the EU's relations with China - the debates in parliament which have forged relations - China's economic power, its impact on energy and climate change and the build-up to the Olympics.
20080707FCS33566
Wednesday 9 July in plenary: China, Trichet, Galileo
EP President Pöttering tells MEPs why he will not attend the Olympics Relations with China were discussed Wednesday with many MEPs urging greater dialogue between Beijing and the Dalai Lama. EP President Pöttering also confirmed he will not attend the Olympic opening ceremony. Wednesday also saw Europe's top Banker Jean Claude Trichet discuss the ECB's 2007 annual report with MEPs. The fate of Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails and the EU's enlargement process were also discussed. Votes on gas market liberalisation and clarity of air fares were also held.
China: MEPs discuss human rights, Olympics and Tibet
In the debate on China many MEPs spoke of their shock at the recent earthquake in China which claims thousands of lives. Turning to political matters many Members deplored human rights abuses such as torture and ill-treatment. A few MEPs spoke of the "improvement" they had noticed in the human rights situation in the country.
Many Members referred to the situation in Tibet and urged dialogue between the Dalai Lama and Beijing. They also called for improvements in the human rights situation. Many MEPs also called for the EU and China to continue to pursue closer links across many aspects of their relations including trade, cultural issues and human rights dialogue.
Several MEPs were critical of the decision of French President Nicolas Sarkozy to attend the opening ceremony of the Olympic Games (in his official role as President in Office of the Council).
On Wednesday Parliament's President Hans-Gert Pöttering announced on Wednesday that he would not attend the opening ceremony of the Beijing Olympics. He cited Parliament's resolution of 10 April and a lack of any progress in talks between representatives of the Dalai Lama and Chinese authorities.
Trichet outlines 2007 European Central Bank report to MEPs
Europe's central banker Jean Claude Trichet was in parliament earlier to present the 2007 annual report of the European Central Bank. His handling of the recent financial crisis was supported by representatives of the main groups. Swedish Liberal MEP Olle Schmidt - who acted as parliament's rapporteur on the issue said that "the ECB has the wind in its sails, pressure had been put on the Bank due to turmoil in the markets and inflationary pressures. We should be grateful that the ECB was there to tackle inflation."
Enlargement a "success" but many challenges ahead
Many MEPs spoke about past enlargements being a "success", the importance of enlargement, and about future challenges - notably given ratification complications with the Lisbon treaty.
The report was drafted by German MEP Brok who told the House that "we want to continue with the peace and prosperity that the EU has achieved and continue to enlarge as much as we can". A vote will be held on the report on Thursday.
Palestinian prisoners seen in a wider context
A debate was also held on the issue of the plight of Palestinian prisoners in Israeli jails. The oral question tabled by a cross party group of MEPs noted that "there are some 11,000 prisoners in Israeli jails, a number which includes 376 children, 118 women".
Speaking in response to the issue representatives of the Commission and Council said the matter of the Palestinian prisoners should be evaluated and dealt with within the wider context of the solution to be found in the Middle East conflict.
Galileo deployment signed into law
EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering and the representative of the Council Jean-Pierre Jouyet signed on Wednesday the EU regulation on the deployment of Galileo. The new European satellite radio navigation system should be operational by 2013.
Key votes: Among other items, the House approved on Wednesday:
transparency in airline charges
gas market liberalisation
report by Austrian MEP Reinhard Rack (EPP-ED) on urban mobility
report by Olle Schmidt (ALDE) on the ECB annual report for 2007
resolution on Sovereign Wealth Funds
report by Jean Lambert (Greens/EFA, UK) on (proposal of a regulation on) the coordination of social security systems (after debate on Wednesday)
Plenary streaming ECB praised for reaction to financial turmoil, caution advised on rate rises Results of votes on Wednesday 9 July 2008 Agenda and documents of Wednesday
MEP Ana Maria Gomes on China's "scramble" for Africa
Portuguese MEP Ana Maria Gomes On Tuesday evening MEPs will debate a report on China's 'go-out' policy and growing influence in Africa. Driven by an increasing need to secure energy supplies Beijing is extending its influence across the African continent. We spoke to Portuguese Socialist MEP Ana Maria Gomes who drafted the report on China's latter day "scramble" for Africa and the consequences for the continent's development, including human rights and the situation in Darfur.
Ms Gomes, your report notes the growing influence of China in Africa. What is driving this involvement?
China has legitimate interests for its own development and in procuring raw materials, namely oil, for its energy consumption. It has found that there are great markets to be explored. Despite its "no strings attached" policy, China also has political interests in Africa.
There's growing awareness among Europeans of Africa's enormous potential. Africa is not just sad stories, as China proves. The main objective of my report is to have a better articulation between Europe and China to make a difference for Africa's development. This should not take place over the Africans' heads, but involve their institutions and governments.
Your report expresses concerns about China's possible negative influence on issues such as corruption, labour rights and environmental standards, in Africa. What can, and should the EU/EP do about it?
China's scramble for resources has negative consequences, not just in conflict areas such as Darfur, but also for attempts to build an industrial base for example in textiles, and by perpetuating corrupt and oppressive elites...China has problems of good governance, respect for human rights and core labour standards, and corruption – which it might be exporting to African countries.
We cannot neglect China, we cannot overrule China; we have to engage with China. The EP took the lead in highlighting the parameters of this engagement, namely the Millennium Development Goals. We have to press China to adopt criteria for development such as we have within the OECD. It is a major power, a permanent member of the Security Council and therefore has responsibilities in Africa and all over the world.
Whatever China does in Africa has huge consequences, good and bad. But Europeans cannot just afford to preach ex cathedra to China when we ourselves have tremendous shortcomings in living up to our commitments in Africa.
The EP awarded the 2007 Sakharov Prize to Salih Mahmoud Osman for his work defending human rights in Sudan. He stressed the influence of China in his country. Could the Prize help persuade China to rethink its "no strings" approach to investment in Sudan or Africa more widely?
Awarding that prize was important and had an impact. Mr Salih was in Lisbon for the EU-Africa Summit just before the EP awarded the prize. He made very important points not just regarding his home country Sudan and the role played by China and others in Darfur, but also in highlighting the fight for freedom and against oppression for many other peoples in Africa, and the role interaction with major players such as EU and China could have in that process.
Live broadcast from 21:00 Info from Briefing Report after vote in Committee Profile of Ms Gomes Sakharov Prize
Climate change: why China matters
China is the world's largest consumer of coal As the economy grows apace in China, so does pollution and it looks set to be a global problem. Ahead of the December UN Climate Change Conference in Bali a delegation from the Parliament's Temporary Committee on Climate Change, led by Chairman Guido Sacconi, visited Beijing to meet with key officials, politicians and experts. The delegation concluded that China is politically committed to fighting climate change, but not yet ready to accept quantitative targets.
"As a fast growing economy China is also rapidly becoming one of the biggest polluters," said Mr Sacconi. "Establishing a new international climate change regime after the expiry of the Kyoto Protocol in 2012 will only be possible if countries like China or India which do not have emission reduction commitments under the current Kyoto Protocol are part of such an agreement."
Why China matters
In 1990 China's CO2 emissions were around 50% of US (the biggest producer) levels. Now China lies just behind the US and is expected to overtake it as the largest emitter of greenhouse gases. With a booming economy and 1.3 billion people, China is the world's largest consumer of coal and oil consumption has doubled in the last 20 years. However, as a developing country it is not required to cut emissions under the 2002 Kyoto Protocol.
"China is strongly committed in the fight against climate change and to engage in the area of emissions reductions, energy-saving, and energy-efficiency. At the same time, it acknowledges the importance of cooperating with industrialised countries on technology and technology transfer, as well as the need for financial assistance in this field. These are certainly extremely positive messages," said Mr Sacconi.
However, he added, "One critical issue remains: the fact that, at this stage, China still considers that the current structure of the Kyoto Protocol should be maintained and developing countries, including emerging economies, should have no quantitative commitments."
China's commitment to fight global warming
"China has recently adopted a Climate Change Programme and is strongly committed to improve its energy efficiency. Our visit to Beijing...allowed us to establish personal contacts with government officials, members of the People's National Congress, as well as business and civil society representatives and to better understand the Chinese position towards climate change," Mr Sacconi said.
The draftsman for the Committee, German Christian Democrat Karl-Heinz Florenz said, "From our discussions with representatives from the National People's Congress, from the government and also from civil society, we understood that climate change is one of the political priorities for the Chinese authorities. I have the impression that the Chinese authorities are adopting and implementing legislation to successfully start the fight against climate change."
The recently-adopted Climate Change Programme is very ambitious with targets to cut energy consumption 20% and increase the share of renewables to 10% of energy supplies by 2010. "Of course the challenge now lies with its implementation, which will have to be closely monitored", Mr Florenz said.
Chinese position towards post-Kyoto climate protection?
"We were happy to learn that for China, like the EU, the UN Climate Change Convention is the only appropriate forum for the international negotiations on climate change. The Chinese authorities also share the EU view that the negotiations for such a new agreement should be concluded by 2009 at the latest, thus avoiding any gap between the current commitment period under the Kyoto Protocol and the future international framework", Mr Florenz added.
Stressing the need to build partnerships and involve new world powers like China and India in the fight against climate change, Mr Florenz said: "This is why the EP attaches such importance to environmental foreign policy". Convinced that China will be a close and key partner of the EU in the negotiations for a post-2012 agreement, he added: "It is in our mutual interest to succeed in the fight against climate change".
The visit was the first of a series to non-EU countries meant to develop parliamentary contacts and forge a strong alliance to address climate change issues.
What the EP is doing
Temporary Committee on Climate Change has urged the EU to secure "by 2009 at the latest" an international agreement that includes: binding emissions targets for all industrialised countries, a global "cap and trade" system and instruments for clean technology transfer - to allow developing countries access to environmentally friendly technologies.
MEPs also call on industrialised countries to lead by example and commit themselves to reducing emissions "by at least 30% by 2020 and 60% - 80% by 2050 compared to 1990".
China committed to fighting climate change, but not yet to quantitative targets, says EP delegation Halving greenhouse gas emissions by 2050: Climate Change Committee sets out aims for Bali MEPs told "no rewind" button on climate change ahead of post Kyoto talks Climate change committee Strategy for the Bali Conference on Climate Change
China: EU must maintain pressure on human rights in the run-up to the Olympics
Olympic game in China As Beijing prepares for the 2008 summer Olympic Games the EU must keep up the pressure on China on human rights. That's the message that emerged from events organised by the European Parliament in November about human rights in China ahead of the Olympics and the situation in Tibet.
China's human rights record seems to be deteriorating due to preparations for the games with media controls, political arrests, widespread slave labour, and oppression of dissidents, a hearing in the EP's Human Rights sub-committee heard on 26 November. Sub-committee chair Hélène Flautre said the absence of a representative from the Chinese embassy during the hearing was"disappointing".
Chinese cyber-dissident and 2007 Sakharov prize nominee Hu Jia , speaking via the internet from his home in Beijing, where he is under house arrest, warned of:
"a human rights disaster" taking place
1 million people being persecuting in jails, camps and mental hospitals
conflicting hopes from the West that holding the games in China "would foster democracy and openness" and the Chinese authorities who want to use the games legitimise their rule
He urged Europe to hold firm to its principles and in particular the arms embargo on China.
Role of the International Olympic Committee
Former Olympic fencing champion, Hungarian MEP Pál Schmitt (EPP-ED), speaking on behalf of the International Olympic Committee (IOC) said the "IOC is not in a position to pressure China on issues outside the Games " but agreed that "it is time for a political statement from the IOC." UK Conservative Edward Mcmillan-Scott said the IOC banned apartheid South Africa from the games. This proves "it can take political positions".
Fair play for Tibet?
Earlier, on 8 November, EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering, Buddhist monks, Olympic medallists, MEPs and human rights activists took part in a conference on Tibet, organised by a cross-party group of MEPs. The Conference Declaration reaffirmed support for the dialogue between the Chinese government and Tibetans, and sees the 2008 Games as opportunity for positive change.
Among the key issues discussed were:
importance of world opinion to the Chinese government
the large number of political prisoners
Control of Tibetan Buddhism (through the law giving the Communist party power to recognize reincarnated lamas)
Systematic settlement of Han Chinese, causing social reengineering and environmental degradation.
Keep up human rights pressure on China in the run-up to 2008 Olympics - press release Press release of the 24th Round of the EU-China Dialogue on Human Rights Human rights sub-committee website
EN
1
PHOTO
20080715PHT34305.jpg
EN
2
PHOTO
20080715PHT34299.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/faces/live/live-video.jsp?language=en
EN
5
LINK
/news/expert/tous_les_epvotes/default/default_en.htm
EN
7
PHOTO
20080226PHT22373.jpg
EN
8
LINK
/eplive/public/livebroadcast_en.htm
EN
11
LINK
/members/public/geoSearch/view.do?country=PT&partNumber=1&language=FI&id=28306
EN
13
PHOTO
20071109PHT12796.jpg
EN
17
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=CLIM
EN
19
PHOTO
20071204PHT14251.jpg
EN
21
LINK
http://www.eu2007.pt/UE/vEN/Noticias_Documentos/20071017UEChina.htm
EN
22
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?body=DROI&language=EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080708IPR33689 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT AGENDA 20080709 SIT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080410BRI26349 ITEM-009-EN NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A6-2008-0080 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070906FCS10161 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071107IPR12737 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071022IPR12053 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071008STO11292 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071105BRI12655 ITEM-010-EN NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071126IPR13587 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FEA DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FEA DOC XML V0//EN
