Out of Africa
External relations
2008-07-31 - 09:14
Gertrude Mongella and Hauwa Ibrahim Relations between Africa and Europe are a subject that is frequently discussed by MEPs. Whether it's the problem of illegal migration, relations with states who border the Mediterranean or human rights, Africa is never far from the EP's agenda. Here we republish four stories that looked at various aspects of Europe's relations with Africa. Included are interviews with two remarkable women - Gertrude Mogella of the Pan-African Parliament and human rights lawyer Hauwa Ibrahim
Also included is a story which looks at the threat that logging and over-fishing poses to the livelihoods of millions of people in East Africa.
20080707FCS33570
EU-Africa relations: joint strategy to tackle the continent's problems
Ahead of the EU-Africa summit being held in Lisbon this weekend, a delegation of MEPs met members of the Pan-African Parliament on Friday morning in the Portuguese capital. A joint declaration by both Parliaments was adopted calling for them to have a stronger role in the new Joint EU-Africa strategy. EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering and Pan-African Parliament (PAP) President Gertrude Mongella will both address the EU-Africa Summit taking place during the weekend.
A Joint Strategy prepared by European and African governments lays out a long term shared vision of the future of EU-Africa relations which would bring benefits to both continents.
The priorities until the next EU-Africa summit in 2009 are peace and security, democracy, human rights, trade, regional integration, development, energy, climate change, migration, employment, science and the information society.
Before the Summit MEPs and Members of the Pan-African Parliament met and adopted a Joint Statement. They called for greater focus on the eradication of poverty and development, particularly through investing in people’s health and education.
The statement criticizes that there is little role for the parliaments foreseen in the strategy - EP and PAP ask for fully involvement into process. They believe that:
real progress can only be achieved having at its heart the people for whom this progress is meant.
parliaments are the democratically elected representatives of the people.
they reflect various opinions of society and are places where different views can be reconciled, compromise found.
Parliaments also must have stronger role in budgetary matters to ensure "that executives carry out the agreed policies in an effective, democratic and fiscally responsible manner". Financial aid too often runs directly form executive to executive bypassing parliamentary monitoring.
Facts:
Three out of every four persons who die from AIDS are Africans.
Every 30 seconds, an African child dies of malaria. Half the deaths could be avoided if parents had access to diagnosis and drugs that cost little more than 1 euro a dose. However, almost half of all Africans are still living on less than 1 Euro a day.
Hunger is a key factor in more deaths than all the continent’s infectious diseases put together.
Life expectancy is falling. People in Africa on average live to the age of just 46 but in some countries it is as low as 35.
The EU is already the world’s largest donor in Africa and is the continent’s most important economic and trade partner.
EU-Africa Summit: EU-Africa relations (European Commission) Pan-African Parliament Parliament's Development Committee
Look positively at Africa, says President of Pan-African Parliament
"Europe plays a great role for Africa" - Ms Mongella Europe can play a role as a partner in sharing sanitation and healthcare technology with Africa. That was one of the messages that President of the Pan-African Parliament Gertrude Mongella brought to Parliament when she was in Brussels for international women's day to promote the role of women. Tanzanian born Ms Mongella also wants more women in political office in Africa and believes they can play a leading politically and culturally. The Pan-African Parliament forms part of the African Union.
During her visit to the Parliament on 6 March we put some questions to Ms Mongella.
There seems to be growing interest in Africa from emerging economies and the industrialised West. Is this new "scramble for Africa" an opportunity or a threat for Africa’s development?
It's a big opportunity. I think the other "scramble” for Africa was just dividing it up. Now everybody is noticing that Africa has potential in its population. Our market is big. But also the most important thing is the natural resources; we are still a continent with rich natural resources which are not yet tapped.
We must be careful that the "scramble" is not going to endanger the African people, like the political scramble, the scramble of Berlin (she refers to Berlin conference in 1884-85) that partitioned Africa.
Can the European Union be a model for the African Union?
It is important to look at your neighbour and learn something from them. But we would make a big mistake to just take what you have in the EU and put it into the African Union. It would equally be a mistake not to appreciate the systems that are serving the EU.
For example the European Parliament has developed over 50 years. So it has a rich experience on how to establish a continental parliament. We have to look at that and then see what best we can pick for our Pan-African Parliament. We are working together to share the experience. But at the same time we need to interpret it to fit the African situation.
How do you assess Europe’s role in relation to Africa and its hot spots?
Europe plays a great role for Africa. Europe has been in Africa for a long time in one way or the other. So some of what we see today is a result of mismanagement of Europe in Africa – poor governance, which made it so difficult to get away from this disaster of colonialism.
But then we have to continue to be partners. We have to examine what is the new role of Europe. We should look at Africa positively, as partners. If we are dealing with poverty and if we are in partnership we should come out with solutions for this problem.
There are so many women dying because of maternal complications. Europe has the technology, Europe has the resources, Europe has developed much scientific knowledge.
Can't we together solve some of these basic problems? Water problems: we have rivers and lakes, it's a matter of putting in pipes. Can’t Europe play with all these resources and work meaningfully with Africa? I am sure if there is a political will, we can sort some of these problems. Europe has a big role to play. And Europe cannot afford to exist without Africa, can you?
Would Africa be better off if there were more women in high political offices?
I think that’s definitely a yes. In fact, not only more women in political offices – but more women than men! If that was the case, Africa would be completely different…
… why is that?
(Ms Mongella laughs) - because it’s the men that have made all that mess - simple. Why are we in a mess? Women have never taken up high decision making positions. Africa is in conflict, Africa is underdeveloped, and it has all been under men.
So we say, the time of men is up, let’s put Africa into the right direction. We are getting there: I am the President of the Pan-African Parliament. We have Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf leading Liberia from a mess of conflict caused by men. So we continue, until we fix Africa.
Endnotes: Tell me about the African Union
The African Union is an organisation of 53 African states. It was established in 2001 as a successor to the Organization of African Unity. Its headquarters is in the Ethiopian capital Addis Ababa. The aim is to help secure Africa's democracy, human rights, and sustainable economy, to end up intra-African conflicts and to create an effective common market.
One of its institutions is the Pan-African Parliament with 265 elected representatives gathering at Midrand, South Africa. Gertrude Mongella from Tanzania has been its President since 2004.
Pan-African Parliament EU-Africa relations: joint strategy to tackle the continent's problems MEP Ana Maria Gomes on China's "scramble" for Africa EP report on EU Africa relations (Oct. 07) ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly African Union Scramble for Africa
Hauwa Ibrahim: "The EU can be the torchlight to show us the way"
Hauwa Ibrahim at the European Parliament in Brussels, 12 June The aspirations of young people in Africa were discussed on 12 June when the EP hosted a seminar on International Day of African Youth. It drew together speakers who addressed the problems that young people face. Chaired by Italian Parliament vice-president Luisa Morgantini (GUE/NGL), the event was held under the patronage of EP President Pöttering. Nigerian lawyer Hauwa Ibrahim, winner of Parliament's 2005 Sakharov prize was one of the speakers. We later put a few questions to her.
What do young Africans really want? What are their hopes and aspirations?
Young Africans want to contribute to peace, freedom and human dignity. They want the opportunity to be and to use their minds creatively. They want the opportunity not to think about what they are eating tomorrow, to be free of things that slow them down - like poverty. They want the opportunity to make a positive change for their society, for their countries and for the world.
What can the EU and the EP do to help young Africans?
It's such an honour that the EP organises a day such as an International Day for African youth! A huge statement has been made: "We can give you a voice, we can give you opportunity. We'll bring you here to see what we have done differently and how you can go and make a difference in your place". We hope that the EU and the EP especially will not look at Africa as a unit, but as a huge continent. When you see an entity with a huge problem, you should take it piece by piece; solve one problem after the other.
One of the issues that we are facing in my country (Nigeria) is that government policies have not been consistent. The EU and the EP can help, since they are institutions that make policies. I suggest that the EU takes the time to visit the continent once in a quarter to have the sense of what is reality. We have infrastructures that are absolutely inadequate.
For example, you have a school that used to have 500 or 600 students, and they now have more than 1000 in less than 10 years, while facilities have not been expanded. This affects the morale of the teachers and of the students. Another issue is the training of teachers, who need to be more motivated. The EU could invite teachers to see how classrooms, books and laboratories are here or train them in sciences, mathematics and so on. The EU can be the torchlight to show us how to get there.
Is Europe a model for African youth? Can it offer hope and if so in what way?
Absolutely! You have passed through so much as a region! The way you (Europe) have overcome the problems, what you have done and how you can think about the future and plan for today are lessons that we could learn from you. This beautiful Parliament is fascinating. How did you come to this end? We may not get there but maybe the new generation will.
What difference did your winning the Sakharov Prize for freedom of thought make in Nigeria and in Africa?
It made a huge, huge difference. It gave me a louder voice, credibility and above all a global stage and recognition. Since my passion is education, we created a charity, "Foundation for Literacy", with the money that I got with the Sakharov prize. And the funds have multiplied, because other people decided to give more money. We put it in a bank and we got (5%) interest. With the 5% we sent 32 children back to school, elementary school but also to university.
Moreover, while I was teaching law in Abuja University, I noticed that there were about 3000 students there who only had 200 useful law books. The government wanted to remove our accreditation as we didn't meet the standards. At about that time I got the Sakharov prize. I was invited in Minnesota to give a speech and I told them about our lack of books. They decided to give us 8000 new books. I used part of the money I got with the Sakharov prize to ship the books from America to Nigeria. So I can say that the EP saved the ability of Abuja University to award degrees that have international recognition.
In the context of the EU importing natural resources like wood from Africa, overfishing and immigrants leaving Africa for the EU, what can Europe do to help Africa?
There are issues about politics and there are issues about economy. The fundamental human rights should lie between the two. If you go to a virgin land in Africa and pick something, or remove their fish, what do you give them in return? Do you want to completely remove their fish? And leave them with nothing? Is that your ultimate objective? I think we should temper economy with humanity. We should temper globalisation with dignity. What we want is a world that is free of terrors, secure. And we do not want to create the opposite through our policies. Whether you are taking the wood or the fish, remember to temper global politics with humanity, dignity and respect for human life.
The event was held as part of the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue. Hauwa Ibrahim was awarded the prize in recognition of her stand in defending Nigerian women who face being stoned to death for adultery and young people who face amputation for theft under Islamic Sharia law.
European Year of Intercultural Dialogue website Ladies, Ibrahim and Reporters joint Sakharov prize winners 2005 2007 Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought
Logging and over-fishing threatening West Africa
Fishermen tend their nets - their livelihood is threatened by over-fishing Illegal fishing and logging of timber in West Africa is devastating local economies and depriving people of jobs. The result is a steady flow of migrants to Europe's shores in search of a better life. These were the conclusions of a debate by MEPs on Monday 16 in Strasbourg. The report adopted calls amongst other things for the labelling of renewable timber and for curbs on unsustainable fishing in West Africa.
The economic importance of timber and fish for countries like Senegal, Cameroon Liberia and Ghana cannot be overstated. However, the resources are dwindling. The German Green MEP Frithjof Schmidt who drafted the report told the House last Monday that in West Africa 87% of the forests had been chopped down.
In addition to a loss of jobs there is also the problem of the resulting desertification which makes food production even more difficult. The report wants all EU countries to use eco-labelling to determine whether timber is coming from sustainable sources. It wants only these products to be allowed to be imported into the European Union.
Over-fishing linked to migration into Europe
As fisheries stocks deplete the world over the rich waters of West Africa make a tempting target. The Governments of these countries often conclude lucrative fishing contracts with the European Union's fleet. This allows vast amounts of fish to be taken out of the water. Then there is the added danger that other vessels from other countries can illegally catch fish.
The result leaves not many fish for coastal communities to rely on for food and trade. This means people have to leave their homes to seek work - and the most popular destination is Europe. A study by the International Organisation for Migration on Senegal showed that there was a direct link between over-fishing and migration.
The report wants EU governments to acknowledge this link and then to take action to preserve stocks and curb illegal fishing.
After their debate on Monday MEPs voted to support the findings of the Schmidt report the next day.
Parliament's resolution EP press release International Organisation for Migration Parliament's Development Committee
EN
1
PHOTO
20080715PHT34194.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.eu2007.pt/UE/vEN/Reunioes_Eventos/ChefesEstado/EUAfrica.htm
EN
3
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/development/Geographical/RegionsCountries/EUAfrica_en.cfm
EN
4
LINK
http://www.pan-african-parliament.org/default.aspx
EN
5
LINK
/activities/expert/committees/presentation.do?committee=2347&language=EN
EN
6
PHOTO
20080314PHT24326.jpg
EN
7
LINK
http://www.pan-africanparliament.org/default.aspx
EN
11
LINK
/intcoop/acp/
EN
12
LINK
http://www.africa-union.org/
EN
13
LINK
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scramble_for_Africa
EN
14
PHOTO
20080612PHT31433.jpg
EN
15
LINK
http://www.interculturaldialogue2008.eu/405.0.html?&tx_ttnews%5Btt_news%5D=206&tx_ttnews%5BbackPid%5D=333&cHash=c40149df1a
EN
18
PHOTO
20080624PHT32611.jpg
EN
21
LINK
http://www.iom.int/
EN
22
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=DEVE
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071130STO14197 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080227STO22422 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0483 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20051017FCS01528 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070906FCS10161 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0289 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080616IPR31751 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FEA DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FEA DOC XML V0//EN
