Replay: Editors' choice
Institutions
2008-08-04 - 10:46
Trainees and postal services are just two things we looked at In this focus we look back at a number of stories that have captured our attention over the last few months. We have a look at the parliament's trainee programme and speak to some of those who have taken part. We also look at the state of insurance cover across Europe for people when they go on holiday. We also hear from people about the likely impact of the reform of Europe's postal system will entail.
Also included here are measures to protect children when they use the internet and a commemoration of the 40th anniversary of the tumult of 1968 which shook Europe. All of these can be found in this focus.
20080707FCS33575
Parliament's Trainees - work and fun in a multinational mix
EP Trainees Konchyta (Spain) and Matthias (Austria) Thursday saw some of the 385 young people coming to the end of their 5 month traineeship in the Parliament meet its President Hans-Gert Pöttering . These internships - commonly known by the French word "stage" are a feature of the European Institutions. For many it is the start of a career in European affairs, for others it's 5 months living away from home and getting a taste of how the EU Institutions work. Places are highly sought after - these trainees were chosen from 4,628 applicants.
Parliament's President Hans-Gert Pöttering stressed the importance of young people to the European project when he recently met a group of stagiares. He told them, "we need your engagement, the engagement of the young generation in favour of European unity".
There are paid and unpaid traineeships - however the majority are paid. Those who take a paid placement in the Parliament are known as Robert Schuman Scholars. Parliament's Traineeships Office said "the number of trainees we can accept depends on the budget available and the capacity of the services to supervise the work."
Being part of the multinational mix
For Spanish intern Concepción Zúñiga "the most interesting thing is that you work with 27 different nationalities. It is a big challenge to write in other languages." Working in Parliament's Press Room she said the experience has given her confidence although she would have liked to have stayed longer than 5 months "as it's a short time to realise what is going on".
Indeed, learning more about the Parliament and other European Institutions is an essential part of being a trainee. "What's a DG?" is one of the first questions European Commission trainees often ask after being assigned to a Directorate General (department) of the EU's executive.
Orsolya Zsemba worked for Hungarian MEP Gábor Harangozó and "managed to learn more than I expected". She said she "learned about the internal procedures of the European Parliament, the inter-linkages of the different policies, the ways of lobbying and policy-making."
"I will learn a lot about myself"
For many people the traineeship is the first chapter in their professional career. Belgian trainee Stéphanie Van Cauwelaert has just started work in Parliament's Web-Communication Unit. She said "I'm sure my work here at the EP will be a great experience and will be a good start for my future working life...I will learn a lot about the EP and the European culture, but I will also learn a lot about myself".
Many find they want to stay in Brussels after their traineeship. Spanish trainee María Jesus Arroqui said "I would like to stay longer in Brussels and find a job related to communication and European Affairs, but it is difficult because of the competition." Karin Flygare, a trainee in the Parliament's External Policy department, said "after this stage I will be looking for a job either in Brussels or in Stockholm. I am interested in working with EU external relations and I think this stage improves my understanding of everyday diplomacy and negotiations."
Trainees are usually based in Parliament's offices in Brussels and Luxembourg. They can also attend the monthly plenary sessions in Strasbourg or be in one of Parliament's Information Offices around Europe's capitals.
The Parliament's Translation Office recruits a couple of hundred stagiares at its office in Luxembourg. There are also some places for young conference interpreters - although these are reserved for people from countries who have just joined the EU or are candidate countries - Turkey for example.
Who becomes a stagiare?
The trainee programme is also open to people from outside the EU. Last year applications came from as afar a field as Belarus, Canada and Taiwan. Only university graduates are accepted for paid traineeships.
Most EU applications come from Italy, Germany, France and Spain and about twice as many women as men apply.
It's not all work is it?
An essential part of the experience is meeting people from different nationalities and backgrounds. Much of this is done at various stage parties around Brussels - many of which have a national or regional theme such as "Blue Danube" to highlight countries of a particular region.
The European Commission has up to 10 times the number of interns as the Parliament so there are a lot of people sharing the same experience over five months.
"One advantage with doing a stage is the social life," said Karin Flygare. "There are parties organised by associations connected to the EP and the Commission that we go to. For the moment we are also "eating our way through" Brussels, trying new cafés and restaurants every weekend."
Traineeships at the EP EP trainees' association Your MEPs
Package holidays - EP study looks at insurance coverage
Broken bones - not the return flight one would like… Package holidays are incredibly popular for millions of people around Europe. For most it is a week away in the sun, a time to relax and be with family and friends. However, for a minority it can be ruined by an accident or injury. A study for Parliament's Internal Market committee has just looked into the state of insurance liability for such holidays. It found that the existing "Package Travel Directive" from 1990 is insufficient and need revising. We look at its main findings.
Package holiday market changing
The study - "safety and liability issues relating to package travel" - is supposed to help MEPs in the upcoming review of the Package Travel Directive and in ongoing discussions over the review of the EU consumer law.
The survey, compiled by leading academics and experts in the field, identifies an industry that is changing rapidly due to low cost airlines, the internet and more and more people assembling their own holidays - so called "dynamic packaging"
There's no question about the popularity of package holidays - in particular in Germany, the UK, France, the Netherlands and Italy. In 2004 in Germany 24.5 million package holidays were sold while in the UK the figure was 10.1 million.
Main causes of injuries?
The report identified a number of factors that led to people being injured. The following were found to be the most common:
Injuries in road traffic accidents (either in hire cars or when tour buses crash).
Poor hygiene standards (the most common problem is diarrhoea)
Poor equipment i.e. poor quality skis.
Accidents caused by poor signs, steps and a lack of light
Excessive alcohol consumption
Current situation in the EU
The study found that despite issues of safety and liability covered by the Package Travel Directive in 1990, there is no specific legal instrument at EU level for tourist safety. It also says that current safety regulations are "piecemeal" and "not comprehensive".
In addition, the study also identified a certain amount of legal confusion as the burden of proof for negligence differs across the EU - for example some courts place it on customers, some on organisers. In November last year, MEPs adopted a resolution on tourism policy in which they "regretted that there is no explicit safety provision in existing legislation".
What can be done?
It calls for new EU road safety rules to ensure tour operators are liable for all services supplied and trips booked at a resort.
On hotel safety the study says that any EU legislation should define basic safety standards for hotels. It also says current EU recommendations on fire safety in hotels should be updated and included in binding legislation.
Regarding air transport it calls for the "Package Travel Directive" to be amended to make the organisers liable for injuries to a consumer if an airline breaches safety regulations whilst working for a tour operator.
Finally, in the unlikely event of terrorism or of a natural disaster it says a tour operator and customer should also have the right to cancel but that the operator should monitor general risks and inform customers.
Any legislative proposals the Commission does eventually produce will have to be approved by the Council of Ministers and the European Parliament.
"Safety and liability issues relating to package travel" Resolution - November 07
You've got mail...
While going through our post box last weekend we came across a letter from one of the Parliament's postmen to his second cousin in Tallinn, also a postman. We had intended to write an article about a vote by the European Parliament on new legislation that will affect Europe's postal services. However, we found this letter summed up everything that we wanted to say, so we thought that with his permission we would publish it...so read on dear reader, read on...
The Hemicycle Chamber
European Parliament
Rue Wiertz
Brussels
Belgium
Dear Pat,
Sorry I haven't written for so long, I think the last time we saw each other was at Uncle Fred's wedding two years ago...the last I heard was that Fred is on wedding No2...
Anyway, I am just writing to let you know about events here at the European Parliament in Brussels last Thursday 31 January.
As you may have heard, MEPs have voted to open up Europe's postal systems to competition. This means that any letters we send under 50 grams - like to Grandma for Christmas or Uncle Peter's birthday - will be included.
Some Members of Parliament were worried about what this would mean for the 5.2 million people - yes 5.2 million people! - employed in the postal business. What is for sure is that there will be a lot of interest in the business - they say that across the European Union it is worth €88 billion. Europe's postmen deliver 135 billion letters a year - we postmen work for our crust, that's for sure!
You are probably worried that our distant cousin in the Shetland Islands will get fewer deliveries or will have to pay more as they are so far away? Fortunately, someone has thought of that and MEPs voted to ensure that 5 daily deliveries a week will still take place no matter where you live. They also want stamps for towns and countries to cost the same too.
I heard the man who actually wrote Parliament's report on this new law, Markus Ferber of the European People's Party and European Democrats, and he put my mind at rest last December. He said that "under the new rules, we will still be able to send letters to remote places, and be sure they get delivered." Finally, and this will interest you for sure, Members want the working conditions of those employed in the postal industry to be protected.
The debate in Parliament was quite interesting with some MEPs thinking it a good idea and others against. Brian Simpson, a British Labour Member said that it would help the post offices compete against other technologies as well as each other. (Even I send emails these days, though you can't beat a real letter can you?) A Green MEP, Eva Lichtenberger from Austria, was worried about what would happen to those who lived in the country, in the mountains or on the borders of Europe.
What else can I tell you - oh yes, when is this all going to take place? Well, those nice people in the European Commission wanted it to happen by next year but those other nice people you voted for in 2004 want it to take place by 2011. Twelve countries will wait until two years after this to prepare their postmen and women for the change.
Our Auntie Lena in Stockholm and cousin Christian in Munich may not notice much difference as they live in some of the five countries who already have competition in their postal services.
And finally, just to let you know that the big Christmas presents you sent arrived safely, thank you very much (big Christmas presents are always nice!). The parcel arrived with the company "Break-pack" as big items can already be sent via private companies.
I hope this reaches you soon. The weather here is not too bad although there is no sign of spring yet!
Yours sincerely,
Alfredo
(Your cousin at the European Parliament's postal service)
p.s. Don't forget to post your Valentine day cards soon!
Press info: Focus on the reforms Ferber interview
A child's right not to be exploited online
The rights of children - in particular the right of protection from paedophiles operating on the internet - will be discussed Tuesday afternoon by MEPs. The world-wide-web has created a new area of anonymity for those preying on children, with child pornography being rampant. It is illegal to exploit children via the internet and several cases have shown the police are capable of tracking down offenders. Tuesday's debate centres on a report by Italian MEP Roberta Angelilli (UEN).
A bleak assessment of the problem by Interpol says that "the internet...and digital cameras have made it easier for individuals with a sexual interest in children to record their activities". A major problem for law enforcement agencies is that many sites and children being abused are not in the EU - but in the developing world.
In a speech on children's rights in Berlin in June last year the EU's Justice Commissioner Franco Frattini told delegates he was "saddened and shocked" to hear that the number of sites with child-sex material went up 1500% from 1997 to 2005.
Stopping payment by credit cards
The Angelilli report, which will be discussed after 1500 CET , lays down a number of options to deal with these disturbing trends.
Blocking credit card payment for paedophile material is one step advocated by the report. This would involve cooperation with credit card companies to get them to block certain sites from receiving money for the material they sell.
Stopping access to sites is another possibility. This would mean internet service providers and search engines using technology available to hamper access to dangerous sites. Closing down sites is another option, although this could only be done if they are based in the EU.
These steps would go hand in hand with a database of sites that sells child pornography. Finally a website dedicated to the rights of the child - so they know what rights they have - is another idea in the report.
Definition of crimes of sexual exploitation
In an effort to tackle the growth of child pornography on the internet and in print EU ministers agreed in 2004 what constitutes an offence, making the production, dissemination and transmission of child pornography illegal and also making it an offence to offer, make available or possess child pornography.
There is a "safer internet" programme running across Europe that aims to warn people of the dangers the internet can pose to children. Young people are drawn to the internet by its fascinating variety - the Angelilli report aims to stop those who prey on children from using this interest against them.
Watch the debate live online from 1500 CET. Parliament will vote on the report on Wednesday 16 January at 1200.
Follow the debate (Tuesday afternoon) Angelilli’s draft report Press-Info: "Rights of the child: the European Parliament to set out its strategy" Story on children and internet (11.2006) Safer Internet programme
40 years on: Europe and the legacy of 1968
Prague Spring meets Soviet Winter. Crowds surround Soviet tanks, 21 August '68 The events of 1968 shook post-war Europe and are still be analysed and spoken about today - a tribute to their enduring importance. Protests in Paris during the May days were the most famous although similar protest events resonated east and west across Europe. In Czechoslovakia the Prague Spring gave us "socialism with a human face" whilst in Poland students protested for reform before Soviet rule crushed dissent. Forty years on we asked a few MEPs for their recollections of that fateful year.
Paris '68 seen by a 24 year old future MEP
Paris in May 1968 was the scene of demonstrations which shook the Fifth Republic. Future president of the European Parliament Nicole Fontaine was living in the Latin Quarter of the city during those days. She recalls: "I was 24 and had just finished my studies at the Institut des Sciences Politiques - I was also expecting my first child". She told us that due to the imminent arrival of her child she was more of an "observer of events rather than a participator".
Ms Fontaine - who still sits in the Strasbourg assembly for the centre right EPP-ED group, said the slogans of '68 "irritated and continue to irritate" the upper classes of French society. For her, the people - in particular the students - were reacting to what they saw as the "archaic and unbearable" French society. For her the legacy was a "catharsis" in French society which led to changes which would have inevitably occurred, but thanks to '68 change came with "more convulsions".
Prague Spring to Soviet Winter: the flight from Prague
The events of 1968 had an impact on both sides of the iron curtain. In Czechoslovakia the Prague Spring of liberalisation and Alexander Dubček's "socialism with a human face" flourished before Soviet tanks ended all hope of reform.
One of those who fled to the west after the Soviet invasion was current Green MEP Milan Horáček. He went to Frankfurt and now represents Germany in the European Parliament. He recalls that "as Czechoslovak political refugees, we found support by those who rejected both capitalism and communism. But of course we were less enthusiastic about the leftist idealism of some of the activists, because we have seen how socialism actually looks in reality".
In terms of the political legacy of '68 in the west and Germany in particular, Mr Horáček sees the election of openly gay mayors, a coalition of greens and conservatives in Hamburg and the involvement of more women in politics as processes which "have their roots in the events of 1968". He told us that "before that public life was much more conservative and such things were simply unthinkable". For his native Czechoslovakia he sees the memories of '68 leading to the dissident movement "Charter 77" and the eventual "Velvet" revolution in 1989.
Poland's student protest: "workers did not support it"
In neighbouring Poland the spring of 1968 saw students revolt against the Communist government in favour of political reform and more freedom of speech. Bronisław Geremek is a Polish historian and now serves as a Liberal MEP. He told us that he finds it "hard to find a common denominator" with the 1968 events in France, Germany, Italy and in the US. He believes they "differed in specifics and their goals were not alike. However, all of the movements were about freedom".
Speaking about the differences between the events of '68 in Poland and the later "Solidarity" movement, Geremek says that "1968 in Poland was purely an intellectual initiative. Other social groups, namely workers, did not support it". He says the experience of that year was present later in Solidarity and that "the valuable experience of 1968 was mainly negative". However, he says that it did "wake up" society and lead ultimately to the fall of the Soviet system.
Turning to Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia he says that prior to that people still believed that socialism could be "revised and reformed". According to Geremek this sentiment was dispelled just as it had been in Budapest in 1956 when the Hungarian revolution was crushed by the Soviet Union.
1968 belongs to history
From the perspective of four decades later, 1968 clearly marked a significant shift in European history, albeit taking different forms on each side of the iron curtain, and indeed varying sharply between different countries on the two sides. These changes played a great role in the shaping of today's reunited Europe represented in the European Parliament. The debate will continue as to the precise nature of the legacy, while many now say the time has come to look forward rather than back.
One of the most important student leaders of the period, current Green MEP Daniel Cohn-Bendit, believes that 1968 should be finally shelved. On the 15th of April he was quoted as saying that "it happened once upon a time. Constantly replaying the debate of 1968 does not bring us any further. Sixty-eight has changed the world, if you like it or not. But today society is different and therefore we need a different debate."
Nicole Fontaine MEP Milan Horáček MEP Bronisław Geremek MEP 1968 - wikipedia
EN
1
PHOTO
20080715PHT34206.jpg
EN
2
PHOTO
20080213PHT21217.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/parliament/public/staticDisplay.do?language=EN&id=147
EN
4
LINK
http://www.epstage.eu/news.php
EN
5
LINK
/members/public.do?language=en
EN
6
PHOTO
20080414PHT26522.jpg
EN
7
LINK
/meetdocs/2004_2009/documents/dv/999/999000/999000en.pdf
EN
12
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/faces/live/live-video.jsp?language=en
EN
16
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/activities/sip/index_en.htm
EN
17
PHOTO
20080516PHT29081.jpg
EN
18
LINK
/members/public/geoSearch/view.do?country=FR&partNumber=1&zone=Ile+de+France&language=EN&id=945
EN
19
LINK
/members/expert/searchForm/view.do?partNumber=1&name=horacek&language=EN&id=28239
EN
20
LINK
/members/expert/groupAndCountry/view.do?partNumber=1&group=1550&country=PL&language=EN&id=28384
EN
21
LINK
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1968
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A6-2007-0399 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080130IPR20129 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070703BKG08766 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070705STO08854 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A6-2007-0520 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071213BRI15257 ITEM-007-EN NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061129STO00721 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FEA DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FEA DOC XML V0//EN
