"Georgia is counting on us...Europe must not flinch" - Marie Anne Isler Béguin
External relations
2008-08-27 - 09:20
EU must take tough decisions President of the EP delegation with the South Caucasus countries, Marie Anne Isler Béguin was in Georgia just a few days after the beginning of the conflict in South Ossetia. Appointed by EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering to represent the Parliament, she participated in the ceasefire negotiations after the first phase of hostilities, and travelled in some of the areas directly affected.
Subsequently, Parliament's Foreign Affairs Committee, Subcommittee on Security and Defence and the Delegation for relations with the South Caucasus met on Wednesday 20 August to discuss developments in Georgia. Georgian Minister Foreign Affairs Eka Tkeshelashvili was there and called on the EU to send a mission to Georgia
We spoke with Ms Isler Béguin on the phone to hear first-hand about what she saw on the ground and to hear her views on possible prescriptions for a resolution of the situation.
What was the situation when you were in Georgia and what did you observe?
I was in Georgia from 11 to 17 August, at the time when the Russian army advanced on Tbilisi. I tried to go to Gori three times. In Kaspi (30 km from Tbilisi), I saw that the city's cement factory had been bombed, the bridge and railway line damaged. Even on Georgian territory and away from the conflict zone, the Russian bombardment had an impact. The population of the city was panicked.
I was with the French ambassador when Medvedev signed the peace agreement. What we saw on the road between Kaspi and Gori was alarming, tanks were in position and the Russians entrenched. The army was deployed on Georgian territory. The Russian soldiers conducted a war of nerves against the population as no-one knew what they would do.
Since the Russian withdrawal, I have received statements from Georgians that they have left villages. But there are still 500 Russian soldiers in Georgia to "ensure security". That is unacceptable.
What should the international community do?
The EU and the US must urgently negotiate a UN resolution to find a new way to regulate the conflict. The CIS soldiers - 99% Russian - were legitimate peacekeepers. But following this war, they are not acceptable to Georgia. The Russians were involved in the conflict, they cannot be peacekeepers. Credible peacekeepers, in the eyes of the Georgians, must be found.
UN troops must be deployed in Georgia and in the conflict zones. Mediation by the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe is not working, it was supposed to send 100 observers and has sent only 20. To be credible and restore confidence in the defence of democracy we must see the blue helmets (of the UN). There was a war.
What are you expecting from the EU summit on the subject organised by France for 1 September?
The EU supports Georgia through its neighbourhood policy. The situation there is fragile and so long as these conflicts remain unresolved we can't move forward. It is urgent that we regulate the situation.
Europe must continue to preserve its values. The 27 countries must unite to defend democracy and demand that Russia comes to an agreement over the resolution of the situation. Georgia's sovereignty and its borders were recognised by all parties, including Russia. The EU must not flinch, because the Georgians have been let down by the US and are counting on the EU to help them. The Council must have the courage to take the decisions it has failed to take since the start of the tensions 2-3 years ago.
My delegation backs the prospect of EU entry for Georgia and the other countries of the South Caucasus...They are turning to NATO to ensure their safety, to which Russia objects and which was a part of the reason for the crisis. It is more clear than ever that the EU must agree on major international issues.
Monday the Duma asked for the recognition of the independence of S outh Ossetia and Abkhazia. Is the territorial integrity of Georgia under threat?
Russia 's recognition of the independence of Abkhazia and South Ossetia is a sword of Damocles, that we knew was there. After Kosovo, Putin anticipated the consequences on the two regions. But the difference is that in Kosovo, it is the international community that is working for independence.
We are for self-determination, but it must be by all the people. In 1994, about 70% of the Georgian population living in Abkhazia was forced to leave the region and take refuge elsewhere. You can only have self-determination when all the inhabitants have returned, including the Georgians from Abkhazia.
In addition, Georgia's borders were recognised by all. Russia won't allow Chechen independence but defends the independence of these two separatist territories at the same time as it recognises the territorial integrity of Georgia! There is an obvious contradiction.
After this interview was conducted, Russia Tuesday noon announced its unilateral decision to recognise the regions of South Ossetia and Abkhazia as independent states. The European Parliament is following the situation in the Caucasus closely. The "Headlines" and "Press Service" pages of this website will provide news of developments in Parliament as they occur. Several political groups have requested a debate and a resolution for adoption during next week’s plenary session.
20080825STO35399 Press release : Georgian Foreign Minister calls on EU to send mission to Georgia Information from the delegation to the South Caucasus Isler Béguin: Georgian elections a "step forward for democracy" (9/1/08
EN
1
PHOTO
20080825PHT35434.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/activities/delegations/publicationsDel.do;jsessionid=AA1AD671B8331BC95DD0E6BB8DE23FA9.node1?body=DSCA&language=EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080821IPR35353 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080107STO17492 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
