Cities of Europe: Athens
Institutions
2008-08-29 - 13:11
The Acropolis In the latest of our looks at the cities of Europe associated with EU treaties, projects and initiatives, we turn south to Athens. The Greek capital, widely acknowledged as the birthplace of democracy, was in 2003 the venue for one of the most momentous treaty signings of postwar Europe, enlarging the EU by ten Member States. Appropriately also for the capital of a famously seafaring nation, Athens gave its name to a Convention protecting sea passengers.
For those in peril on the sea…
The liability of carriers for injury, damage or loss suffered by sea passengers is a subject currently detaining Members of the European Parliament's Committee on Transport and Tourism. On 25 August, the committee examined draft legislation on carriers' liability in the event of accidents at sea, as part of the wider "maritime safety package" of draft laws submitted to Parliament. Several elements of this wider package are due to be debated by Parliament as a whole at its plenary sitting of 1-4 September 2008.
The principle of carriers' liability for damage suffered by passengers carried on a seagoing vessel underpinning the legislation currently before MEPs was established in the Athens Convention, signed on 13 December 1974.
Sealing the new Europe
It was on 16 April 2003 that the leaders of the then fifteen EU Member States and the ten countries who were to join them gathered in the Greek capital to sign the treaty which would bring about the largest ever enlargement of the European Union, leading to a 25-country Union and thereafter to the 27 of today. The Athens Treaty thus set the seal on a process precipitated by the disintegration of the Soviet Union whereby five countries of central and eastern Europe and three countries which had been part of the Soviet Union itself chose to seek membership of the European Union, alongside the two Mediterranean island nations who also opted for this path.
Birthplace of the Olympic Games
The original classical era Olympics were first recorded in 776 BC in Olympia, Greece. Myth has it that the Games were created by Heracles and his father Zeus. Be that as it may, today in Athens stands the Kallimarmaro Stadium, a replica of the ancient Athenian stadium, where the first modern Olympic Games took place in 1896. More modern facilities were required of course for the next occasion Athens hosted the Games in 2004, but many would argue that the underlying spirit of the Games, encompassing values such as fair competition, solidarity, friendship, peace and diversity are timeless, at the heart of the democratic world view born in Athens and enshrined in the founding principles of the European Union.
The Olympic hymn (written by the Greek poet Kostis Palamas), performed at the opening ceremonies of the Olympic Games when the Olympic flag is raised, seeks to capture the spirit of the Games: "Ancient and immortal spirit, pure father of all things beautiful and great and true..").
Sightseeing in Athens today
Home of Plato's Academy and Aristotle's Lyceum and birthplace of Socrates, Pericles, Sophocles and many other philosophers who have inspired western thought for centuries, Athens is widely referred to as the cradle of western civilization and democracy. Physically, the classical era heritage of Athens is manifest above all in the world famous monuments on the Acropolis, perhaps above all the Parthenon, or in the "Agora" (an open "place of assembly" in ancient Greek city-states, whose name and function have inspired the Citizens' Agoras organised by the European Parliament).
The visitor might also take time to walk in the narrow streets of the famous historic triangle (Plaka, Thission, Psyri) neighbourhood, or catch a glimpse of a "tsolias" (soldier of the Greek presidential guard, with famously distinctive dress uniform) in Syntagma Square, in the heart of the governmental quarter.
Athens' climate is one of the warmest in Europe (with mild winters and very hot summers), so most visitors, like the natives, will sooner or later seek shade and refreshment. Many locals opt for a "frappé" (typical Greek cold coffee with ice cubes) in a café and for a range of Greek specialties (feta, tzatziki, souvlaki, gyros, dolmadakia, mousakas, etc.). As dusk falls, you might track down some traditional Greek "bouzouki" music in a taverna while partaking of ouzo or retsina.
For those who wish to explore beyond the capital city, needless to say, many will be drawn to nearby Piraeus, the main commercial port of Athens, where they can embark on ferries bound for in excess of 200 inhabited Greek islands...
20080825STO35403 TRAN Committee Live streaming (of maritime safety package debates) Will the EU ever field a single team for the Olympics? Citizens' Agora More info on Athens
EN
1
PHOTO
20080827PHT35550.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=TRAN
EN
3
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/faces/live/live-video.jsp?language=en
EN
5
LINK
/parliament/public/staticDisplay.do?id=66
EN
6
LINK
http://www.greece-athens.com/
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080825STO35400 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
