The Week Ahead 1-7 September 2008
Institutions
2008-08-29 - 10:30
Plenary session – Brussels
Russia/Georgia. EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering will address EU leaders at Monday’s special summit and hold a press conference (1530 Justus Lipsius Building) . Immediately after the summit, French Foreign Minister Bernard Kouchner will present its conclusions to MEPs in the plenary, during a debate also including the Commission (Monday). Parliament will then vote on a resolution on the situation in Georgia (Wednesday).
Telecom package. Changes to telecom regulation, covering radio spectrum allocation, internet access and consumer protection among other things, are set to be debated at first reading (debate Tuesday, vote September II session).
Social policy. The European Commission will present its proposals on labour rights, anti-discrimination and other areas of social policy in a debate with MEPs (Tuesday).
Product labelling. Revised rules on how packaging should indicate chemicals present in products come to first reading (debate and vote Wednesday).
EP/Costa Rica. Oscar Arias, President of Costa Rica and winner of the Nobel Peace Prize in 1987, will address MEPs in a formal sitting, then take part in a press conference with President Pöttering. (Wednesday)
Gender equality. A report from the Women’s Rights Committee considers the impact of marketing and advertising on male-female equality. The Committee’s annual report on gender equality is also on the agenda (debate Tuesday, vote Wednesday).
Animal cloning. MEPs will discuss with the Commission whether animal cloning should be allowed in food production (debate Tuesday, vote on resolution Wednesday).
Maritime package. Away from the plenary, the Transport Committee will vote on a series of legislative reports on changes to EU rules governing the shipping industry (Thursday).
EP/Serbia. President Pöttering will meet the President of Serbia, Boris Tadic (Wednesday).
20080829IPR35593 For details of all the week's events, see "The Agenda"
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20083600AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
