EU summit on Georgia – MEPs react: did the EU get it right?
External relations
2008-09-02 - 18:13
9 August - Russian troops on the road to South Ossetia's capital Tskhinvali On Monday, the heads of state and government, meeting for a special summit on the Georgia conflict condemned Russia’s intervention and recognition of the break-away regions in Georgia. They agreed to send a fact finding mission, to nominate a special representative and to suspend negotiations of a partnership agreement with Russia until Russian troops deployed after 7 August are completely withdrawn.
The day after the summit and the subsequent debate in plenary, we asked a range of MEPs specialising in Foreign Affairs and the Caucasus region in particular for their assessment of the EU’s reaction to the crisis.
Was the response to the Russia-Georgia crisis from the EU summit appropriate?
Marie Anne Isler Béguin is a French Green MEP who Chairs Parliament's delegation to Georgia. She told us that she was "pleasantly surprised by the outcome of the Council, for example nobody expected them to suspend the partnership agreements (with Russia) until Russian troops has left Georgian territory."
Polish MEP Jacek Saryusz-Wolski (PPE-DE) Chairs the Foreign Affairs Committee. He believes that “we, the Union, have a choice – either to be satisfied with our verbal actions or to revise our policy towards Russia, making it clear that we can be assertive in the event of non-compliance by Russia with the rules which we expect".
Karl von Wogau (EPP-ED) of Germany chairs the security subcommittee. He welcomed the fact that the EU decided to act jointly and to send an observer mission to Georgia. "The EU can only make a real difference in international conflict resolution when it acts under joint leadership and a common flag" he said.
Bulgarian Socialist MEP Evgeni Kirilov: "I think that the EU's reaction to the conflict in the Southern Caucasus was a very timely, balanced and mature one. There is no better alternative for the Union than to continue dialogue and cooperation with Russia”, while making clear “that we are no more in a situation of business as usual.”
Ona Juknevičienė (ALDE, Lithuania) : “I am glad that now a common opinion of Europe is clear, and targeted to seek an effective resolution. I am not convinced that suspending of the negotiations of Partnership and Cooperation Agreements is an adequate measure. Russia knows very well that it is equally important to both sides."
For the UEN group, Latvian MEP Inese Vaidere told us she is in favour of freezing the simplified visa system with Russia and stopping the partnership agreement: “We shouldn’t be afraid to interrupt the dialogue. …. If Russian aggression and the recognition of the separatist regions do not receive an adequate reaction it will be a signal to carry on as before.”
Milan Horáček, German Green member of Czech origin was “not totally satisfied with the reaction by the EU summit. I would have hoped for a reaction more clearly based on our values of democracy, rule of law, human rights and most of all freedom. There is too much, even explicit, consideration for our dependence on oil and gas. When Russia says this is temporary, it reminds me of 1968 in Prague, where the troops ended up to remaining for 22 years.”
How should the EP position itself?
Esko Seppänen (GUE/NGL) of Finland is Vice-chairman of the EU-Russia delegation: "I want a balanced approach giving due attention to Mr Saakashvili´s terribly wrong risk assessment when preparing his adventurous military attack. At the same time, the EP should request Russia to obey international law and provide help for the civilians suffering in South Ossetia and Georgia."
Belgian Socialist MEP Saïd El Khadraoui “It's obvious there's no military solution to the conflict. More cooperation, not more confrontation is the response. Although we need to condemn vehemently the Russian military response, we have to acknowledge that we need Russia if we want a lasting solution for the problems in the area."
What of Georgia's future?
Ms Isler Béguin "I'm happy to see that colleagues in this parliament have changed its mind in relation to Georgia for him to open the door in a perspective that they can hope to one day join the EU."
Hungarian Member György Schöpflin for the EPP-ED told us that "it is still too early to say anything. On the one hand the Russians' game is still going on, on the other hand we cannot still see how the Georgian political elite relates to Saakashvili."
Ona Juknevičienė went on to say that "Russia will do anything in order not to withdraw from South Ossetia and Abkhazia. Georgia on it's own can do very little. Georgia's future depends mainly on the position and actions of the EU and NATO."
Bulgarian Socialist Evgeni Kirilov said "the strong willingness of the EU to engage more closely in the Black Sea region and the Caucasus makes me optimistic about the future of this troubled European neighbourhood.”
20080901STO35697 Tabled resolutions - Georgia MEPs debate the situation in Georgia President Pöttering’s speech at the summit Interview Isler Beguin
EN
1
PHOTO
20080902PHT35916.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/activities/plenary/motion.do;jsessionid=17F470E7747F6B4C8EBFEEF7A3F9A5A3.node1?language=EN
EN
4
LINK
/president/defaulten.htm#speeche
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080829IPR35626 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080825STO35399 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
