MEPs move towards cross-border motor insurance
Consumers
2008-09-02 - 16:56
In adopting an own-initiative report on motor insurance in Europe, MEPs welcome the Commission’s report on certain issues relating to motor insurance. The report highlights the importance of including, fully and effectively, all stakeholders, in particular consumers, in the process of consultation in the development of EU policy. The report underlines the importance of increasing consumer confidence in motor insurance policies as regards cross-border motor vehicle travel within the EU.
The report calls for the systematic involvement of consumer organisations representing in particular victims in the process of evaluation of the effectiveness of the systems in place in the Member States.
The report underlines the importance of increasing consumer confidence in motor insurance policies as regards cross-border motor vehicle travel within the EU, especially for motorists from the old Member States travelling to destinations in the new Member States and vice versa. The Commission is invited to continue to closely monitor the effective functioning of market mechanisms and to report periodically to Parliament on this issue.
MEPs consider, in line with the generally established EU approach on sanctions, that the principle of subsidiarity should be applied and that there is no need for the harmonisation of national penalty provisions. They recommend, with reference to the reasoned offer/reply procedure, leaving to the discretion of Member States the imposition of sanctions and the choice of which types and levels of provision are appropriate. Member States are called upon to ensure that in the event of non-compliance with the three-month deadline for submitting a reasoned reply to the claim for compensation or a reasoned offer of compensation, the penalties introduced are effective.
MEPs reiterate the importance of boosting citizens’ confidence in the functioning of the claims representative system by promoting it through public campaigns and by other appropriate measures.
Insurers are required to include the contact details of the information centre in the Member State in question in their contractual information package. They are also, as part of the pre-contractual information package, to provide comprehensive information to consumers on how the claims representative system works and what are its uses and benefits to the insured party.
MEPs consider that, in relation to Motor Third Party Liability insurance, the negative effects of introducing a system of compulsory cover of legal costs in Motor Third Party Liability insurance would outweigh the potential benefits. The Commission is invited to take, in partnership with Member States, the further steps necessary to raise awareness of legal protection insurance particularly in the new Member States, focussing on informing consumers of the advantages of being offered and holding one or another type of insurance cover. The European Parliament considers in this context the role of national regulatory bodies to be crucial for the implementation of best practices from other Member States.
The House calls on those Member States that do not have established alternative dispute resolution systems for settling claims to consider introducing such systems based on best practice from other Member States.
British and Irish speakers in the debate
Diana Wallis (UK) for the ALDE group said: " Mr Mladenov’s report makes a very important contribution to the ongoing work. It is clear that claims need to be simplified as much as possible and the three month period has to be respected. Accident trauma must not be increased by legal trauma. We know that there are complicated issues of conflict of law that this Parliament wanted to solve in our approach to the Rome II Regulation."
Malcolm Harbour (EPP-ED, UK) said: " I want to build on some of the points that a number of my colleagues have made, particularly Diana Wallis and Andrew Schwab. Diana and I have been involved in this area since we came to Parliament in 1999, and therefore understand its importance. It is probably fair to say that if Parliament had not consistently raised these issues with the Commission and said that the motor insurance regime, and particularly its cross border aspects for mobile motorists, was deeply unsatisfactory, then we would be where we are now, and nowhere close to the fourth Motor Insurance Directive and perhaps looking forward to a fifth."
Colm Burke (EPP-ED, IE) said: "As a legal practitioner who has dealt with cross border claims, it is not all rosy in the garden as might be suggested in the report. While I welcome the report, some of the kind of problems that I have come across are problems where there is legal cost insurance and where the claimants are finding it difficult to recover costs on the basis of it. These claimants have gone through court procedures and expended monies in order to validate their claims and then find that, on the one hand, the insurer of the offending party which caused the accident is not paying the full costs of putting the case together, and on the other hand, their own insurance company, with whom they had insurance for covering legal costs, is also not paying up and is walking away from its responsibilities."
20080901IPR35823 Certain issues relating to motor insurance Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 2 September)
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5564872
EN
2
LINK
//activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
