Monday plenary: Russia-Georgia, judicial cooperation
Institutions
2008-09-02 - 12:27
French Foreign Minister Bernard Kouchner debates with MEPs, 1 September The first post-summer break session, exceptionally held in Brussels, saw French Foreign Minister Bernard Kouchner, hotfoot from the extraordinary EU Summit on Georgia, reporting to MEPs on national leaders' conclusions on how to deal with the crisis. The ensuing debate focused on future relations with Russia. The day in plenary also included a debate on justice and home affairs.
Debate on Georgia, Russia and the EU
“If we fail to meet our joint responsibility today, then Russia might act in the same way towards other States,” warned Parliament's President Hans Gert Pöttering during the extraordinary EU Summit on Georgia. Directly addressing people in the small states that share a border with Russia - Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia, he said: "You are no longer alone! A threat to your country would constitute a threat to the European Union as a whole".
Mr Pöttering called for the EU to be united and determined not to accept the territorial integrity of Georgia being called into question by a unilateral decision in Moscow.
Immediately after the extraordinary summit on Georgia, French Foreign Affairs Minister Bernard Kouchner and External Affairs Commissioner Benita Ferrero-Waldner arrived directly from the discussions in Council to debate the issue with MEPs.
Mr Kouchner took a firm stance, condemning the Russian unilateral action and explaining the decision to suspend EU talks with Russia on a new partnership agreement until Moscow withdraws its troops from Georgia. But he also pleaded for maintaining channels of communication with Russia, while promising help for rebuilding Georgia. Ms Ferrero-Waldner underlined Europe's need for a coherent energy policy, revealed by this crisis.
Across the floor of the House, political group representatives condemned the action taken by Russia in the Caucasus, with several also criticising the actions of the Georgian government in the course of the crisis. As for the future, the need for a constructive and balanced role for the EU in bringing about a resolution to the conflict was widely expressed, with many Members emphasising the importance of the EU's long-term relationship with Russia.
You can read a detailed account of the debate at the link below, or watch the whole debate via our video-on-demand service.
Debate on justice and home affairs
No less than 5 reports linked to justice and home affairs were discussed during this first debate in the hemicycle, with French Minister of Justice Rachida Dati and Justic Commissioner Jacques Barrot. Among the issues were the mutual recognition and execution of judicial decisions in absentia between EU countries and the reinforcement of judicial cooperation through Eurojust and the European judicial network.
MEPs noted disparities among member states on asylum applications, despite the “Dublin system” established in 2003, which defines which country is responsible for examining an asylum application. They called for a better burden sharing and said the detention of claimants should be a “measure of last resort”.
Mourning the absent
At the opening of the session, at the invitation of the President, Hans-Gert Pöttering, MEPs commemorated the victims of the two recent plane crashes: in Madrid on 20 August which left 154 people dead and at Kyrgyzstan's capital, Bishkek, on 24 August, when 68 passengers died. Members also remembered colleagues and former MEPs who passed away during the summer: Polish MEP Bronislaw Geremek (ALDE), Willy Piecyk (PSE) and Maria Luisa Cassanmagnago Cerretti.
Also on Monday
Later MEPs debated motor insurance, the fight against fiscal fraud and European contract law.
20080901STO35664 Opening of the plenary session Geremek profile MEPs debate the situation in Georgia EP President speech at the special EU Council on Georgia EU Council conclusions
EN
1
PHOTO
20080902PHT35914.jpg
EN
5
LINK
/president/defaulten.htm?home
EN
6
LINK
http://www.consilium.europa.eu/ueDocs/cms_Data/docs/pressData/en/gena/102338.pdf
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080829IPR35610 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080714STO34077 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080829IPR35626 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
