Transport Committee still at odds with Council on third maritime package
Transport
2008-09-04 - 11:52
In reports voted Thursday, the Transport Committee deplores the fact that, over a year after Parliament's April 2007 first-reading vote on seven proposals to protect Europe against maritime accidents and pollution, transport ministers are still blocking two - on flag state obligations and civil liability - and have not taken up most of Parliament's recommendations on the other five.
In the case of the third maritime package's two "missing files", on flag state obligations and on civil liability, MEPs decided to insert key amendments on these issues into other reports. They also reinserted all key amendments from the first reading, approving them almost unanimously in this morning's vote.
Maritime safety is top priority
Members reiterated that maritime safety had always been Parliament's priority, and that they did not want Council to water down important suggestions on port state control, a Community vessel traffic monitoring system, accident investigation, the liability boat passenger carriers and ship inspection and survey organisations.
Five maritime package reports
A Community vessel traffic monitoring and information system
(Rapporteur: Dirk Sterckx (ALDE, BE)
The committee reinserted amendments on the designation of an independent competent authority for the accommodation of vessels in distress. Successive disasters and near-disasters have shown that much time is often wasted because it was not clear who was responsible for what, it said. The committee favours setting up a competent with the independent expertise to decide, should an incident occur, on the best course of action to avoid a disaster. In the event of an accident, masters and crews should be treated fairly and not criminalised, it added.
Absence of evidence of financial security must not be a factor in assessing and deciding whether to accommodate a ship in distress, and accommodation in a place of refuge should not be restricted to insured vessels. MEPs also adopted so-called "political" amendments, inserting the key elements of the civil liability issues blocked by the Council, into this report.
The report was adopted with 39 votes in favour, none against and no abstentions.
Investigation of accidents in the maritime transport sector
(Rapporteur: Jaromir Kohlicek (GUE/NGL, CZ)
MEPs approved amendments on the independence of investigative bodies, a deadline for starting investigations and an obligation for Member States to implement IMO guidelines on fair treatment of seafarers. The committee wants safety investigations of serious accidents, and not only of "very serious" accidents as Council is proposing, to remain mandatory and distress alerts to remain within the scope of the Directive. Finally, it is essential that Member States apply a common methodology in investigating accidents, it said.
The report was adopted with 40 votes in favour, none against and no abstentions.
Ship inspections and survey organisations (Directive and Regulation)
(Rapporteur: Luis de Grandes Pascual (EPP-ED, ES)
Classification societies are private sector organisations to which flag states delegate some ship inspection functions. Here, the main disputes with the Council are over the name of the new body or system for assessing and certifying these societies and the liability of recognised organisations when carrying out work on behalf of a Member State. Amendments to restore the key elements of the missing proposal on flag state control were also adopted.
Both reports were adopted with 42 votes in favour, none against and no abstentions.
Port state control
(Rapporteur: Dominique Vlasto (EPP-ED, FR)
Committee amendments reveal disagreement with the Council on the frequency of inspection of vessels in various risk categories, the inspection rate target which national authorities would be required to meet and the fact that Council wants to exclude vessels calling at offshore anchorages from inspection requirements, whereas Parliament wants them included. Finally, whilst ministers want a ban on sub-standard vessels using EU ports to be temporary, MEPs want it to be permanent.
The report was adopted with 40 votes in favour, none against and two abstentions.
Liability of boat passenger carriers in the event of accidents
(Rapporteur: Paolo Costa (ALDE, IT)
MEPs also inserted amendments on the extension of the scope of the Regulation transposing the Athens Convention to all domestic carriage by sea, the scope of which the Council wishes to limit to large A-class ships, on the inclusion of inland waterways and on the Council's rejection of the application of the €21,000 advance payment to victims of permanent invalidity or severe injuries.
The committee also reinstated first-reading amendments proposing a harmonised approach on ceilings on the amounts to be paid to passengers in the event of accidents. They rejected any derogating reference to the global ceilings of the Convention on Limitation of Liability for Maritime Claims which might prevent passengers from recovering a substantial part of their claims under the Athens Convention.
The report was adopted with 40 votes in favour, none against and 2 abstentions.
What happens next?
The plenary debate and vote on these reports are scheduled for the September II session. If the Council does not accept Parliament's second-reading verdict and makes no progress on the two missing files, then a conciliation procedure cannot be excluded.
2008-09-04 Committee on Transport and Tourism In the Chair Paolo COSTA ALDE IT
Procedure: Co-decision, second reading - Plenary vote: September II
20080904IPR36208 Committee on Transport and Tourism website
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=TRAN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
