African Week: strengthening cultural and parliamentary ties between the EU and Africa
Development and cooperation
2008-09-11 - 18:08
European Parliament President Hans-Gert Pöttering and Pan-African Parliament President Gertrude Mongella called for deeper cultural dialogue between Europe and Africa as well as closer ties between the parliaments of the two continents at the closing ceremony of the EP's African Week in Brussels on Thursday. Wole Soyinka, winner of the Nobel Prize for Literature, stressed that "the hunger for justice is not restricted to Europe".
"Europe's integration process can and should serve as an example for dialogue between cultures at African level. Although there are no easy solutions to the African continent's problems, a constructive intercultural dialogue is essential", argued Mr Pöttering, who chaired this special session of African Week. "Africa, with its 53 countries and 2000 languages, cannot resolve its difficulties purely at national level".
European Commission President José Manuel Barroso described the ties between Europe and Africa as "a relationship between equal partners determined to face up together to the world's problems, such as food security, migration and climate change". The EU and the countries of Africa had laid the foundations for this new cooperation at the second EU-Africa summit on 8 and 9 December 2007, he added.
Intercultural dialogue and justice
Wole Soyinka, the Nigerian former winner of the Nobel Literature Prize, appealed for an end to the "culture of impunity" towards former African dictators, saying that "the fate of this continent depends on those who regard themselves as Africans".
"A torturer is a torturer, whatever the colour of his skin or his religion", he stressed, citing the cases of Idi Amin, Pol Pot and Radovan Karadzic. With the 60th anniversary of the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights approaching, he also underlined his opposition to the notion of "cultural relativism", which some people believe justifies non-respect for human rights in Africa.
"We must show that Africa is rich in culture and intelligence. It is too often associated with death and hunger", urged EP Vice-President Luisa Morgantini (GUE/NGL, IT).
Relations with the Pan-African Parliament
Gertrude Mongella, President of the Pan-African Parliament, believed "the strengthening of ties between the two parliaments has also helped strengthen ties between the EU and the African Union". For his part, Hans-Gert Pöttering said "a strengthening of the parliamentary dimension is part of the struggle for the stability and development of the African continent".
The European Parliament has since 2005 had an ad hoc delegation for relations with the Pan-African Parliament, chaired by Michael Gahler (EPP-ED, DE).
Extraordinary meeting of African Week
Chaired by Michael Gahler (EPP-ED), chair of the Ad hoc delegation for relations with the Pan-African Parliament 20080911IPR36989
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
