Intercultural Schools: London's Elizabeth Garrett Anderson School sets example to EP Education and Culture Committee
Education
United Kingdom
2008-09-10 - 15:40
Elizabeth Garrett Anderson School - 64 languages spoken in one school "The future of my city depends on schools like Elizabeth Garrett Anderson (EGA). Students find their own identities in an intercultural context," this was the message of Jo Dibb Head teacher of the Islington based Elizabeth Garrett Anderson School to the European Parliament's Education and Culture Committee's hearing in Brussels.
The EGA school for some 1 200 11-16 year old girls is based in Islington and surrounded by social housing with 64 different languages spoken by pupils. 43% of students are entitled to free school meals, well above the national average and 92% are black or minority ethnic from 66 ethnic backgrounds.
"Education is still intrinsically build to social class, it is important for the school to give our students the 'social capital' they need to succeed.
Our school uniforms - ('the EGA collection') which were partly designed by the students allows pupils to express their religious beliefs within their uniforms. We have the same expectations as other schools, all our classes have seating plans to ensure that different ethnic backgrounds mix. We also teach in the pupils' mother tongues - we have taught maths and science in Turkish which has boosted results and we have mother tongue teaching, in Bengali, Arabic and Turkish," said Jo Dibb.
The Head teacher pointed out that currently the lowest achieving group in the school were white UK students, this was linked to the school intake and social class.
Helga Trupel (Greens/EFA, DE) said: "We had an opportunity to visit Elizabeth Garrett Anderson school during the British Presidency of the EU in 2005. The school is an excellent of example of how important it is to boost the self-esteem of students in an intercultural context. It is also a model of integration for dealing with students from immigrant backgrounds."
Other speakers to the hearing on intercultural schools (see link below) were: Judit SZIRA, Senior Advisor, Roma Education Fund, Georgios TSIAKALOS, Professor of Pedagogy , Aristotle University of Thessaloniki and Maarten KNOESTER, Executive Director, Stichting Het Rijnlands Lyceum - International School of The Hague.
20080904IPR36298 Programme and CVs for hearing on Intercultural Schools Elizabeth Garrett Anderson School
EN
1
PHOTO
20080910PHT36852.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/activities/committees/hearingsCom.do?language=EN&body=CULT
EN
3
LINK
http://www.egaschool.co.uk/index.php
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
