The Week Ahead 15 - 21 September 2008
Institutions
2008-09-12 - 11:56
Committee meetings and political groups week - Brussels
Preparing for the plenary. Parliament’s political groups will devote most of the week to preparations for the 22-25 September plenary session in Brussels. The agenda includes the telecom package and the third maritime package, as well as measures for combating terrorism and protecting personal data. Patient mobility and the regulation of hedge funds will also be debated. Patriarch Bartholomew I, spiritual leader of Orthodox Christians, will address Parliament.
Child protection. The Civil Liberties committee votes on a report on the protection of children using the internet (Monday).
Foreign Affairs. France's State Secretary for European Affairs, Jean-Pierre Jouyet, will update the Foreign Affairs Committee on the latest development in external relations. (Tuesday)
Trade/Doha Round. Commissioner Peter Mandelson will discuss developments in the wake of the unsuccessful July WTO ministerial meeting with the Trade Committee (Monday).
Citizens’ Initiatives. The Constitutional Affairs Committee hosts a discussion on the proposal that citizens should be able to request new proposals from the Commission by collecting signatures (Thursday).
President’s activities. Gedimina Kirkilas, Prime Minister of Lithuania (Wednesday), Nikola Spiric, Prime Minister of Bosnia-Herzegovina (Tuesday) and António Guterres, UN High Commissioner for Refugees (Tuesday), will be meeting EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering.
Launch of europarltv. President Pöttering will officially launch the European Parliament’s new Web TV channel, europarltv (Wednesday).
Cinema – Lux Prize. Parliament will also begin screenings for its second Lux Prize for European cinema (Monday, press conference Tuesday).
Pre-session press briefing. Any changes to the plenary agenda will be announced at the regular pre-session briefing at 11am on Friday (Anna Politkovskaya Room PHS 0A50).
20080912IPR37065 For details of all the week's events, see "The Agenda"
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20083800AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
