Overview on African week at the EP - 8-12 September
External relations
2008-09-15 - 15:40
Africa from every angle was explored in African week African week at the European Parliament (8-12 September) brought some outstanding politicians and artists of Africa to Brussels. A series of discussions and parliamentary debates focused on issues as human rights, immigration and food crises, while the art performances and exhibitions showed contemporary African art. The event was held as part of the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue.
On our web page, the main events, both political and cultural, of African week were presented on a daily basis. We focused on the big events and discussions on the situation of the women in Africa, the world food crisis and intercultural dialogue.
This feature represents a compilation of all our stories on African week. Don't miss the special video highlighting the most important activities of the week.
20080908FCS36422
Dispatch from the debates
Malick Sidibé and one of his photos African issues are central to many of Parliament's meetings this week, while African culture fills its public spaces and corridors. Tuesday saw several African female Ambassadors debate with MEPs in the Women's Rights and Gender Equality Committee and performances by dancers from Cameroon and musicians from Guinea.
Liberia's Ambassador to Belgium Younger Telewoda spoke about gender based violence in Liberia and reasons for women's lack of education - namely early marriage, teenage pregnancy and domestic labour. However, she pointed to recent changes, with women more involved in government and public life. During the day, artists from across Africa were dancing, playing traditional instruments and recounting Africa folk tales to passers-by in the main public areas of the Parliament's building in Brussels. Tuesday also saw an exhibition of photos from the renowned photographer Malick Sidibé of Mali.
High food prices
Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala of the World Bank at the EP Wednesday With world food price indexes having risen by 40% last year the soaring price of food and its social consequences is a key theme under discussion in African week. Wednesday morning saw MEPs on the Development Committee debate a proposal that will see €1 billion of unspent money from Europe's agriculture budget spent to boost food production in the developing world. They were joined by prominent international figures from Africa - Jacques Diouf of the UN's Food and Agriculture Organisation and Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala of the World Bank. During the debate Ms Okonjo-Iweala said "this money is the single biggest expression of effectively dealing with food crisis".
Gay Mitchel
Culture across the continents
Glimpses from African week A debate on intercultural dialogue between different areas of the world was the main political event of African week. Parliament's President Pöttering evoked European integration as "an example for all countries in the world" and as a positive force in improving dialogue between cultures. Commission President José Manuel Barroso and the President of the Pan African Parliament Gertrude Mongella also spoke.
One of the keynote speakers was Nigerian playwright and winner of the Nobel prize for literature Wole Soyinka. He passionately appealed for there to be no "double standards" in international justice where African dictators escape sanction whilst in Europe human rights abusers face trial. It was part of his speech calling on justice for the victims and perpetrators of human rights in Africa.
EN
1
PHOTO
20080915PHT37279.jpg
EN
2
PHOTO
20080909PHT36629.jpg
EN
3
PHOTO
20080909PHT36623.jpg
EN
5
PHOTO
20080911PHT36959.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080904STO36266 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FEA DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FEA DOC XML V0//EN
