The EP has its own webTV channel: EP President launches EuroparlTV
Institutions
2008-09-17 - 11:05
The EP President, Hans-Gert Pöttering, launched this morning EuroparlTV, the Parliament's own webTV channel. As from today anyone with Internet access will be able to watch a regularly changing set of programmes based around the life of the Parliament. The aim of EuroparlTV is to bring Parliament closer to European citizens in a modern and creative format.
EuroparlTV is available at the following address: www.europarltv.europa.eu
An excellent internet tool
In his speech the European Parliament President, Hans-Gert PÖTTERING , declared: " As we approach the European elections of June 2009, EuroparlTV should be an excellent Internet tool for citizens, especially young people, to keep themselves informed about the activities and decisions of the directly-elected European Parliament - decisions which have an impact on the everyday lives of almost 500 million European Union citizens ".
What will be on the channel?
EuroparlTV is not a single channel but rather is split into four channels, each directed to a different audience:
Your Parliament , aimed at those with a particular interest in politics at the EU level: informed citizens, industry groups, social partners, lobbyists, academics as well as those working in the EU institutions.
Your Voice conceived for the general public and providing the possibility of featuring user-generated content.
Young Europe , aimed particularly at school-aged children, high users of the Internet and the European electorate of the future.
Parliament Live provides continuous coverage of live events in the Parliament, notably debates in the plenary sessions, with a link to the audiovisual archives of previous sessions, as well as in the coming months, the activities of the committees.
Who can watch and in which languages?
Anyone with Internet access will be able to watch EuroparlTV. Internauts will be able to choose between Windows Media and Flash 9.
All programmes will be translated into more than 20 languages, making the site unique in the world. Some programmes will be voiced-over, while others subtitled. This system will be tested and refined over the coming weeks.
In his speech the Vice-President responsible for Information and Communication, Alejo VIDAL-QUADRAS (EPP-ED, ES) stressed: "The EP is committed to making its work as transparent and understandable as possible to European citizens. They have a right to know and be able to make sense of what happens in the Parliament that they have elected. That is why today is the beginning of a new adventure that I am proud to be part of".
This was echoed by the Chair of the Committee on Education and Culture, Katerina BATZELI (PES, EL) who said that " EuroparlTV is a modern technology which helps to enable the democratic participation of every citizen, particularly young citizens, in European and national current affairs ". Moreover, according to the Greek politician, " EuroparlTV is an excellent example of how new technologies and the new media can help to inform citizens about serious challenges we must all confront ".
Plurality of opinion guaranteed
According to its Editorial Charter, "the channel shall ensure that the plurality of opinion in the European Parliament is reflected, with due respect to the relative strengths of the political groups, in accordance with a neutral, non-partisan editorial policy".
The choice of a web TV channel
The EP preferred a web TV channel to a traditional broadcast channel for several reasons. Among others, a web TV fits much more readily with the direction of technology, in particular, the convergence of computer and television technologies and the rapid spread of broadband; it is oriented to the user's convenience rather than the broadcaster's, offering the viewer a wide choice of material to watch at the time and place of his or her choosing; and it is much more cost-effective.
20080917IPR37499 EuroparlTV Launch of EuroparlTV, the webtv of the European Parliament - background Clip of EuroparlTV launch available to download from FTP server Audio, 03:21 - extracts (Vice President A. Vidal-Quadras, and EP President H.-G. Pöttering)
EN
1
A
http://www.europarltv.europa.eu/
EN
2
LINK
http://www.europarltv.europa.eu/StartPage.aspx
EN
4
LINK
ftp://epavvideoget:mo12ssb@ftpeps01.europarl.eu.int/epavvideo/ebs/europarltv
EN
5
MULTIMEDIA
20080917MLT37534.mp3
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080901BKG35904 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
