Launch of EuroparlTV in Ireland
Institutions
Ireland
2008-09-19 - 14:32
Europarl TV is born EuroparlTV, the European Parliament's own webTV channel was launched on Wednesday 17 September 2008 in Brussels. Celebrating this historic event, the European Parliament Office in Ireland, together with Eileen Dunne, (well-known newsreader) invited the media to the European Parliament Information Office in Dublin to see clips from the launch ceremony.
EuroparlTV will bring Europe closer to its citizens
EuroparlTV is a unique project, committed to make the European Parliament's work more transparent and understandable to European citizens. Anyone with internet access will now be able to watch a wide range of clips and videos based around the life of the Parliament. Four different channels concentrate on different audiences: Your Parliament will inform those with a particular interest in politics, Your Voice provides for interactivity by featuring user-generated content on issues like immigration and climate change, Young Europe aims at school-aged children and Parliament Live provides continuous coverage of live events in the Parliament. While EuroparlTV broadcasts programmes in more than 20 languages, it will give European citizens the opportunity to experience the work of the European Parliament without any barriers of time, location or linguistic access.
Launch in Ireland
During the launch, Francis Jacobs, Head of the European Parliament Office in Ireland, pointed out that "The recent referendum, and the surveys that have since been made of public opinion, have shown that the level of knowledge about the European Union and its institutions remains at a very low level. The main purpose of EuroparltTV is to help reduce that knowledge gap, and to enable people who cannot physically visit the Europe Parliament to learn about the Parliament, to follow some of its activities, and to comment on them". He then described the different programmes and features of EuroparlTV, the" most ambitious multilingual channel in the world".
Eileen Dunne, the well-known newsreader took the opportunity to mention the benefits EuroparlTV offers to journalists. During her address she pointed out that EuroparlTV allows everyone to access information on the European Parliament and on Europe as a whole at any time and from almost anywhere in the world. This would be a huge improvement in the day-to-day work of journalists and for those seeking information for professional or private purposes.
20080911IPR36997 EuroparlTV European Parliament Information Office in Ireland Audio, 03:21
EN
1
PHOTO
20080916PHT37497.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.europarltv.europa.eu/StartPage.aspx
EN
3
LINK
http://www.europarl.ie/
EN
4
MULTIMEDIA
20080917MLT37534.mp3
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
