Opening of September II plenary session: Minute of silence for victim of ETA bombing / Funding of the No campaign in Ireland
Institutions
2008-09-22 - 18:01
EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering opened the September II plenary session and said: "Yesterday evening the terrorist organisation ETA committed murder again. A 46 years old military officer, Luis Conde de la Cruz, was the victim of a car bombing in Northern Spain. This was the third car bomb which exploded within 24 hours in Spain. In these terrorist attacks several people were injured, one of them seriously. " The question on financing the No campaign in Ireland was also raised.
On the ETA bombing, President Pöttering said "The European Parliament strongly condemns these terrorist acts and wants to express its deep concern. On behalf of the European Parliament I wish to express my deepest condolences to the family and all the relatives of the officer Luis Conde de la Cruz, as well as our solidarity with Spain, its authorities and very especially the Spanish Security forces. I would also like to send a message of support and solidarity to the people injured in the bombings and their families.
Terrorism is a direct attack on freedom, human rights and democracy. We have to state it very clearly . I want to reiterate once again that nothing can justify terrorism. We must work together in combating terrorism under the force of the rule of Law and democracy.
The EU is a community built on solidarity. A terrorist attack in any part of the EU is a terrorist attack in the entire European Union, against each one of us.
Let us now observe a moment’s silence."
Questions over the funding of the No campaign in Ireland on the Lisbon Treaty referendum
Raising a point of order, Co-President Daniel Cohn Bendit (Greens/EFA , DE) said: " Last weekend, the Irish press revealed that there possibly exists a link between the financers of the no-campaign in Ireland and the Pentagon as well as the CIA. This was a very interesting story and the explanation given was that Europe should not become too strong. I would ask the President to please clarify this matter and suggest that we also ask the Council as well as the Commission to inform us next time, because if this story turns out to be true it would be an interesting fact indeed, confirming what lies behind the €1.2 million which was used to finance the no-campaign in Ireland. I therefore would like to ask the President to please look into the matter so that we receive information and achieve transparency."
In response, EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering said: " I have been following this whole matter very attentively for some time. We do indeed need absolute transparency on this (matter) because this is exactly what those who are attacking us demand. However, they must of course comply with these standards themselves, i.e. they must provide total transparency on what funds this organisation.
We have learned from the Irish media - and I am quoting what we read in Ireland during the past week - that in the past Mr Ganley claimed that the donations come from ordinary citizens, and that they are small donations. According to the reports, he now has admitted that he himself has donated €200 000 of his personal assets to his organisation, and it has also been confirmed in the meantime that Mr Ganley has signed contracts with the Pentagon over the execution of military orders amounting to about 200 million - I believe - dollars. Other estimates are much higher. We must continue to follow this affair very closely. The facts must be put on the table. We cannot allow Europe to be harmed by people who demand transparency but do not provide it themselves.
I would like to emphasise my high regard for the Irish Minister of European Affairs, Dick Roche, who has made it his personal cause to shed light on this issue and I explicitly support him in his uncompromising approach. Ladies and gentlemen, I deduce from your applause that we stand on the side of those who strive for absolute transparency in all of these questions in order to keep Europe from suffering harm. "
20080919IPR37656 Briefing - 22-25 September 2008 Final draft agenda - 22-25 September 2008 EP President homepage
EN
2
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?reference=2008-09-2&language=EN
EN
3
LINK
/president/defaulten.htm?agenda
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080901BRI35769 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
