Highlights of 22-25 September Brussels plenary session
Institutions
2008-09-22 - 17:17
The main highlights of the second September plenary include a vote at first-reading on the telecoms package, the House also votes as second-reading on the maritime package. MEPs will debate the impact the financial market crisis as well as the Parliament's priorities for 2009. MEPs will hear from Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew in a formal sitting and debate media pluralism, blogging the fight against obesity, and the new social package on patient mobility.
Telecoms package: MEPs to vote on European Parliament's position MEPs will vote on the European Parliament's first reading position on the telecoms package at midday on Wednesday 24 September following the debate that took place on 2 September 2008. The Industry and Internal Market Committees have already backed the amended "telecoms package" seeking to strengthen consumer rights and privacy protection, to ensure a consistent application of regulatory measures and to modernise radio spectrum use. Malcolm HARBOUR (EPP-ED, UK) is rapporteur on the report on electronic communications networks and services, protection of privacy and consumer protection. MEPs to debate impact of financial market crisis Council and Commission representatives will make statements on the world financial system and the impact of recent crises on the European economy at the start of a debate with MEPs on the extraordinary events on financial markets in the last week. Call for new legislation to ensure financial stability MEPs in two committees are calling for new legislation to improve regulation of financial markets, in particular regarding hedge funds and private equity investors. They also want measures to deal with some of the causes of the credit crunch. If the plenary agrees, the two reports will become formal requests from Parliament for the Commission to propose legislation. In a report drawn up by Poul Nyrup RASMUSSEN (PES, DK), the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee asks for a series of legislative measures on issues related to hedge funds and private equity. A related report from the Legal Affairs Committee, drafted by Klaus-Heine LEHNE (EPP-ED, DE) focuses in particular on transparency issues affecting these sectors. Updating VAT rules on financial services MEPs look set to back an update of the rules regarding the VAT treatment of financial services and insurance, with some proposals for changes. The aim is to ensure legal certainty in a sector which has changed dramatically since the current rules were drawn up over 30 years ago. Most financial services are exempt from VAT, but the legislation setting out how this exemption works in detail dates from 1977 and is out of date. The increasing level of cross-border supply of such services within Europe’s single market and the greater use of outsourcing of services to third countries have led to situations not provided for in the original legislation, which means there is unhelpful legal uncertainty. MEPs to debate the social package - patient mobility The social package was first debated in Parliament on 2 September 2008. Most MEPs speaking in the debate on the Commission's new "social agenda" welcomed the package of measures, though some said there were insufficiently specific and substantial. On Thursday, 25 September, Parliament will debate the second part of the Social Package relating to health aspects. . Altogether, the package contains 19 initiatives in the areas of employment and social affairs, education and youth, health, information society and economic affairs. The House will also vote on a resolution on the whole social package. John BOWIS (EPP-ED, UK), has been appointed the European Parliament's rapporteur on the new EU directive on cross-border healthcare. MEPs to adopt written declaration on the proclamation of 23 August as European Day of Remembrance for Victims of Stalinism and Nazism European Parliament President Hans-Gert PÖTTERING will announce the adoption of the written declaration on the proclamation of 23 August as European Day of Remembrance for Victims of Stalinism and Nazism since it has been signed by more than half of all MEPs (409 out of 785 on 15 September) Written declaration on combating the trafficking of children to be adopted The President of the European Parliament will announce that the written declaration on combating the trafficking of children has been adopted since more than half of all MEPs have signed the declaration (407 out of 785). The declaration calls on the Member States to recognise the fight against child trafficking as a priority objective in their national child protection policies. The declaration, together with the names of the signatories, are now forwarded to the Council and the Commission. Priorities of the European Parliament for the legislative and work programme of the Commission for 2009 For the first time the European Parliament will debate its priorities for the legislative and work programme of the Commission for 2009 before the Commission formally presents their work programme to the Parliament. On 13 February, the Commission presented its Annual Policy Strategy setting out its political priorities for 2009. It outlines the Commission's policy objectives in five priority areas: growth and jobs, climate change and sustainable Europe, making a reality of the common immigration policy, putting the citizen first, and Europe as a world partner. The Commission will seek to gain approval for its legislative initiatives and also look forward by stimulating debate on the internal market, social agenda and budget reviews. Police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters: MEPs seek stronger personal data protection The Civil Liberties Committee is seeking to beef up the data protection provisions of a proposed Council framework decision on police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters in its third report on this proposal. MEPs in the committee feel that the text had been weakened by the political agreement in the Council, which needs unanimity. Terrorism: MEPs favour making incitement a crime, but with safeguards for fundamental rights The fight against terrorism must not constrain freedom of expression, says the European Parliament Civil Liberties Committee in a report on a Commission proposal to include three new offences in European law: public incitement to commit terrorist offences, recruitment for terrorism, and terrorist training. Vote on resolution on freedom, security and justice Following the debate which took place on 31 January on the progress made in the Area of Freedom, Security and Justice (Articles 2 and 39 of the EU Treaty) - see also Oral Questions O-0005/2008 and O-0006/2008 tabled by the Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs. MEPs vote on a resolution on this topic. Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew to address MEPs The Ecumenical Patriarch BARTHOLOMEW I will address a formal sitting of the European Parliament on Wednesday 24 September. The patriarch's visit to the EP is one in a series of similar visits as part of European Year of Intercultural Dialogue. The role of the Patriarch of Constantinople in the Eastern Orthodox Church - also known as "Archbishop of Constantinople — New Rome" - is that of "first among equals" among the Eastern Orthodox bishops. He is thus the spiritual leader of the 300 million Orthodox Christians worldwide. Call to defend media pluralism, but questions over blogging Parliament will vote on draft resolution tabled by the Culture Committee that calls for steps to be taken to ward off threats to media freedom and diversity from owners, shareholders and governments. At the same time the committee voices concern about the uncontrolled nature of blogs and other on-line media. The own-initiative report, drafted by Marianne MIKKO (PES, ET), argues that "the unrestricted concentration of ownership jeopardises pluralism and cultural diversity" and that there is a "considerable risk" that concentration of ownership and the private media's pursuit of profit can compromise its ability to act as a watchdog for democracy. 2009 to be designated European Year of Creativity and Innovation The Culture Committee is recommending that Parliament back a Commission proposal for 2009 to be designated 'European Year of Creativity and Innovation’. However, while the Commission chiefly wishes to emphasise lifelong learning, the Culture Committee proposes a broader focus, highlighting a wider range of EU programmes. Transport Committee still at odds with Council on third maritime package In reports for the Transport Committee, MEPs in the committee deplore the fact that, over a year after Parliament's April 2007 first-reading vote on seven proposals to protect Europe against maritime accidents and pollution, transport ministers are still blocking two - on flag state obligations and civil liability - and have not taken up most of Parliament's recommendations on the other five. In the case of the third maritime package's two "missing files", on flag state obligations and on civil liability, MEPs propose to insert key amendments on these issues into other reports. They also reinserted all key amendments from the first reading, approving them almost unanimously in the committee vote. Fight obesity earlier in life Europe has almost 22 million overweight children, and a further 1.3 million will be overweight or obese by 2010, says the Environment Committee in a report that calls for an earlier start to measures to prevent obesity. Remedies include clearer food labelling, better food in schools and kindergartens, restrictions on advertising unhealthy food to children, and VAT reductions for fruit and vegetables. Collective management of copyrights on-line Giuseppe GARGANI (EPP-ED, IT), on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs will be asking the Commission questions on collective management of copyrights on-line. Forthcoming EU-India summit to be debated by MEPs Parliament holds a debate on Wednesday with the Council and Commission on the EU-India summit being held in Marseille on 29 September. Climate change, energy and the world food situation are among topics on the summit agenda. A revised joint action plan, to adapt the 2004 strategic partnership, is due to be adopted by the summit. Further progress is expected in talks on a maritime agreement, a free-trade agreement and an aviation agreement. Petitions Committee: listening to the EU's citizens Parliament's Petitions Committee had another busy year, as is described in its annual activity report for 2007. The number of petitions submitted by the public increased, as did the proportion lodged electronically through the EP website, while members of the committee undertook six fact-finding missions. Environmental issues and fundamental rights were the subjects most frequently raised by petitioners. International Tropical Timber Agreement 2006 Caroline LUCAS (Greens/EFA, UK), newly elected leader of the Greens in the United Kingdom, will be putting forward a non-binding report on the International Tropical Timber Agreement 2006. The key point is the request by Parliament to modify the legal basis. As the agreement establishes a specific institutional framework by organising cooperation procedures, it means that the EP should have assent instead of being only consulted on the International Tropical timber Agreement of 2006. MEPs question Commission on International Tropical Timber Agreement (ITTA) 2006 There is growing concern about the impact of deforestation and forest degradation and the consequences for climate change and biodiversity. As part of a more general approach, also covering temperate forests, demand for fair and sustainable timber products and traceability all along the supply chain, an effective ITTA could make a significant contribution to protecting the world’s forests and ensuring the sustainable use of timber. Helmuth MARKOV (GUE/NGL, DE), on behalf of the Committee on International Trade, will be asking the Commission questions on the International Tropical Timber Agreement (ITTA) 2006. Mountain farming: a special case In an own-initiative report tabled to the House, the Agriculture Committee calls for the Commission to devise within six months a special strategy for the sustainable development and use of resources in Europe's mountain areas. Farming is difficult in hilly areas and needs support, partly because of its environmental role, say MEPs. Mountain areas cover 40% of Europe's total surface area and are home to 19% of Europe's population. However, farming in these areas is vulnerable, facing transport and communication problems and high production costs. Dairy farming is in a critical situation, as milk quotas will soon be increased - bringing the prospect of falling prices for many producers - and the EU dairy regime as such will end in 2015. Progress report on the reform of the European Schools In the light of the successive enlargements of the EU, the increase in the number of agencies and places of work and the introduction of more flexible employment contracts, is a reform of the European Schools model, devised more than 50 years ago, now not urgently needed? MEPs will debate an Oral Question to the Commission which suggests that the European Schools system be thoroughly reviewed.
20080919IPR37658 Final draft agenda Briefing - 22-25 September 2008
EN
1
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?reference=2008-09-2&language=EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080901BRI35769 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
