EU-India Summit: MEPs back Free Trade Agreement by end of 2008
External relations
2008-09-24 - 13:30
In adopting a joint resolution on the preparations for the EU-India Summit, (Marseille, 29 September 2008) MEPs underline their firm commitment to the establishment of a comprehensive, wide-ranging and ambitious Free Trade Agreement between the EU and India and urges both sides to work towards bringing negotiations to a successful conclusion by the end of 2008. The resolution was adopted with 392 votes in favour, 44 against and 29 abstentions.
The House calls for the conclusion of a comprehensive FTA which will improve market access for goods and services, covering substantially all trade, and contain provisions on regulatory transparency in areas relevant to mutual trade and investment, including standards and conformity assessment, SPS, IPR, enforcement, trade facilitation and customs, public procurement, and trade and competition, as well as trade and development and human rights clauses as an essential element of the FTA.
Aviation and maritime agreements
MEPs also call on the EU and India to make good progress on concluding maritime and aviation agreements which would further boost bilateral trade and investment; states that the Summit will also provide an opportunity for signing the Financing Agreement on the new civil aviation cooperation programme.
Christian minorities
The House recognises that India provides a model for handling cultural and religious pluralism, despite intermittent and local difficulties among religions, including those between Hindus and Christians. MEPs express, however, deep concern at the current situation of Christian minorities, and regret the impact that the anti-conversion laws that have spread among several Indian states may have on freedom of religion.
Parliament calls for a progress report to be drawn up on the human rights policy implemented with India, recalling that the EU-India human rights dialogue is presented as a model in the field. The House is surprised, in this context, that India is not on the list of countries eligible for EIDHR funding for civil society microprojects.
Death penalty
MEPs u rge the Indian Government immediately to abolish the death penalty by imposing a moratorium on executions and encourage the Indian Government to sign and ratify the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women; urges India to sign up to the International Criminal Court.
Terrorism
MEPs call on the EU and India to make clear their joint commitment to dealing with the scourge of terrorism, which is one of the main threats to international peace and security; urges enhanced cooperation on intelligence-sharing, and requests that serious consideration be given to India having privileged status within Europol.
The House stresses that India’s food security remains an area of concern; calls on the Indian Government to bridge the demand-supply gap by accelerating the pace of domestic production of food grains and ensuring public and private investment, the introduction of new technologies and crop diversification.
Millennium Development Goals
The House welcomes progress achieved by India towards poverty eradication (MDG 1) but notes, however, the slow progress towards the MDGs on education, health, gender equality and empowerment of women; reiterates its concerns that child mortality and maternal health (MDGs 4 and 5) are the areas showing least progress and are unlikely to be achieved by 2015. MEPs call on the Council, the Commission and the Government of India to prioritise actions on gender equality, reduction of child mortality and improvement of maternal health.
20080923IPR37904 Resolution, as adopted by Parliament, will be available here (click on 24 September)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
