Sheffield European Festival 13 September 2008
Culture
United Kingdom
2008-10-01 - 16:25
MEP question time in Sheffield To help celebrate 2008 Year of Intercultural Dialogue and explore its meaning, the London Office of the European Parliament organised a special Festival day with something for everyone in Sheffield, one of England's largest cities. Sheffield is the UK's first City of Sanctuary and has been granted the status of Fairtrade city. Sheffield has an international reputation for metallurgy and steel-making. Today it is trying to regenerate itself as a modern sports and technology based city.
Sheffield has a wide ethnic mix of population. It has had a large Polish community since the 1940s but this has grown substantially since 2004 and the city now also includes many Latvians and Slovaks. Sheffield has one of the largest Spanish British populations in the country, with over 3,000 Sheffielders of Spanish descent. The Sheffield Somali community is the second largest and one of the oldest in the United Kingdom with Somalis having lived in Sheffield since the 1930s. The South Asian ethnic group - people of Indian, Pakistani and Bangladeshi origin - is the second largest ethnic group in the city after White British with Pakistanis forming the largest group.
Into this rich mix of cultures and religious beliefs the Festival brought a day which included an MEP Question Time featuring local MEPs Linda McAvan, Timothy Kirkhope and Richard Corbett, chaired by local BBC political presenter Len Tingle; a "Football Unites, Racism Divides" blow-up football pitch, and special exercise and health stand manned by Sheffield United FC; a whole programme of dance and street theatre including local Polish troupe Zalesie, traditional clog dancers and a brass band; Bhangra music, Rock and Dahl drum music, and acrobats and burlesque performers. The public were invited to join in as much as possible: to try an Islamic art workshop and masterclass, visit a wide range of stalls which provided information on every aspect of the EU and attempt quizzes and games of skill which tested EU knowledge and entertained and educated children of all ages. Open Minds Theatre company from Rotherham acted out the Kashmiri story. The audience of invited guests and Saturday shoppers alike watched the story unfold. It was their story. Different ages recognised their own experience or learned how things were - still are for some. How things have changed in fifty years - attitudes shifted and different forms of intercultural dialogue developed.
20080926IPR38245 European Parliament Office in the United Kingdom
EN
1
PHOTO
20081001PHT38476.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.europarl.org.uk/index.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
