FIFA boss Blatter appeals to MEPs over "local" football
Sport
2008-10-07 - 11:30
FIFA boss Blatter: wants more local players The head of world football - Sepp Blatter - has told MEPs he wants to limit the number of foreign players on the pitch to 5. He believes this will encourage clubs to develop home grown talent and to protect the local identity of teams.
Such a move from Blatter has sparked controversy as it would appear to contradict EU law - notably the right to free movement of persons. Instead MEPs on the Culture Committee prefer a "home-grown players rule" which foresees a minimum number of locally trained players.
The Swiss born FIFA boss proposes a "6+5" rule to govern local and foreign players. He set out his arguments to MEPs on the culture committee on Monday 6 October.
MEPs want "homegrown" football
In May MEPs rejected the proposed "6+5" rule by adopting a report by Greek MEP Manolis Mavrommatis (EPP-ED). This report called on countries and sporting associations in the European Union not to introduce new rules that create direct discrimination based on nationality.
Instead MEPs want the Commission to recognise the legality of measures that favour a minimum number of locally trained players. MEPs support the position of the European football body UEFA and its President Michel Platini. A position which states that a minimum number of players in a team should be trained in the club or in the same league
“National identities are lost”
On Monday Blatter stated that due to a lack of national restrictions, “the best players now play in the biggest and richest competitions in the biggest teams who have 30 good players, while only 11 can play and the other players are not available to other teams. This is morally reprehensible, it causes increasing inequalities" he said
Moreover Blatter indicated that “national identities are lost. Some teams play with 11 different nationalities, none from the country the club is from. Bayern München apparently needs 5 interpreters in their dressing room. We therefore ask to let sports be organized autonomously.”
"1 billion affected by professional football"
Mr Blatter told the MEPs that "sports is not an economic activity alone, it’s far more about culture since 1 billion people are directly or indirectly affected by professional football. We do not want to contradict EU law, the free movement of persons, but things can be changed if we really want it. Laws are not definite. We ask for your understanding, for your solidarity."
He went on to say that "it’s not only about football. The whole sports world is with us, including the football players.”
The European football body UEFA has opted for an approach which seems to comply with the principle of free movement of workers while promoting the training of young European players. Blatter views the proposed "home grown-players" however as “a contradiction regarding the protection of young players since teams will then attract young foreign players at an even younger age.”
Concerns about young players, foreign investors and racism
Belgian MEP Ivo Belet (EPP-ED) drafted a report on football last year. He said that: “We agree 100% with the objectives of the FIFA. We however have to be realistic; the 6+5 rule is in contradiction to EU law. The home-grown player rule we think is a step towards a final solution."
Several MEPs showed concerns about increased racism in football as well, which led several MEPs to ask for actions such as taking points away from teams whose fans engage in racist behaviour.
Ivo Belet stressed that parliament and FIFA “share the same concerns, such as foreign investors taking over national clubs." Belet focussed on teams such as Manchester City which has recently been taken over by a wealthy sheikh who aims to invest millions into the team, buying the best players available.
Locally funded teams
The FIFA President said he was appalled by these developments, stating in a press conference later on Monday that "clubs should be financed from the same region or at least the same country. When such an investor after a few years has had enough of a team he leaves and takes his money with him."
The 72 year old Swiss has held the post of the world governing body of football - FIFA - since 1998. His tenure has often been marked by controversy - notably over his often robust views on players and referees. He one suggested a referee should receive a yellow card after doling out several during an ill-tempered match. After speaking to MEPs on Monday 6 October Mr Blatter spoke to us and was interviewed by EuroparlTV on his proposals.
You can watch an exclusive interview with Mr Blatter on EuroparlTV by clicking on the first link!
20081006STO38774 EuroparlTV interview Sepp Blatter Focus: European football under the spotlight Sport - MEPs back a fair playing field FIFA president - profile EuroparlTV report on Blatter visit
EN
1
PHOTO
20081006PHT38847.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.europarltv.europa.eu/yourParliament.aspx?action=viewVideo&packageId=f0379c5d-2e7c-424f-bb7c-16baa305e813
EN
5
LINK
http://www.fifa.com/aboutfifa/federation/president/index.html
EN
6
LINK
http://www.europarltv.europa.eu/yourParliament.aspx?action=viewVideo&packageId=d65c17fc-22de-4555-9f8f-59f24366a9a7
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070323FCS04520 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080513STO28749 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
