Highlights of October plenary session in Brussels
Institutions
2008-10-08 - 16:24
The main highlights of the Brussels plenary session are: Ingrid Betancourt to address Parliament, Debate on the preparation of the European Council 15-16 October in particular the financial crisis, a vote on a report on the use by the EP of the symbols of the European Union, votes on reports on financial market supervision and a vote on a resolution on the situation in Belarus.
Ingrid Betancourt to address Parliament
Former Colombian presidential candidate Ingrid BETANCOURT , who was freed in July after six years in captivity at the hands of FARC guerrillas, will address a formal sitting of the House at 3pm on Wednesday. Along with 14 other hostages, she was rescued by Colombian security forces on 2 July 2008 in Operation Jaque, having spent a total of 2,321 days in captivity. Ms Betancourt will also give a press conference with EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering after Wednesday's formal sitting.
Preparation of the European Council 15-16 October
MEPs will debate preparations for the forthcoming European Council on 15 and 16 October. The meeting will be preceded by a statement by Hans-Gert Pöttering, President of the European Parliament, followed by an exchange of views.
Use by the European Parliament of the symbols of the European Union
The European Union flag, anthem and motto are to be formally recognised in a report put forward to the plenary. A proposal to amend Parliament's Rules of Procedure so as to formalise its use of these symbols is being put forward by the Constitutional Affairs Committee.
Enforcement of the ECJ Judgment on the 'Turco' case
Marco CAPPATO (ALDE, IT) and Michael CASHMAN (PSE, UK), on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs, Anneli JÄÄTTEENMÄKI (ALDE, FI) and Costas BOTOPOULOS (PES, EL), on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs, will be asking the Council and Commission questions on the enforcement of the ECJ Judgment on the 'Turco' Case (transparency in the legislative preparatory works/documents)
Together for health: A strategic approach for the EU 2008-2013
Alojz PETERLE (EPP-ED, SI) will be putting forward a non-binding report entitled Together for health: A strategic approach for the EU 2008-2013, which says that disease prevention efforts and vaccination campaigns, where effective products exist, should be stepped up significantly. The report stresses the importance of carrying out well-organised, comprehensive and effective screening programmes to facilitate the early detection and immediate treatment of disease, thereby reducing the associated mortality and morbidity.
MEPs advocate a holistic approach to eradicating poverty
A holistic approach to eradicating poverty, which seeks to ensure adequate incomes, quality jobs and better access to social services and services of general interest, is advocated by the Employment and Social Affairs Committee in an own-initiative report by Gabriele ZIMMER (GUE/NGL, DE) on promoting social inclusion and combating poverty, including child poverty, in the EU. Eight per cent of EU workers are at risk of poverty. The report stresses that, although having a job is the best defence against poverty, it is not always a guarantee.
Implementation of social legislation relating to road transport
Alejandro CERCAS (PES, ES) will be tabling an own-initiative report for the Employment and Social Affairs Committee on the implementation of social legislation relating to road transport. MEPs express concern at the shortcomings and delays in the transposition and implementation of social legislation relating to road transport in some Member States. Self-employed drivers should also be included in the scope of the directive, say MEPs.
Water scarcity and droughts in the EU
Richard SEEBER (EPP-ED, AT) will be putting forward an own-initiative report on water scarcity and droughts in the European Union. The Environment Committee urges the Commission and Member States to acknowledge that deforestation and unrestrained urban development are contributing to growing water scarcity. The committee calls on the Member States and the authorities concerned to pay heed to water-related considerations in their land-use planning.
Financial market supervision: call for wide-ranging reform
MEPs will debate and vote on a formal call on the Commission to come up with legislation to improve the supervisory architecture for financial services in Europe, based on a report from the Economic and Monetary Committee. The report, drawn up by Ieke van den BURG (PES, NL) and Daniel DÄIANU (ALDE, RO), is a comprehensive overview of areas that need attention in the light of the current crisis and after seven years of operation of the current “Lamfalussy system” It includes recommendations on the structure for the “Level 3” Committees of national financial regulators (CESR for securities, CEIOPS for pensions and insurance, and CEBS for banking) and on the mechanisms for managing systemic risk.
Accounting standards: proposals for improved governance structure
Following a debate in September plenary, MEPs will vote on a resolution on the future of the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB). Parliament adopted a report calling for changes in the governance structure of the IASB in April and since then its oversight body, the International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation, has issued a consultation document with proposed changes.
Situation in Belarus after parliamentary elections
MEPs will debate and vote on a resolution on the situation in Belarus following statements from the Commission and the Council.
Suspension of the WTO Doha Round
Following Commissioner Peter MANDELSON's (Commissioner for Trade) return to the UK government, MEPs will debate the suspension of the WTO Doha round. MEPs debate a Commission statement on the current deadlock in the Round launched Doha in 2001. Trade ministers from 35 WTO members met in Geneva last July for intensive negotiations but failed to reach a deal on a special safeguard mechanism for developing country farmers and on NAMA (non-agricultural market access), two key areas in the Doha Round.
Partnership and Cooperation Agreement - EC-Ukraine
The Committee on International Trade is proposing a report drafted by Zbigniew ZALESKI (EPP-ED, PL) approving the conclusion of the Agreement in the form of an Exchange of Letters between the European Community and Ukraine in relation to preservation of commitments on trade in services contained in the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement.
Arctic governance in a global world
Diana WALLIS (UK), Bilyana Ilieva RAEVA ( BG) and Johannes LEBECH (DK), on behalf of the ALDE Group, will be asking the Commission questions on Arctic governance in a global world.
Combating undeclared work
An own-initiative report on a European Commission proposal to step up efforts to combat undeclared work is being proposed by the EP Employment and Social Affairs Committee. Undeclared work, which in some Member States accounts of 20% of GDP, is a worrying feature of Europe's labour markets, say MEPs. Undeclared work risks undermining the European social model and distorting competition on the single market. It also leads to social dumping, notes the report by Pier Antonio PANZERI (PES, IT). Furthermore, immigrants, particularly illegal ones, are more exposed to the risks of undeclared work.
20081007IPR38882 Briefing - 8-9 October - Brussels plenary session Final draft agenda - 8-9 October 2008 Watch the plenary live on-line
EN
2
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?reference=2008-10&language=EN
EN
3
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/faces/live/live-video.jsp?language=en
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080925BRI38127 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
