"Words can foster and cure" an emotional Ingrid Betancourt tells MEPs
Human rights
2008-10-08 - 17:35
Betancourt: "Speak out for those still tied in chains, words matter so much" Addressing a formal sitting of the EP, in a passionate speech, Ingrid Betancourt spoke in depth about others around the world incarcerated against their will and the task of raising awareness of human rights violations globally. Ms Betancourt's key message was one of the power of discourse; "the only weapon we can believe in, is the force of words, there is nothing stronger than words." Ms Betancourt expressed her thanks to the EP's efforts in creating a public consensus for her plight.
Ingrid Betancourt is a former Colombian presidential candidate who was freed in July after six years in captivity at the hands of FARC guerrillas. Ms Betancourt, who has frequently spoken out against terrorism, had decided to campaign in an area with a strong guerrilla presence despite warnings not to do so. Along with 14 other hostages, she was rescued by Colombian security forces on 2 July 2008 in Operation Jaque, having spent a total of 2,321 days in captivity.
Introducing Ingrid Betancourt , EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering opened by saying, "The fact that you are with us today is a clear sign that brave people, in their fight for freedom and human dignity, never lost hope. Terrorism, as practised by your abductors, is a direct attack on our values, freedom and democracy. Your example shows us again that democracy should never yield to terrorism; it is our moral responsibility that the rule of law always be defended."
"People have been deprived of their freedom simply because they campaigned for human rights. We want to be able to protect the defenders better in their work".
Admiration for a unified Europe
In the opening section of her speech, Ms Betancourt stressed her admiration for the European Parliament and everything it did in the build up to her release: "Just three months ago I was watching you act from the depths of the jungle and my biggest hope was that people could speak for us as prisoners at the madness of others. It is a miracle that I can share this," she said.
"I am full of admiration that this is a Parliament that I like very much and I dream like all South Americans that we can in our union one day come together in a Latin American parliament in order to find through dialogue the key of a shared destiny which will be a great destiny for our country."
Continuing the fight for those still held hostage
Ingrid Betancourt moved to remind Parliament and its audience of the continuing struggle in Colombia and those who are still incarcerated: "Parliament became aware that more than 3,000 of my countrymen are still suffering. 15 comrades and I were able to rediscover freedom and fight for the release of those others in captivity."
Ingrid Betancourt paid tribute to the Burmese leader Aung San Suu Kyi and captured Israeli soldier Corporal Galid Shalit.
Ms Betancourt also paid a highly moving tribute to fellow detainees: "I would like to read out their names - please indulge me for a minute. When they hear their names in this House they will respond with a speeding up of their heartbeat within the tomb of the jungle." Ms Betancourt read the list of names with tears in her eyes.
The rhetoric of words- a force for global good
The core of the speech focussed squarely on the power of words: "As you know words are extremely powerful and it's using words that we can combat hatred and violence. You sometimes feel frustrated as you cannot achieve everything you want from your words. This happened to me in the Colombia Parliament.
In a materialistic world something that can't be seen doesn't exist but the parliament is the temple of speech and the freedom of speech and its words that can free.
You can bring about awareness in society and if the governments end up acting because one of you speaks on an issue. Every time one of you takes the floor, evil retreats. Words have an impact on real life. Human beings are beings that use speech. Words can foster and cure, but also hurt, harm and kill. Words are inspired by emotion." [At that stage, a deeply moved Ingrid Betancourt broke down as she spoke as did several MEPs]
Guerrilla fighters and terrorism- a social reflex?
Ms Betancourt was quick to point at larger social problems perpetuating violence as a result of capitalism: "Our society is producing countless guerrilla fighters in Iraq, Iran and Afghanistan. Do we have the right to build a society based on exclusion? We build our happiness based on others suffering. We should be building rational societies where all are included with an end to conflict. Technology allows us to arrange things differently so we can find our place just by being a citizen. The defence of rights come from a change of habits. We must be more aware that our lifestyle brings pressure on others".
"I want to tell you about this certainty; through words we can irrigate the whole world. This strength in our souls that can lead us to speak to everybody. We can build peace and preserve freedom for everybody and we build a new civilisation of love".
20081007IPR38884 audio, 37:18 - Ingrid Betancourt - EN
EN
1
PHOTO
20081007PHT38933.jpg
EN
2
MULTIMEDIA
20081009MLT39068.asf
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
