MEPs advocate a holistic approach to eradicating poverty and a target minimum wage for all Member States
Social policy
2008-10-09 - 11:18
MEPs advocate a holistic approach to eradicating poverty A holistic approach to eradicating poverty, which seeks to ensure adequate incomes, quality jobs and better access to social services, is advocated by the EP in an own-initiative report. MEPs call on the Council to agree an EU target for minimum wages to provide for remuneration of at least 60% of the relevant average wage and, further, to agree a timetable for achieving that target in all Member States. MEPs call on the Council to agree an EU-wide commitment to end street homelessness by 2015.
Eight per cent of EU workers are at risk of poverty. Although having a job is the best defence against poverty, it is not always a guarantee, stresses the own-initiative report on promoting social inclusion and combating poverty, including child poverty, in the EU.
An adequate income
Some of the 27 Member States have a minimum income scheme, but others do not. MEPs encourage Member States to provide for guaranteed minimum income schemes for social inclusion.
Minimum income schemes should be complemented by support measures to facilitate social inclusion e.g. in housing, education, training, and lifelong learning, and income support schemes to help cover the costs to individuals and households, say MEPs.
Member States should also provide targeted additional benefits for disadvantaged groups (people with disabilities or chronic diseases, lone parents or households with many children), to cover extra costs such as those of personal support and the use of medical care.
Child poverty
Children and young people make up almost one-third of the EU population and 19 million children are at risk of poverty.
MEPs want child poverty reduced by 50% by 2012, and urge Member States to allocate sufficient resources to achieve this goal. They also back an approach based on the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child.
Homelessness
Lastly, MEPs call on the Council to agree an EU-wide commitment to end street homelessness by 2015. Member States are urged to provide integrated policies to ensure access to quality and affordable housing for all and to devise "winter emergency plans".
The report was adopted with 540 votes in favour, 57 against and 32 abstentions.
20081009IPR39070 Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 9 October)
EN
1
PHOTO
20081009PHT39090.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
