Creators of youth media to share their vision of Europe
Youth
2008-10-13 - 10:42
From Wednesday 15 to Friday 17 October 2008, 200 young journalists from all of the 27 Member States of the European Union will attend a seminar organised by the European Parliament in Brussels. The second annual edition of the European Youth Media Days will provide high-level debates and hands-on media production in numerous working groups and discussion panels. The President of the European Parliament, Hans-Gert Pöttering will award the EP Prize for Journalism on Friday.
On Wednesday evening, Alejo Vidal-Quadras, Vice-President of the European Parliament and Harald Rømer, Secretary-General of the European Parliament will open the event. Chairpersons of Parliament's different political groups will critically debate their visions of the EU’s future, Union's role in the world and its economical and social policies. Afterwards, young journalists gather with parliamentarians and Brussels based correspondents. Creators of youth media from across the continent will share their ideas and approaches in another evening panel.
Thursday will be the media day, entirely dedicated to hands-on media productions. Ranging from TV to radio, from print to web and photography, participants will work on different themes under the guidance of professional media makers with inputs from Members of the European Parliament. Themes in the workshops will include a wide range of issues and formats such as "The bigger, the better?", a tabloid on EU enlargement, "Nuclear windmills?", a TV debate on future energy sources and climate change, "EUROpolitan", the attempt to create a European women's magazine, or "A Free Press? Truth Hurts", that will report on the state of freedom of press.
On Friday, young media makers will discover Europe in a day. Initiated with a keynote speech and award presentation by Hans-Gert Pöttering, President of the European Parliament, at the award ceremony of the European Parliament Prize for Journalism, the day will offer insights into the Brussels world of media and politics. During their visits to the European Commission, the French EU Council Presidency and the International Press Centre, the young journalists will address issues such as civil liberties and perspectives beyond today’s EU borders. The Media Days will conclude with an interactive, multimedia "Media Night", offering a view ahead to the future of European media.
20081013IPR39235 All information on the European Youth Media Days is available online
EN
1
LINK
http://www.youthmediadays.eu/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
