Round up of October Brussels session
Institutions
2008-10-13 - 10:01
An emotional Ingrid Betancourt is met by MEPs and EP President Pöttering Last week saw former Colombian hostage and presidential candidate Ingrid Betancourt make an emotional speech to MEPs in Brussels. Just months after her release from her 6-year ordeal, she urged the House not to forget other hostages. The financial crisis was debated during the two-day sitting ahead of Wednesday's EU summit.
Members also backed a five year health plan for the Union which will put the emphasis on preventative medicine and attempt to reduce differences across the EU especially in cancer care.
The House also took the symbolic step of keeping the EU's flag and anthem for meetings and other official functions. They were left out of the reform treaty by European leaders who deemed them too federalist.
20081006FCS38727
Wednesday's sitting: Ingrid Betancourt, financial crisis, water scarcity
Ingrid Betancourt greets the press after her speech to MEPs, 8 October The power of the spoken word and the comfort it can bring to hostages. Those were the messages brought to MEPs by former Colombian hostage Ingrid Betancourt when she addressed them on Wednesday. The days also saw MEPs debate the issues they believe a forthcoming EU summit should look at with the financial crisis being central stage. Later, steps to cut water waste by 20% were discussed.
Betancourt: "There is nothing stronger than words"
The session opened with president Pottering warmly welcoming Ingrid Betancourt, former Colombian presidential candidate and French national who was invited to address the Parliament.
Ms Betancourt spent 6 years as a hostage n the Colombian jungle after having been taken prisoner by the FARC rebel movement. Her case had repeatedly been raised by MEPs over the last years and she told the House that "just three months ago I was watching you act from the depths of the jungle and my biggest hope was that people could speak for us as prisoners at the madness of others. It is a miracle that I can share this" she said.
In an emotional speech she rammed home the importance of words and the impact they can have saying "the only weapon we can believe in, is the force of words, there is nothing stronger than words."
Ms Betancourt also called for continued recognition for those both in Colombia and elsewhere who are held in captivity. Her full speech is available below.
Financial crisis debated ahead of EU summit
Next Wednesday Europe's leaders will meet in Brussels for a European Council. Ahead of the meeting - in which the present crisis is expected to dominate - MEPs debated the options open to Europe.
The debate saw profound ideological differences emerging around the Chamber, as members sought to interpret recent events in the financial world and draw conclusions for the EU as a whole. Despite their differences on the wider meaning of the crisis however, most speakers agreed that the EU must take initiative and act collectively to introduce new measures and rules in order to ensure the stability of the economy.
Water scarcity and droughts in Europe
In the evening, MEPs debated on a report on water scarcity and droughts in the EU. In particular the problems have been identified as inefficient water consumption, a lack of knowledge about the need to conserve water and a lack of coordination between people and water companies.
The report - drafted by Austrian MEP Richard Seeber's (EPP-ED) - calls for the creation of a water saving culture in Europe. The Austrian MEP said that "in the future up to three billion people will be facing water scarcity and that already in 2007 one third of the Europeans lived in regions facing this problem". He underlined that "water scarcity and droughts should be considered as a global phenomenon" and that "when it comes to fighting against water scarcity and droughts the member states should work together united".
MEPs on Parliament's Environment committee also want a greater realisation that deforestation and urban development are contributing to growing water scarcity.
Another topic discussed on Wednesday was the situation in Belarus after the parliamentary elections, which failed to respect the international standards for democratic government.
Ingrid Betancourt Richard Seeber's report on water scarcity Carlos Carnero González's report Press service: Water scarcity and draughts in the EU Financial crisis: MEPs assess EU action and impact
Thursday session: MEPs fly EU flag. European health debated
MEPs backed the symbolism of keeping the EU flag Thursday saw MEPs vote 503 to 96 to keep the EU flag and anthem. Despite being left out of the reform treaty as official emblems of the Union, Members reaffirmed their commitment to the symbols of European unity. Thursday also saw a debate on a forthcoming health action plan for the whole European Union. It highlights the need to deal with rising medicine costs and the importance of prevention rather than cure.
MEPs opt to keep 12 stars and Beethoven
MEPs to keep the blue flag with the 12 stars, Beethoven's "Ode to joy" anthem and the motto "united in diversity". This means that at meetings held in the European Parliament the flag will be prominently displayed. The anthem will also be played at formal sittings and other occasions.
These symbols had been dropped from the reform treaty after objections from some EU countries that having the flag and stars would be too "federalist".
Spanish Socialist MEP Carlos Carnero González who was in charge of assessing parliament's reaction to the dropping of the symbols said "it is very clear: the symbols of the Union are very much alive in the Institution that represents, more directly than any other, the 500 million inhabitants of our 27 Member States".
Health - 40% of diseases linked to lifestyle
Better prevention and closing the disparities between countries in terms of healthcare are just issues raised in a health action plan debated on Thursday. Slovenian MEP and cancer survivor Alojz Peterle (EPP-ED) drafted parliament's response to the proposed Commission action plan over the next five years.
The report highlights adverse health trends, especially "lifestyle diseases"; the rising cost of medicines and variations in life expectancy (9 years women/ 13 years men).
It also says that prevention-only treatment amounts to 3% of health spending in the EU and that 40% of diseases are linked to lifestyle.
Speaking in the debate Alojz Peterle said that the European Union must make "a strategic shift towards disease prevention". Swedish Socilaist Åsa Westlund highlighted the "inequalities within member states". This point was taken up by Cypriot Liberal Member Marios Matsakis who spoke of the "shameful differences between richer and poorer countries".
Round up of 2 day session Together for health: A strategic approach for the EU 2008-2013 Symbols of the Union to be adopted by Parliament Results of votes on Thursday 9 October 2008
EN
1
PHOTO
20081009PHT39096.jpg
EN
2
PHOTO
20081009PHT39086.jpg
EN
8
PHOTO
20081009PHT39094.jpg
EN
9
LINK
/news/expert/default_en.htm
EN
12
LINK
/news/expert/tous_les_epvotes/default/default_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081007IPR38884 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A6-2008-0362 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A6-2008-0347 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080925BRI38127 ITEM-010-EN NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081006STO38719 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081009IPR39072 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081008IPR39024 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
