Domestic violence: an underestimated problem
Women's rights/Equal opportunities
2008-10-14 - 10:05
The lack of reliable statistics on domestic violence, the instruments that exist at European level and the effectiveness of the legislation were the issues raised at a public hearing on combating domestic violence which was held at the European Parliament on Monday and organised by the Committee on Women's Rights and Gender Equality.
"By domestic violence we mean violence or the threat of physical, psychological or sexual violence", recalled Ana Zaborská (EPP-ED, SK), chair of the Women's Rights Committee, who also emphasised the importance of enabling victims to speak out.
Harmonising data collection at EU level
In the view of Commission Vice-President Jacques Barrot, who is responsible for justice, freedom and security, the problem is underestimated. "Figures from studies conducted by the WHO in Sweden, Germany and Finland show that at least 30% of women between 16 and 67 have been on the receiving end of physical or sexual violence at least once in their lives".
The Commissioner stressed the need for precise information in order "to devise better awareness campaigns and to decide on appropriate measures". His view was endorsed by José Mendes Bota, rappaorteur for the Council of Europe, who was at the meeting to present the findings of the Council of Europe's campaign "stop domestic violence against women". "Eighty million women in Europe have suffered attacks" but "we need reliable statistics", he said.
Existing instruments
The Commission announced that a report on the results of the EU action plan to fight trafficking in human beings would be available by the end of the year. Proposals would also be submitted in spring 2009 under the multi-annual programme 2010-2014, he added.
Since 1997, the Daphne programme has financed over 500 projects, of which half are for women who are victims of violence. In 2007, €14 million were allocated to the Daphne programme, he said.
A legal framework at European level
Replying to Edit Bauer (EPP-ED, DK), who asked how effective legislation in this area could be, Enriqueta Chicano, honorary President of the Foundation of Progressive Women in Spain, said that legislation in her country, dating from 2004, had helped reduce the problem. The number of cases of people reporting violence had increased.
To Gabriela Cretu (PES, RO), who asked "how long must women wait before there is a European legal framework on this matter?", the Commissioner answered "this question could be examined when the multi-annual programme 2010-2014 is drawn up".
"One third of Member States of the Council of Europe do not classify violence against women as a criminal offence", pointed out José Bota, who called for a framework convention to be devised by the Council of Europe on the most serious and most widespread forms of violence against women.
2008-10-13 Committee on Women's Rights and Gender Equality Chair Anna ZÁBORSKÁ EPP-ED SK
20081013IPR39218 Website of Women's Rights Committee
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=FEMM
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
