The Week Ahead 20-26 October 2008
Institutions
2008-10-17 - 10:33
Plenary Session – Strasbourg
European Council debate. President Nicolas Sarkozy of France and Commission President José Manuel Barroso will debate the conclusions of the latest EU summit with MEPs. (debate Tuesday, vote on a resolution Wednesday)
Hearing of Commissioner-designate. Baroness Ashton will take part in a hearing before the Trade Committee, with the participation of the Foreign Affairs and Development Committees. (Monday, plenary vote Wednesday)
Sakharov Prize. The winner of the EP prize for freedom of thought will be chosen by political group leaders. The three candidates are Hu Jia, Aleksandr Kozulin and Apollinaire Malu Malu. (Thursday)
EU Budget 2009. Parliament holds its first reading of the next EU Budget. (debate Wednesday, vote Thursday)
Agency workers. EU-wide rules on the rights of temporary employees look set to be approved at second reading. (debate Monday, vote Wednesday)
Child protection. MEPs will vote on a first-reading deal with Council on a programme aiming to protect children using the internet. (debate Monday, vote Wednesday)
Marital law. MEPs will debate proposals to clarify jurisdiction in cross-border marital law cases, such as divorces. (debate Monday, vote Tuesday)
Erasmus Mundus. Parliament is set to vote on the EU’s programme for world-wide student exchanges for 2009-13. (debate Monday, vote Tuesday)
Intercultural Dialogue. The United Nations High Representative for the Alliance of Civilizations, former Portuguese President Jorge Sampaio, will address MEPs, before giving a press conference with EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering. (Wednesday)
Lux Prize. The second edition of Parliament’s prize for European Cinema will be presented by President Pöttering at a ceremony in the plenary. (Wednesday)
Financial crisis. The Conference of Presidents of political groups will discuss next steps in stabilising financial markets with Commission President Barroso. (Tuesday)
20081017IPR39826 For details of all the week's events, see "The Agenda"
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20084300AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
