Highlights of October II plenary in Strasbourg
Institutions
2008-10-20 - 17:37
The Strasbourg session was opened by the EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering. The House approved one change to the week's agenda: the postponement of the Oral Question to the Commission on the EU Solidarity Fund from this coming Wednesday to the plenary session in November. Here we summarise the main highlights of the session.
Outcome of EU summit: financial crisis, food prices, climate/energy, immigration, Lisbon Treaty
MEPs will hold a debate on Tuesday 21 October with French President and Council President-in-Office Nicolas Sarkozy on the outcome of the EU summit of 15-16 October in Brussels, where the European Union's leaders are due to discuss the world financial situation, energy and climate issues, immigration and asylum, food and petrol prices and the next steps on the Lisbon Treaty. The House will vote on a resolution on Wednesday.
Alliance of Civilisations: Jorge Sampaio addresses MEPs
MEPs will hear an address by Jorge Sampaio, former President of Portugal and currently High Representative for the Alliance of Civilisations. This visit takes place as part of European Year for Intercultural Dialogue. Jorge Sampaio was President of Portugal from 1996 to 2006.
EU-Russia relations
MEPs will debate EU-Russia relations after hearing statements from the Council and Commission. The next EU-Russia summit will be held in Nice on 14 November under the auspices of the French Presidency. Russia is the EU’s third biggest trade partner, with Russian supplies of oil and gas making up a large percentage of Russia’s exports to Europe.
Parliament to give its assent to agreement with Bosnia
MEPs are expected to give their assent next week to the conclusion of a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH). In a resolution adjacent to this report, MEPs point out the issues where Bosnian authorities need to make progress: reform of the state, return of refugees, non-discriminatory access to education and future constitutional structure. MEPs are also in favour of strengthening the EU Special Representative's role.
Statistics on trade within the EU
MEPs will vote on a series of changes to the EU’s system for collecting statistics on the trade in goods between Member States. The proposals aim to reduce the administrative burden on businesses involved in reporting data to statistical bodies, while at the same time, maintaining access for policy-makers to high quality statistical information.
Hearing of Baroness Ashton - Monday evening: MEPs to quiz Commissioner-designate
Following Peter Mandelson's return to UK politics, Baroness (Catherine) Ashton has been nominated to take over the trade portfolio in the Commission. The EP's International Trade Committee is organising a hearing of the Commissioner-designate. As well as the wider trade agenda, the committee will want to know Baroness Ashton's stance on a number of development-related trade issues, such as Economic Partnership Agreements and the Doha Development Agenda. MEPs from the Development Committee and Foreign Affairs Committee will also take part in the hearing. The hearing takes place from 6-9pm in room LOW N1.4 on Monday 20 October. The plenary is set to vote on her appointment on Wednesday.
2009 Budget: abiding by the EU's commitments
The EP Budgets Committee is proposing its draft report on the 2009 EU budget. MEPs have increased most of the figures proposed by the European Commission, believing that the Council's cuts had made it impossible to meet the EU's commitments. The fight against climate change, the EU's social dimension and security questions are Parliament's priorities for 2009. The vote takes place on Thursday 23 October.
Erasmus Mundus II: MEPs seek to facilitate access and sharpen focus on languages
To help enhance the quality of university teaching and attract the best foreign students and academics to Europe, MEPs are fine-tuning phase two of the EU's Erasmus Mundus university co-operation and student mobility programme (2009-13). A report proposed by the Education and Culture Committee says it should be made easier for Erasmus students from third countries to obtain visas, and that tuition fees should not be imposed in countries that do not currently charge them.
Awarding of the Lux Prize for Cinema
Jean-Pierre and Luc Dardenne, directors of 'Le silence de Lorna', Kornél Mundruczó, director of 'Delta', and actress Orsi Tóth as well as Miroslav Janek, director of 'Obcan Havel', will be at the European Parliament in Strasbourg on Wednesday, 22 October 2008 for the LUX Prize for cinema award ceremony at 11.15am.
Towards a common charge system for EU airports
Common principles for levying charges at Community airports are set out in a second-reading report, proposed by the Transport Committee on a directive to prevent individual airports abusing a dominant position on the market. MEPs in the committee want the rules to apply to airports with an annual throughput of over five million passengers per year, whereas the Commission had proposed one million.
Temporary agency workers to gain equal rights
The Employment and Social Affairs Committee is recommending approving the Council Common Position on temporary work, without amending it. The Common Position takes up the vast majority of Parliament's first-reading amendments, including those on equality of treatment of temporary workers with those of the employer company. Under the proposed deal, Britain's 1.3 million agency workers will get the same pay and conditions as permanent staff after being employed for 12 weeks.
Deal on the promotion of clean road transport vehicles
Dan JØRGENSEN (PES DK), for the Environment Committee, will be tabling a proposed first reading agreement with Council on the promotion of clean road transport vehicles. The most important point of the deal is that the directive stays mandatory, but that Member States are given some flexibility. The aim of the directive is to promote and stipulate the market for clean and efficient vehicles to prompt industry to develop and invest in environmentally-friendly vehicles.
A safer internet for children
The proposal seeks to introduce a new "Safer Internet" programme to run from 2009 to 2013, following on from the success of the current programme (2005-2008). The aim is to anticipate discernable trends in the online environment. With a budget of €55 million, the programme will combat illegal content, promote a safer online environment, raise public awareness and establish a "knowledge base" for research purposes. Parliament is working on this legislation in co-decision with the Council of Ministers.
Deal on the marketing authorisations for medicinal products
Françoise GROSSETÊTE (EPP-ED, FR) will be putting forward a first-reading agreement concerning a Commission proposal to harmonise the regulatory system used to change marketing authorisations for medicinal products (changes subsequent to the placing on the market, such as change in the production process, change in the packaging or change in the address of the manufacturer, update of patient information leaflet). It will ensure that all medicinal products placed on the Community market - including those authorised at purely national level - are subject to the same criteria for the approval and administrative handling of changes, regardless of the procedure under which those medicines have been authorised (national or EU procedure).
Timeshares: Parliament and Council agree new rules
The timeshare holiday rights of some 1.5 million European families will soon be better protected, as MEPs in Strasbourg are expected to endorse a compromise reached between Parliament and Council on the new Timeshare Directive. The directive seeks to enhance consumer confidence and legal clarity, which are essential to the growth of this sector, via simplified EU-wide rules.
MEPs debate the Holodomor, the Ukrainian famine of the 1930s
MEPs will hear a Commission statement and hold a debate to commemorate the 75th anniversary of the Holodomor, the large-scale famine that took place in Soviet Ukraine in 1932-33. Estimates for the number of deaths from the famine run into the millions, although some survivors are still alive today. The disaster is widely attributed to food shortages caused by the Soviet collectivisation of agriculture, while some argue there was a deliberate element, with the Soviet government seeking to destroy opposition to their authority.
Human rights situation in the world
The session ends with three debates and votes on human rights situations in the world, on this occasion the topics are: Venezuela, DR Congo: clashes in border areas, and Burma.
20081017IPR39864 Briefing for Strasbourg plenary - 20-23 October 2008 Final draft agenda - 20-23 October 2008 Watch the plenary live on-line
EN
2
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?reference=2008-10-2&language=EN
EN
3
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/faces/live/live-video.jsp?language=en
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081014BRI39372 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
