Cod stocks recovery plan: MEPs call for an end to all discards
Fisheries
2008-10-21 - 14:42
In their response to the European Commission's latest cod recovery plan, MEPs today called for all cod caught to be landed, rather than discarded, so as to enable proper scientific evaluation of stocks. They also agreed to the inclusion of the Celtic Sea (south of the Irish Sea) in the cod recovery plan. In a second vote, on fishing in outermost regions of the EU, MEPs propose extending until 2011 the deadline for fishing vessels receiving national state aid to enter the fishing fleet.
Rapporteur on cod stock recovery, Niels Busk (ALDE, DK) emphasised that the purpose of the proposed changes in the cod recovery plan is to see cod stocks restored within five to ten years. In Monday evening's debate, he spoke of the problem of illegal fishing: "It is a disgrace to the fishing stock, it is a disgrace to the fishing industry, it is an outrage against society as a whole, and the European Parliament has emphasised this time and time again."
Commissioner Borg said that he would shortly be following up with a proposal for a European regulation on reducing discards.
Among the proposals made by the European Parliament in its response to the cod recovery plan:
all cod caught to be landed, rather than discarded, so as to ensure proper scientific evaluation of stocks;
Member States as well as fishermen themselves should be encouraged to bring in measures to reduce fish mortality and discards;
The 15% +/- margin for Total Allowable Catch, established the previous year, should be generally applicable;
2004-2006 should be used as reference years, rather than 2005-2007, to ensure the highest quality and reliability of data;
Cod killed by seals, and the impact of climate change are mentioned as 'other relevant sources of cod mortality'.
Debate - Monday, 20 October
During Monday's debate, Jim Allister (NI, UK) suggested: "Increase the Total Allowable Catches, and I believe you will correspondingly reduce the discards and swell the food supply, without depleting the biomass more than we do at present through discards. That, I believe, is the way to go, along with cod avoidance plans, and then some sense might come to this policy."
Struan Stevenson (EPP-ED, UK) acknowledged that climate change had caused the North Sea to warm up by 1.5 degrees with the result that cod had moved further north. "All the tough management plans that we want to introduce will not make any difference," he said. He also raised the issue of grey seals in the North Sea and their impact on cod populations.
Avril Doyle (EPP-ED, IE) referred to an Irish proposal for a pilot project to be run in 2009 on reducing cod discards in the Nephrops fishery. She also asked for clarification on whether the Celtic Sea would be included in the recovery plan, to which Commissioner Borg replied that although the cod stock in the Celtic Sea is in better shape than other areas, 'it is still in very bad shape' and would be included.
Kathy Sinnott (IND/DEM, IE) reminded the Commissioner that cod used to be the most common fish in Irish waters and on Irish tables. "Discards," she said, "are more than a waste and a contradiction. They are an abomination."
The European Parliament is consulted on proposals in the area of fisheries policy, but the final say lies with the Council of Ministers.
Background note
The cod recovery plan, established in 2004, aims to ensure the reconstitution of cod stocks within a ten-year period to precautionary levels advised by scientists. The cod stocks covered by this plan were those in the North Sea, Kattegat and Skaggerak, the Eastern Channel , the Irish Sea and West of Scotland. Recent scientific advice from the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea (ICES) has indicated that the reductions in cod catches arising from the collective effect of total allowable landings (TACs), technical measures and complementary effort management measures have been far from sufficient to reduce fishing mortality to levels required to allow the cod stocks to rebuild. None of the four cod stocks covered by the recovery plan show clear signs of recovery, "although Committee MEPs say that stocks in the North and Celtic Seas are showing some signs of improvement.
20081020IPR40053 Fishery resources: recovery of cod stocks (amend. Regulations (EC) No 423/2008 and (EEC) No 2847/93) Outermost regions: management of fishing fleets (amend. Regulation (EC) No 639/2004) Texts, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 21 October)
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5619092
EN
2
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5664842
EN
3
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
