Divorce for international couples: MEPs back bid to clarify the legal options
Justice and home affairs
2008-10-21 - 15:33
Parliament today backed by an overwhelming majority (522-89, with 35 abstentions) a proposed Regulation seeking to reduce the number of disputes about the country in which divorce proceedings should take place. The proposal does not create a standard EU-wide divorce system, but it does attempt to help the 170,000 couples affected to choose which country's law will apply for their divorce. The UK has opted out of this legislation and Ireland has also not indicated that it will take part.
The aim of the draft Regulation is to allow couples to choose the Member State where they wish to divorce, if they have defined links with it, such as it being their country of residence or of nationality, or where the divorce application is lodged. MEPs suggest adding the country where the marriage took place, subject to the chosen legal system being in conformity with fundamental rights.
Information to couples
The proposal provides for the two parties to be informed of their rights, to prevent the choice of law applicable creating a disadvantage for either member of a couple.
However, MEPs are proposing amendments emphasising the need to inform couples of the practical repercussions of their choices, and seeking to ensure that they receive full, reliable information before signing any act. For this purpose, they suggest the creation of an information system on the internet.
What happens next?
The UK has opted out of this legislation. Moreover, for it to come into force, it still requires the unanimous approval of the other 26 Member States. At this stage, nine countries (Bulgaria, Italy, Spain, Romania, Austria, Hungary, Greece, Slovenia and Luxembourg) have agreed to use the so-called "enhanced cooperation" method, which would enable them to proceed on their own.
20081020IPR40047 Civil judicial cooperation: jurisdiction, recognition and enforcement of judgments in matrimonial matters and the matters of parental responsibility (amend. regul. 2201/2003/EC) Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 21 October)
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5372262
EN
2
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
