British journalists return home from European Youth Media Days with new ideas and full address books
Institutions
United Kingdom
2008-10-22 - 11:35
British journalists return home from European Youth Media Days The second European Youth Media Days were held on 15-17 October in Brussels. 200 young journalists from all 27 EU countries came to the European Parliament to network, learn and exchange ideas and views. We have asked three of the 15 UK participants to tell us what they gained from the event and to reveal any ideas they have gleaned on how to make European news more alive.
Alisdair Glennie, who is a journalism student at Lambeth College in London, sums up the event: "I got a full address book! In just a few days I made friends across Europe, from Finland to Romania. It's great to have contacts and peers in so many countries. I also got to work in a radio studio for the first time, and saw how the European Parliament woks from the inside."
London-based journalist Robin Ash, who works for The Times, took part in EYMD for the second time. "I learnt from this year's event that with enthusiasm, cooperation and teamwork, great things can be achieved in a very short space of time."
Simret Cheema-Innis , who is currently working on radio stations in the West Midlands , added: "EYMD really gave me more of an interest and even an insight into European p olitics. It was amazing to meet other young journalists such as myself, but working in their respective countries. I found it fascinating hearing the local issues that each person had and how they applied their knowledge to the workshops. It was truly thrilling. I feel now that it has opened up my eyes to perhaps even explore issues in other countries with a lot more confidence and write articles or even produce video projects in accordance to this ."
Making European news come alive and more interesting can be a challenge, but not for these enthusiastic journalists.
"European news is often extremely interesting but tends to be perceived as dry, irrelevant and dull over here in the UK. A new forum for European news, perhaps based online, which centred on the universal themes that affect all Europeans - peace, free movement, the environment and so on, could be a success.", says Robin Ash.
"It's not a case of sexing European news up, or dumbing it down. It is especially important that European media doesn't try to become a PR machine for the EU. If everything gets reported - warts and all - then people won't feel like helpless victims of a malignant machine", Alisdair Glennie concludes.
If it's up to EYMD participants, we will soon get a fresh view on European news. So stay tuned...
20081016IPR39801 European Youth Media Days UK Office of the European Parliament
EN
1
PHOTO
20081013PHT39325.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.youthmediadays.eu/
EN
3
LINK
http://www.europarl.org.uk/index.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
