Deal on the marketing authorisations for medicinal products
Public health
2008-10-22 - 12:01
Parliament adopted a report on a first-reading agreement concerning a Commission proposal to harmonise the regulatory system used to change marketing authorisations for medicinal products (changes subsequent to the placing on the market, such as change in the production process, change in the packaging or change in the address of the manufacturer, update of patient information leaflet).
The deal ensures that all medicinal products placed on the Community market - including those authorised at purely national level - are subject to the same criteria for the approval and administrative handling of changes, regardless of the procedure under which those medicines have been authorised (national or EU procedure). All operators within the European Community will thus be subject to the same rules for the approval, administrative treatment and supervision of changes to medicinal products, thereby eliminating, and diverging, redundant and contradicting requirements.
A compromise at first reading has been agreed with Council taking on board many of the demands of the Environment Committee.
Within the European Community, medicinal products are regulated throughout their entire lifetime. Changes subsequent to their placing on the market, are governed either by national provisions or by Community rules: "Variations Regulations".
However, the current Variations Regulations do not apply to changes to marketing authorisations for medicinal products which have been granted at a national level by a Member State competent authority under a national procedure. In the absence of Community harmonisation, changes affecting purely national authorisations are therefore subject to national rules, which differ quite substantially.
The objective of the proposal is, therefore, to empower the Commission to extend the scope of the corresponding Variations Regulation to ensure that all medicinal products placed on the Community market -including those authorised at purely national level - are subject to the same criteria for the approval and administrative handling of changes, regardless of the procedure under which those medicines have been authorised.
- In certain cases MEPs want to give Member States the possibility to continue to apply national provisions
- MEPs want to extend the possibility of submitting a single application in certain cases
- MEPs want to prolong the transition period from 12 month to 18 month after entry into force.
The report was adopted with 675 votes in favour, 21 against and 8 abstentions.
20081021IPR40256 Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 22 October)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
