MEPs declare "Lorna" LUX Prize winner 2008
Institutions
2008-10-22 - 17:34
Parliament's LUX film prize is in its 2nd year The European co-production "Lorna's Silence" by Jean-Pierre and Luc Dardenne has won the European Parliament's LUX film prize. Set in Liège in Belgium it features a young Albanian women whose hopes of a better life are cruelly dashed when she gets drawn against her will into the criminal underworld.
The prize is awarded to films that help increase people's understanding of different cultures and peoples in Europe.
MEPs choose the winning film from a shortlist of three complied by an international jury of filmmakers. Here in this feature we speak to the makers of each of the three films.
The winning film will receive funding to be subtitled in all 23 official languages of the EU.
Presenting the prizes, the President of the European Parliament Hans-Gert Pöttering, said that each of the three films addressed a different issue deserving of greater recognition and that each of the three films was a winner.
Luc Dardenne stressed the importance of the subtitling of the film thanks to the prize because "we are not watching each others films often enough in Europe". He hoped that "all distributors and cinema managers will understand the message of this prize."
LUX stands for the Latin word for light and alludes to the Lumière brothers, the French pioneers of cinema.
20081020FCS39962
Luc Dardenne: "Le Silence de Lorna"
Lorna's luck: Belgian winner Luc Dardenne Liege born Luc Dardenne and his brother Jean-Pierre are an acclaimed film making duo in their fifties. "Rosetta" in 1999 won them the coveted Palm d'Or at Cannes. As in "Le Silence de Lorna" many of their films deal with young people facing social difficulties. In the film the character of Lorna is played by Kosovar actress Arta Dobroshi.
After the award ceremony we spoke to Luc Dardenne about the film.
I have made this film because....
I had a profound desire to make this film - with my brother.
This prize means to me...
Cultural diversity, that is to say that cultural exchange between European countries doesn't happen enough in the area of cinema".
My next film will be
I don't know yet.
The best film ever made...
That has never been done.
European cinema without public support would be...
Non existent, or will become a cinema that will be less profitable - also a cinema that will be less good - with rare exceptions.
If I wasn't film director I would....
I would have liked to have been a singer or musician.
Cinema without Hollywood would be...
An orphan without a large part of cinema's history...
The person in the world of cinema I most admire is...
Charlie Chaplin. For me he was a pioneer and someone who reflected his socio-economic era. He also made the best and most beautiful comedy.
Film website Trailer LUX Prize website Lux Prize 2007 Watch award ceremony on EBS
Miroslav Janek: "Občan Havel"
Miroslav Janek: Creator of "Občan Havel" The long career of Miroslav Janek (54), a Czech film director and editor, began in Czechoslovakia and continued in the USA, where he emigrated at the age of 26. He first learned about film from his father, a passionate amateur filmmaker.
To date he has made about 40 films. The Parliament nominated him for the 2008 Lux prize for his movie "Občan Havel" (Citizen Havel) - a film which looks into events in a post-totalitarian Czech Republic during its transition to democracy.
Václav Havel was a key figure in the great changes that took place in central and Eastern Europe in the 1990s.
We spoke to Miroslav Janek about his career and views on film.
I made this film because...
I was asked to make it. The film was shot for 13 years by Pavel Koutecký, a friend of ours and colleague. He died tragically in an accident before he was going to edit it. After that I was asked by the production team to finish the film.
My next film will be .....
We will have five one hour TV programmes called "Citizen Havel".
The best film ever made is ...
Now that I am sitting here in this (a grey high sofas in front of Parliament's hemicycle ) - I would say "Cabinet of doctor Caligari". It is a German silent film from the 20's. It is a classic and there is a very special design that reminds me of this one here.
European cinema without public support would be...
Laughing "dead or sick"
If I wasn't a film director I would have become ...
A carpenter.
Cinema without Hollywood would be....
Better...no no. this is not true. This is a difficult question, because there were some incredible films made but also a lot of rubbish that is taking over the cinema. In one word just to answer the question: it would be different.
My best film so far was ...
Maybe the film called "The Unseen" (1997). It is about blind children taking photographs.
The person in the world of cinema I most admire is ...
There is no single person. I admire a lot of people. But if I really need to mention one person I would chose Federico Fellini.
The Lux prize means to me ...
This is a special experience. I would never have expected to enter the European Parliament or any other parliament under normal circumstances.
Citizen Havel
Kornél Mundruczó - "Delta"
Hungarian director Kornél Mundruczó - "Delta" Born in 1975 in Hungary, Kornél Mundruczó has received numerous international awards, including the short-film category prize at the International Film Festival in Cottbus and the Hungarian Critics' Award.
He was nominated for the EP Lux prize 2008 for his latest movie "Delta"- a tale of a long lost brother being reunited with his sister in a remote marshland community much to the distain of the locals.
The same movie won the award of the International Federation of Film Critics this year at Cannes Film Festival.
Delta is the story of the return of a taciturn young man to the countrified delta region which is his family's home. There, he finds and falls in love with a sister he never knew he had. However, their relationship is rejected as strange and unnatural by the locals.
I made this film because.. ...
I had an idea... just going about my daily life. I have seen a lack of tolerance in Hungary, but also all over Europe. So I thought I would like to make a film about that.
My next film is ...
You never know... You have lots of ideas all the time. ...But waiting for the money that's what is difficult in our business.
The best films ever made are ...
Movies directed by Rainer Werner Fassbinder, a German director. He is the biggest for me. Each one of his films are excellent.
European cinema without public support would be ....
Crazy - and very, very bad for all of Europe, especially for the audience! In this case, money can start to make the rules, and we have examples of what has happened... We have to bear in mind that culture is very important for Europe. History and culture - that's the best Europe has.
Cinema without Hollywood would be...
It depends...These days Hollywood is very conservative, but in the 40s, 50s and also 60s it was very brave. In that time European cinema and Hollywood cinema were much closer. Therefore I hope there is a revolution in Hollywood and afterwards we will be able to make films together, like in the 40s and 50s.
My best film so far is...
My next!
The LUX prize means to me...
The opportunity to build up a bridge between West and East. I have always felt that I am European since my early childhood and we are like in the same country now. And this is great. My nomination means that it is working.
"Delta" production company More on Delta
Belgian film 'Le Silence de Lorna' winner of the EP LUX Prize for cinema
EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering presents the LUX Prize to Luc Dardenne The film 'Le Silence de Lorna', by the Belgian directors Jean-Pierre and Luc Dardenne, is the winner of the European Parliament Cinema Prize LUX 2008. EP President, Hans-Gert Pöttering handed over the trophy to Luc Dardennne in a ceremony in front of MEPs and representatives of the three competing films in the final. The aim of the LUX Prize is to facilitate the circulation of European films within Europe.
In awarding the prize, Parliament President Hans-Gert Pöttering said: "The European Parliament has always recognised the pivotal role culture plays in our society and the award of the second LUX Prize reflects this. One of the objectives of the prize is to experience cultural and language differences within the EU. With this year's winner, a major social issue affecting Europe can be brought to cinemas in all European countries." Director Luc Dardenne said, on receiving the prize: "We don't see enough of each other's films in different countries of the European Union. I think this prize is the first step in remedying this problem." Aim of the LUX Prize The aim of the LUX Prize, awarded for the first time in 2007, is to break down the language barriers that prevent European films from circulating in the EU and give a boost to cinematic work within the EU. The winner of the LUX Prize will have his film subtitled in the Union's 23 languages and one copy will be produced per Member State in 35mm format. The Prize also covers an adaptation for the deaf and hard of hearing, and eventually an adaptation for blind and visual impaired-people. The competition 'Le Silence de Lorna' was selected by the MEPs who could vote for three films in competition; 'Le Silence de Lorna' (Jean-Pierre and Luc Dardenne) 'Delta' (Kornél MUNDRUCZÓ) and 'Obcan Havel' (Miroslav JANEK and Pavel KOUTECKÝ) The three films were part on an official selection of 10 films, selected by a 17-strong independent panel drawn from the highest level of the cinema profession: producers, distributors, cinema operators, festival directors, critics, etc. In order to be eligible the film should illustrate the universality of European values and/or the diversity of European culture and/or bringing insights into the debate on the process of building Europe. The films have been shown in the European Parliament in Brussels from 15 September-17 October 2008. The LUX Prize was awarded for the first time in 2007 to the Turkish-German co production "On the Edge of Heaven" ("Auf der anderen Seite"). Facts about the winning film: "Le silence de Lorna" Directed by: Jean-Pierre and Luc DARDENNE Co-production: Belgium, Germany, France, Italy, United Kingdom Release year: 2008 Runtime: 105 minutes Original version: French Award: Best screenplay, Cannes 2008 Synopsis In order to become the owner of a snack bar with her boyfriend, Lorna, a young Albanian woman living in Belgium becomes an accomplice to a diabolical plan devised by mobster Fabio. Fabio has orchestrated a sham marriage between her and Claudy. The marriage allows her to obtain Belgian citizenship and then marry a Russian Mafioso willing to pay a lot of money to acquire the same quickly. However, for this second marriage to be possible, Fabio has planned to kill Claudy. Will Lorna keep silent?
EN
1
PHOTO
20081020PHT40045.jpg
EN
2
PHOTO
20081022PHT40457.jpg
EN
3
LINK
http://www.sonyclassics.com/lornassilence/
EN
4
LINK
http://www.diaphana.fr/fiche.php?pkfilms=171#
EN
5
LINK
http://www.lux-prize.eu/
EN
7
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/avservices/video/video_prod_en.cfm?type=ebs&sid=129651
EN
8
PHOTO
20081020PHT40043.jpg
EN
9
LINK
http://www.lux-prize.eu/films_details/havel/index_en.htm
EN
10
PHOTO
20081022PHT40459.jpg
EN
11
LINK
http://www.coproductionoffice.eu/
EN
12
LINK
http://www.lux-prize.eu/films_details/delta/index_en.htm
EN
13
PHOTO
20081022PHT40461.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071107FCS12747 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FEA DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FEA DOC XML V0//EN
