Deal on the promotion of clean road transport vehicles
Environment
2008-10-22 - 12:21
Parliament adopted a first-reading agreement with Council on the promotion of clean road transport vehicles. The most important point of the deal is that the directive stays mandatory, but that Member States are given some flexibility. The aim of the directive is to promote and stipulate the market for clean and efficient vehicles to prompt industry to develop and invest in environmentally-friendly vehicles.
The proposal concerns the promotion of clean and energy-efficient road transport by obliging public authorities and certain operators to consider not only the cost, but the environmental impact, of the vehicles that they plan to purchase.
Mandatory requirement to take into account lifetime energy and environmental impacts when purchasing road transport vehicles
The compromise would require all contracting authorities and entities and certain operators to consider not only the purchase price of vehicles but also their lifetime energy and environmental impacts (including energy consumption, CO2 emissions and emissions of certain pollutants (including NOx, NMHC and particulate matter)), when purchasing road transport vehicles.
MEPs managed to keep this requirement mandatory but inserted certain flexibility in the directive giving Member states different options to fulfil the requirement. If a procurement procedure is applied, the environmental impacts shall be used as award criteria and the operational lifetime costs for energy consumption, CO2 emissions and pollutants emissions shall be monetised and calculates following a methodology specifies in the directive.
Scope
The directive covers not only public procurers but also road transport vehicles purchased by contracting authorities and contracting entities irrespective whether they are public or private. It furthermore covers the purchase of road transport vehicles used for performing public passenger transports under an public service contract giving the Member States the freedom to exclude minor purchases with a view to avoiding unnecessary administrative burden.
Member States, furthermore, have the possibility to exempt vehicles designed and constructed for special use (vehicles designed and constructed for use principally on construction sites or in quarries, port or airport facilities, armed services, civil defence, fire services and forces responsible for maintaining public order; and mobile machinery).
Exchange of best practices
The Commission shall facilitate and structure the exchange of knowledge and best practices between Member States for promoting the purchase of clean and energy efficient vehicles Support for through facilitating and structuring.
Figures
Given that the total annual vehicle procurement by public authorities in the EU is estimated at 110,000 passenger cars, 110,000 light commercial vehicles, 35,000 lorries and 17,000 buses for the EU, the new directive is expected to ensure a sufficiently substantial demand for clean and energy-efficient vehicles to prompt industry to develop and invest in environmentally-friendly vehicles
Date for entry into force and transposition in national law.
Member States must transpose the directive 18-month after entry into force of the directive into national law. Entry into force is 20th day after publication.
Background
In June 2006, the Environment Committee rejected a similar Commission proposal. The new proposal incorporates several of the committee's requests, e.g. on the proposal's scope, technology neutrality and the inclusion of CO2 emissions.
The resolution was adopted with 641 votes in favour, 37 against and 24 abstentions.
20081021IPR40226 Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 22 October)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
