Parliament adopts resolution on maritime piracy - legally incontrovertible rules of engagement needed
Security and defence
2008-10-23 - 13:01
In adopting a resolution on sea piracy, the European Parliament expresses its serious concern about the growing number of maritime piracy cases, in particular in the seas off Somalia and the Horn of Africa. Criminal assaults against Community fishing, merchant and passenger vessels have increased in number and frequency. MEPs call on the Council and Member States to adopt clear and legally incontrovertible rules of engagement for the naval forces engaged in those operations.
Commission figures show that the year 2007 saw an alarming increase of 17%, totalling 282 cases. Ten vessels and more than 200 seafarers are reported to be still in the hands of pirates and, also in 2007, 20 crew members were killed. An increase of piracy acts was also reported from other parts of the world, such as the Mozambique Channel, some areas off the coast of India and the Caribbean, as well as in the Nigeria Gulf. (Commission).
Members welcome in principle the Council Joint Action, which establishes a military coordination action named EU NAVCO but regret the lack of consultation by the Council of the European Parliament on the decision to launch this operation and to provide information to the EP about the scope of this action and the exact tasks that the "EU coordination cell" in the Council will undertake in support of EU NAVCO.
MEPs call on the Council and Member States to explain the objectives of the EU military naval operation within the framework of United Nations Security Council Resolution 1816(2008) to suppress armed robbery and piracy off the coasts of Somalia. The House acknowledges that UNSC 1816(2008) and 1838 were drafted under Chapter VII of the UN Charter as the only way to legitimate the use of force but stresses that under no circumstances should acts of piracy as well as acts against piracy be considered acts of war.
Rules of engagement
Council and Member States are also invited to adopt clear and legally incontrovertible rules of engagement for the naval forces engaged in those operations.
Council should clearly distinguish between this mandate and the anti-piracy tasks performed by its Member States within the framework of Operation Enduring Freedom-Horn of Africa, aimed at countering terrorist activities. Members request clear guidelines for detention and prosecution of captured pirates and call on the Council to avoid any involvement of EU NAVCO in the on-going conflict in Somalia. There should be effective coordination with other vessels in the region, especially those of the USA and Russia.
Parliament welcomes the Commission's intention to improve coordination with the European agencies responsible for maritime surveillance, underlining in particular the prevention of illegal activities with a special focus on international waters. It urges the Council not to equate the challenge of terrorism with the issues of illegal immigration and human and drug trafficking.
The Commission is called on to set up a Community system for mutual cooperation that would allow the vessels flying the flag of a Member State deployed in international waters to protect fishing and merchant vessels from other Member States, at the earliest possible opportunity.
The House regrets that the action taken by the Council does not concern the fishing areas in the region and calls for swift action to be taken into that effect. Council should do everything to dismantle the organised criminal networks that reap the profits of these acts of piracy. Finally, it hopes that the Commission and the UN do not neglect the path of political cooperation and normalisation with the states of the region concerned, in order to enable them to better prevent and combat crime at sea and its many root causes.
This resolution is a follow-up of the plenary debate on sea piracy held on 23 September 2008 in Brussels and was tabled by Paolo Costa (ALDE, IT), Chairman of the Committee on Transport and Tourism.
20081022IPR40410 Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 23 October) Debate Tuesday, 23 September 2008 - Brussels Sea piracy
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//TEXT CRE 20080923 ITEM-012 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
