Parliament gives its assent to agreement with Bosnia
External relations
2008-10-23 - 11:55
MEPs gave their assent next week to the conclusion of a Stabilisation and Association Agreement (SAA) with Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH). In a resolution adjacent to this report, MEPs point out the issues where Bosnian authorities need to make progress: reform of the state, return of refugees, non-discriminatory access to education and future constitutional structure. MEPs are also in favour of strengthening the EU Special Representative's role.
MEPs welcome the agreement which has the potential to boost BiH's economy but remind political leaders that this can be achieved only if they pursue with determination reforms at all levels - state, entity and local. This should be done with a view to modernising the country and making it more efficient and compatible with EU standards. BiH should abolish all unnecessary legal and administrative barriers and streamline its administrative structures, according to the resolution.
MEPs have reaffirmed that the membership prospect of BiH as a single state, and not for its entities, which do not enjoy autonomous sovereignty.
Disarmament
Calls on the Commission to guarantee EU funding for the UN programme on disarmament so that the destruction of the surplus weapons, military equipment and ammunition of the BiH armed forces can continue under UN supervision.
Situation of refugees
The report drafted by Doris PACK (EPP-ED, DE) is concerned by the lack of progress in refugees' and IDPs' returns, for example in the region of Posavina, located in the Republika Srpska. Local authorities should be more involved and adequate housing, infrastructure and employment in the areas of origin needs to be provided.
Education
Serious efforts need to be undertaken in order to overcome the segregationist structures currently operating in the country, according to MEPs, since this is key to promoting employability but is also instrumental in achieving reconciliation.
Future constitutional set-up
MEPs are of the view that the debate on the future constitutional set-up of BiH must be led by the Bosnian Parliament. Any constitutional settlement must be the product of voluntary agreement between the different political parties in BiH. The international community and the EUSR must play a facilitator's role.
MEPs are in favour of strengthening the EU Special Representative's role when the Office of the High Representative is closed down, but remind that this can only happen when all the conditions set by the International Community are fulfilled.
MEPs are in favour of closing down the Office of the High Representative.
Stabilisation and Association Agreements
The SAA with BiH has been signed in June 2008. SAAs are the first step towards accession to the European Union, provided that the Copenhagen criteria are fulfilled. The EU Summit in Thessaloniki (June 2003) reaffirmed the prospect of EU membership for the countries of the Western Balkans.
The resolution was adopted with 567 votes in favour, 21 against and 5 abstentions.
20081022IPR40406 Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 23 October)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
