Round up: October Strasbourg session 20-23 October
Institutions
2008-10-27 - 11:17
21October, Strasbourg: President Sarkozy makes his point to MEPs Last week in Strasbourg saw MEPs debate the financial crisis and its effect on people across Europe. They were joined by president Sarkozy as France currently holds the EU's Presidency. The week also saw MEPs back more rights for workers on temporary contracts, support a directive on fairer airport charges and block moves to introduce body scanners in Europe's airports.
The week also saw the award of the annual Sakharov human rights prize to Chinese dissident Hu Jia. MEPs from across the political spectrum voted to award the prize to Jia for his courage in speaking out against human rights abuses in China.
During the week Members also passed the EU's 2009 budget at the first reading stage. Funding to combat global warming and dealing with security threats are two areas where money will be available.
Another award last week was the LUX film prize which was awarded to a Belgian film "Le Silence de Lorna" for its portrayal of the interaction of people from different parts of Europe.
20081023FCS40477
Monday: Temporary workers, divorce, study abroad
Strasbourg, 20 October: rights of temporary workers were debated Back in Strasbourg Monday, MEPs debated measures to clarify the status and rights of temporary workers in the EU. It covers paid leave and rights for pregnant women. MEPs also discussed steps that will clarify which court has jurisdiction when people of different nationalities divorce.
MEPs back temporary workers
The number of temporary workers is on the increase, but national legislation differs across the EU. The novelty of the directive is that it in principle includes guarantees from "day 1" for temporary workers, covering areas like resting times, paid leave and non-discrimination towards pregnant women.
French Socialist Harlem Désir's report on on proposals to regulate the status and conditions of temporary workers in the EU met with positive reactions across the political spectrum, as well as from Commission and Council.
Mr Desir said, "Adopting this directive without amendments will send a signal that Europe's social heart is still beating...we have to show that Europe cares for employers and workers, reconciling Europe with its citizens." The vote is scheduled for Wednesday.
Foreign divorce made fairer
A report by German Socialist Evelyne Gebhardt concerns Europe-wide guidelines to clarify which country's courts has jurisdiction when couples of different nationalities divorce.
This could help clarify who would get custody of children and property. In Europe there are over 170,000 such divorces a year. However, the call for a comprehensive framework applying to cases of cross-border divorce litigation met with mixed reactions from MEPs, according to political outlook and nationality. There are also divergences between EU governments.
Jacques Barrot, Commissioner for Justice, Freedom and Security, said before starting a reinforced cooperation, which could "fragment" the EU, it would be best to get as many member states as possible on board.
Making studying abroad easier
A report by French Liberal Marielle de Sarnez seeks more participation and simpler visa procedures for the new Erasmus Mundus programme, which promotes exchanges between students studying for a masters degree inside and outside the EU. "It is a good programme, and considering the difficult times we are going through this is giving a positive image of Europe in the rest of the world," Ms de Sarnez said.
The new Erasmus Mundus Programme has a budget of about €950 million and looks to create joint master's degrees and doctorates, involving universities from at least three European countries; partnerships between European and third country universities, including a scholarship scheme; and to promote European higher education. In the previous programme, 4424 scholarships were granted from 2004-2008 to students from third countries and 323 universities took part, 265 of them in Europe.
Temporary Workers Cross-border divorces Live from Strasbourg Erasmus Mundus Programme More on Erasmus
Tuesday: Sarkozy, financial crisis, Russia
Nicolas Sarkozy makes his point to MEPs, 21 October Strasbourg Tuesday in Strasbourg saw MEPs debate the conclusions of the last EU summit held on 15-16 October. The agenda included the financial crisis and Europe's recent troubled relations with Moscow. As holder of the rotating EU presidency Nicolas Sarkozy briefed MEPs on attempts to deal with the present financial crisis.
Europe "must not miss date with history"
In a detailed address to the Parliament, President Sarkozy stated his thoughts on climate change with conviction. He warned the Chamber that the EU's climate change package must not be over-shadowed by the current economic crisis stating "we must not miss our date with history."
He was also keen to stress that the "ambitious" climate control package should not be viewed under the long shadow cast by the financial crisis.
He added that "the ambitious energy package is based on the belief that the world is heading for disaster .... It would be tragic to abandon its policies on the pretext that the financial crisis occurred."
Financial crisis: call to help vulnerable in Europe
Addressing the House, President Sarkozy was also vehement in his recognition of the seriousness of the financial crisis. He called for a European and worldwide effort to rectify the problem; "The crisis is global, the response must be global" he said.
Among ideas he floated were measures to ensure that "European companies are not bought up by non-European capital while their stock exchange values are low."
EC President José Manuel Barroso was quick to echo the sentiments of Sarkozy stating "European citizens need support - especially the vulnerable."
MEPs voice support for direct action
Joseph Daul, leader of the centre right EPP-ED group made his approval clear but warned that forward planning is needed: "Of course, the financial crisis is not behind us yet. It is during such situations that we can adopt rules for the future".
The leader of the Socialist PSE group Martin Schulz thanked Mr Sarkozy for finally adopting a more socialist standpoint: "I am glad you have finally arrived, however late." He added that "the credit crunch will pass, but climate change will not."
Leader of the Liberal ALDE group Graham Watson: "In August, Europe kept tanks out of Tblisi, this month, Europe has kept the banks in business, if in December Europe acts to preserve the planet, than we should convince even the most sceptical that we need the Lisbon Treaty".
The Parliament will vote on a resolution on the issue Wednesday 22 October.
Europe's relations with Russia debated
Tuesday afternoon saw the chamber steer its discussion towards relations with Russia. Security of energy supply, international status-quo after Georgia and the future of EU dialogue with Russia in times of economical crisis and political tensions dominated this vibrant debate.
Most speakers for the political groups concurred that though the Georgian crisis had provided important lessons for Europe in its relations with Russia. However, many MEPs felt Moscow should remain an important strategic partner for the European Union.
A positive rhetoric was used and most felt that talk of a second cold war and economic isolation of Russia inaccurate and counterproductive.
"Europe does not want another Cold War", said President Sarkozy "It is Europe that has brought about peace."
Watch Parliament Live Agenda of the session EP Press Service
Wednesday: LUX Prize, UN envoy, 2009 budget
EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering with the LUX prize Wednesday in Strasbourg Belgian film "Le Silence de Lorna" scooped parliament's LUX film prize. There was also an address by UN special envoy for the Alliance of Civilisations Jorge Sampaio, who called for tolerance towards people of other religions and cultures. The EU's 2009 budget was debated and a new trade and political deal with Bosnia-Herzegovina discussed.
08 LUX Prize
Parliament hosted the award ceremony for the 2008 LUX prize. Three provocative and moving films went head to head in a bid to claim the coveted prize, which finally went to the Belgian film, "Le Silence de Lorna", which triumphed over Hungarian film "Delta" and the Czech entry "Občan Havel".
During the award ceremony, European Parliament President Hans-Gert Pöttering said: "Culture has always played a pivotal role for the European Parliament. The award of the second LUX Prize shows this."
He added: "One of the objectives of the prize is to experience cultural and language differences within the EU."
UN envoy stresses need for tolerance
On Wednesday morning the UN's High Representative Jorge Sampaio spoke of the task facing Europeans in bridging social chasms and building similarities on common differences. He opened his speech with a message on behalf of the UN Secretary General, Ban Ki Moon. This year is the European year of intercultural dialogue.
"Europe faces multiple challenges in promoting intercultural dialogue. Migration, economic uncertainty and political tensions are putting strains on relations between different cultural, ethnic and religious groups", he said.
The 69 year old from Lisbon went on to say: "Cross-cultural tolerance, dialogue, respect and understanding must be pillars of the better world we are trying to build."
Mr Sampaio stressed the importance of multilateral understanding and the achievement of common goals. "Cultural diversity has become a major political issue challenging modern democracies, pluralism, citizenship and social cohesion as well as peace and stability among nations."
He also drew upon current situations facing many member states and urged tolerance and understanding by Europe's citizens. "Europe is a place where we can live together as equals and that requires more and more inclusive citizenship and better governance of cultural diversities."
EU's 2009 budget gets first reading
In the afternoon MEPs gave the 2009 budget its 1st reading. During the debate budget rapporteur, German Socialist Jutta Haug highlighted key areas of importance including climate change, social Europe and security.
MEPs from all political groups stressed the need to reinforcing financing for Europe's emerging foreign and security policy. Portuguese Socialist Ana Maria said: "for the EU to be a strong global actor, we need more funding".
Thursday saw MEPs vote to approve the budget by 509 votes in favour, 60 against with 25 abstentions.
Also on Wednesday the Parliament debated the Bosnia and Herzegovina Stabilisation and Association Agreement with the European Commission. There were also debates on airport charges and the ever-prevalent financial crisis. ´
Alliance of Civilisations: Jorge Sampaio addresses MEPs EP Budgetary power LUX Prize feature Airport taxes: 21 Oct Bridging the cultural divide Interview with Jutta Haug
Thursday: MEPs against body scans & pirates. Hu Jia wins Sakharov Prize
"Yes, No, Abstain": MEPs vote. Strasbourg, Thursday 23rd October MEPs condemned the use of body scanners at airports Thursday. They believe they are "equivalent to a virtual strip search" and will block European Commission plans to approve them. The day also saw the House call for criminal action to be taken by Europe, America and Russia against sea pirates. MEPs also awarded the prestigious Sakharov prize to jailed Chinese dissident Hu Jia.
MEPs take on pirates
European ships and their cargos are increasingly being targeted by pirates off Somalia and the Horn of Africa. A recent case was that of a Ukrainian vessel loaded with tanks and armaments falling into the hands of warring factions in Somalia.
In a strongly worded resolution, MEPs called for European states to treat this kind of piracy as a criminal act under international law.
Members also want more clarity concerning when European forces can be deployed. French naval commandos recently stormed a yacht that had been captured by pirates - successfully freeing her French crew.
The resolution, which will be sent to the Council of Ministers, also called for Europe to coordinate naval patrols and future action with the US and Russian navies.
Speaking in Thursday's debate Europe's new transport commissioner Antonio Tajani called for concerted action to avoid going back "centuries" where pirates control the high seas. He told the House the four most dangerous areas are "the South China seas, the Straits of Malacca and Singapore, the Gulf of Guinea and the Horn of Africa".
MEPs against airport body-scanners
The use of body scanners at airports is "equivalent to a virtual strip search" and "has a serious impact on the right to privacy...and personal dignity".
That is the emphatic view of MEPs on the European Commission's proposal to allow body scans to be one of the "permitted methods" of ensuring security in airports.
Body scanners produce images of persons as if they were naked and the Commission would like them included in a draft regulation on security.
In a resolution passed on Thursday, MEPs demanded the Commission carry out a fundamental rights impact assessment and to consult the Fundamental Rights Agency as well as the European Data Protection Supervisor
Speaking in the debate on Tuesday 21 October British Conservative Philip Bradbourn MEP said that such scans "were a grave violation of the right of privacy and a degrading measure".
Budget and Bosnia
In other votes MEPs passed the 2009 budget at its first reading. Also approved were measures to make airport charges clearer. A report on the European Ombudsman's activities last year was also signed off.
Finally, as part of their remit to approve all international agreement the European Union signs, MEPs passed a Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the EU and Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Sakharov Prize 2008 awarded to Hu Jia Sea piracy Press release on body-scanners Press releases
EN
1
PHOTO
20081024PHT40598.jpg
EN
2
PHOTO
20081020PHT40033.jpg
EN
5
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/faces/live/live-video.jsp?language=en
EN
8
PHOTO
20081020PHT40041.jpg
EN
9
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/faces/live/live-video.jsp?language=en
EN
10
LINK
/sides/getDoc.do?type=AGENDA&reference=20081021-LASTV&secondRef=0&language=EN
EN
12
PHOTO
20081022PHT40467.jpg
EN
14
LINK
/parliament/public/staticDisplay.do?id=46&pageRank=5&language=EN
EN
19
PHOTO
20081022PHT40469.jpg
EN
23
LINK
/news/expert/default_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A6-2008-0373 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A6-2008-0361 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A6-2008-0294 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070705STO08862 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081020IPR40025 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081021IPR40244 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081020FCS39962 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081020STO39951 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080211FCS20948 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080428STO27729 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081020STO39964 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081022IPR40410 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081022IPR40394 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
