Mediterranean eating - "reduces mortality"
Public health
2008-10-30 - 11:05
An Italian child is fed "Spaghetti alle Vongole" - a traditional Christmas dish Bad health through a bad diet is a growing problem across Europe. One such case is obesity which experts believe is responsible for over 10% of deaths across the continent. MEPs recently discussed the merit of the "Mediterranean diet" - fish, fruit vegetables - and whether it could lead to a healthier life.
Countries bordering the Mediterranean traditionally tend to eat fruit, vegetables and bread.
Allied to olive oil, fish, poultry and wine it makes for a diet that many supporters consider the healthiest in Europe.
At a hearing on 13 October MEPs, local representatives and even Chefs discussed the relative merits of the diet.
"Spaniards, Italians and the French live longer"
María Dolores Rubio is a key adviser to the regional government of La Rioja, Spain. She told the hearing that "Studies prove that a Mediterranean diet helps to reduce all cardiovascular disease risks, Alzheimer's disease and cancer. The fact is that Spaniards, Italians and French people live longer."
"The effects are tangible and could be a real life insurance policy" said Ms Rubio. "A Mediterranean diet reduces mortality, delays aging processes, and reduces health costs."
It's what you eat, but how much
Also speaking at the hearing was Mr Lluis Serra Majem, President of the Mediterranean Diet Foundation. He was keen to point out the benefits of eating non-processed items such as fish, nuts, fruits and vegetables.
He was also eager to stress the value of "using spices and herbs as an alternative to salt", the benefits of which can be huge in reducing blood pressure and high cholesterol.
Mr Lleonart also saw the benefits of drinking wine: "Studies show that moderate consumption can be highly beneficial. However, the daily intake should be no more than 2 glasses for men, 1 glass for women."
Scheme would cause food shortages
However, some MEPs did not warm to the idea that a Mediterranean diet is a soultion for poor health. British Conservative MP Neil Parish - who Chairs parliament's Agriculture Committee - saw an immediate problem in the natural balance of food in Europe:
"If the whole Europe starts the Mediterranean diet, there will be not enough fish. It’s important to ensure a connection between foods of Europe and it’s wrong to promote just one kind of food. Northern Europe should eat more fish and olive oil, Southern Europe, more meat."
However, diet is closely linked to social class and income. Studies across Europe have shown that more affluent members of society eat up to 50% more fruit and vegetables than poorer people.
"We should fight chemical foodstuffs"
What was clear from the hearing was the fact that MEPs were strongly in favour of a natural, balanced diet and not necessarily the Mediterranean one.
Italian chef Alfonso Iaccarino, echoed this view: "We need to return to nature. Simpler food, old traditions, diversity and quality! We should fight chemical foodstuff."
It was also the general consensus that more education was needed in giving children the necessary skills to exploit the food around them.
Many MEPs showed their support for the Mediterranean diet being adopted, not only as a model for food but also as a model for culture. Already a number of countries have applied to list the Mediterranean diet as a UNESCO World Heritage "site' - a move which could be further supported by a Parliamentary resolution.
Italian Chef Al Iaccarino's pizza
Fresh dough
Fresh tomatoes
Extra virgin olive oil
Mozzarella
Basil
20081027STO40642 Agriculture Committee MEPs fight obesity
EN
1
PHOTO
20081030PHT41040.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=AGRI
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080922STO37699 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
