This week is Arab week at the European Parliament
Culture
2008-10-31 - 10:28
Late Egyptian singer Umm Kulthum by Chant Avedissian is the Arab week poster Europe's relationship with the Arab world will be the focus of attention during "Arab week" at the European Parliament from 3-7 November. A series of debates, exhibitions and even musical performances will take place in Brussels to draw attention to the politics and culture of the Arab world.
The week will also see Members of the Human Rights subcommittee and the Foreign Affairs committee discussing human rights and meeting Arab League Secretary General Amr Mussa.
Also present in Arab week will be a group of Iraqi parliamentarians who will be briefing MEPs on the situation in the country and prospects for the future.
Speaking ahead of the event the President of the European Parliament Hans-Gert Pöttering commented that: "The Arab world is not only a close neighbour of Europe but also, through the Arab communities present in the Union's member states, a component of today's European societies."
Calligraphy and contemporary Arab art
The importance of Arabic culture and its influence on Europe will also be a theme of the week.
Arab calligraphy will be demonstrated by Hassan Massoudy and Algerian novelist Yasmina Khadra will be talking about some of his books.
There will also be an exhibition of paintings, photographs and sculptures from over 30 contemporary Arab artists inside and around parliament's building in Brussels. It is part of the events to marks this, the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue.
Musicians from Morocco, Bahrain and Saudi Arabia will be performing with a public concert in Place Flagey in Brussels on Wednesday 5 November.
If you would like to see a full list of events see the link below.
20081027STO40644 EP Delegations Committees Hans-Gert Pöttering website
EN
1
PHOTO
20081027PHT40756.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/activities/delegations.do?language=EN
EN
3
LINK
/activities/committees/committeesList.do?language=EN
EN
4
LINK
/president/defaulten.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
