Amr Moussa: "Barack Obama could bring about a sea change in the Middle East"
External relations
2008-11-05 - 18:56
The impact of the newly elected American president on the solution of the Middle East conflict was the main topic in Wednesday's debate at the Foreign Affairs Committee with Amr Moussa, secretary general of the League of Arab States. The meeting took place as part of the Arab Week organised jointly by the European Parliament and the Arab League.
"This is the first day of the new era we have been yearning for. This will go down as a historic day, with the election of Barack Obama as the first black president of the United States", said the secretary general of the pan-Arab body. He stressed that the message of change, which was at the heart of the Democrats' campaign, "has had a big impact in the Middle East".
Mr Moussa went on to say "what we need in the Middle East is a change of method". He criticised the outgoing US administration's waiting game, saying it had "waited seven years before taking action" to try and resolve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. "The United States must play the role of honest broker in this conflict, as the dishonest brokers have failed", he said, and he welcomed the fact that the Middle East was one of the priorities of the 44th US president.
However, "we need Europe's commitment", he added when speaking of the EU's role, "regardless of the position taken by other powers".
Settlements in the occupied territories
"We need strong intervention from the United States, the world's most powerful country, to put an end to the settlements in the occupied territories", which could in the long run become de facto annexations by certain parties, maintained Mr Moussa.
"The road to normalisation with Israel is a two-track path that requires a brave decision to put an end to the settlements", he said in reply to Tunne Kelam (EPP-ED, ET), who asked him about the recognition of Israel by Hamas.
"Israel's right to exist is clear", added Mr Moussa, who stressed that the Arab League's peace initiative was geared to seeking a peaceful solution on the basis of recognition. "We have gone beyond the debate on the right of Israel to exist".
To a question by Véronique de Keyser (PES, BE) on the talks aimed at reconciling the different Palestinian factions scheduled for 9 November in Cairo, Mr Moussa replied that "the current situation is not acceptable. The Palestinians are defending a cause but by fighting among themselves they are sawing off the branch on which they are sitting".
Mediterranean Union
Answering a question by David Hammerstein (Greens/EFA, ES) on the Mediterranean Union, Mr Moussa welcomed the fact that the Arab League would in future be able to take part in this Union "at all levels", as was decided by the ministers of the 43 countries at the summit which ended yesterday in Marseilles.
The Arab League, which brings together 22 members of the Maghreb, Mashreq and the region of the Arabian-Persian Gulf, is the joint organiser of the Arab Week currently being held at the European Parliament.
2008-11-03 Committee on Foreign Affairs Chair Jacek Saryusz-Wolski EPP-ED PL
20081103IPR41246 Website of EP Foreign Affairs Committee
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?body=AFET&language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
