EP President calls for rapid progress on climate change legislation
Environment
2008-11-13 - 12:00
EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering called for "concrete results" in the negotiations on the EU's climate change package before the international climate conference in Poznan in December. He was speaking to MEPs and leading climate and development researchers who met on Wednesday to discuss measures both to meet the future energy demand and to combat climate change on a global level. The event was organised by Parliament's scientific research panel STOA.
"Our planet is heading for a dramatic crisis due to human malpractice", said President Pöttering, adding that "the price of inactivity is increasing every day". Next year's climate conference in Copenhagen was "the last chance for the international community of states to formulate a comprehensive and binding answer to climate change", he said.
Concrete results on climate change proposals before international climate conference in Poznan
"If we want to convince our partners in the world to participate in a binding global strategy, we have to show concrete results", said the EP President with a view to the informal negotiations on the EU's climate change package which are currently taking place between Parliament, Council and Commission. He said Parliament was ready to hold its first-reading vote in December, ahead of the European Council and the international climate conference in Poznan (11-12 December). "It is now up to the Council if there is enough flexibility to reach an agreement in first reading by December this year", he concluded.
Radical change in technology
Talking to MEPs in a video-conference from the Earth Institute at Columbia University, Professor Jeffrey Sachs called for "a radical change in technology". "We are trying to fight climate change with 19th century technology", he stressed. As "most of the technology we need does not yet exist or is not yet at demonstration phase", Prof. Sachs went on, no one really knew the costs of large-scale photovoltaic installations or carbon capture and sequestration.
The EU and the US should both each invest at least US$ 30 billion in technology development, said Prof. Sachs. This technology should be available to developing countries for free and the governments of the developed countries should pay the royalties, he concluded.
The future energy mix
"Power generation accounts for twice the global CO2 emissions of transportation", said Dr David Eyton of the BP Group. In his view there were "only three major options in the medium term for decarbonising electrical power supply - nuclear, wind, and carbon capture and storage".
This view was challenged by Satu Hassi (Greens/EFA, FI) who stressed that several scientists considered concentrated solar power a valuable option and asked whether it was a cost effective, large-scale option in the short term. Solar technology was still at a very early stage, replied Dr Eyton, but had a "large potential" in the long term.
Help developing countries to adapt to climate change
Tackling climate change was not only "a question of mitigation but also one of adaptation", stressed the Vice-Chair of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Professor Jean-Pascal van Ypersele. "Some of the changes are already taking place and the first victims are in the developing countries", he went on. "Many of us in Europe focus on mitigation but if we don't give enough attention to adaptation, it will be difficult to get the developing countries on board for mitigation measures", concluded Prof. van Ypersele.
Asked by Lily Jacobs (PES, NL), Prof. van Ypersele said that the IPCC also listened to objections by sceptics and that its summary for policy makers was based on a consensus approach between hundreds of world-class scientists and various stakeholders.
7th STOA Annual Lecture (2008): "Meeting Future Energy Demands and tackling Climate Change" 2008-11-12 In the chair Malcolm HARBOUR EPP-ED UK
Science and Technology Options Assessment panel - STOA
20081113IPR41900 Website of STOA - Parliament's panel on Science and Technology Options Assessment
EN
1
LINK
/stoa/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
