Possible blue card migrants have their say
Immigration
2008-11-14 - 12:54
Broad horizons: Todd Chakara fits the blue card profile Next week MEPs vote on a new "blue card" scheme for skilled migrants. It is intended to tackle the shortfall in highly qualified people in areas like IT and engineering. We asked some potential future blue card holders what they think.
The blue card would introduce a special procedure for the entry of non-EU citizens to work in the European Union. Inspired by the US Green Card it aims to have a common procedure for the whole of the EU.
Nandagopal Menon is from India and is doing a PhD in the Netherlands. He explained that under current rules "although a residence permit issued by a Schengen country allows its holder to travel freely, taking up residency in another country to work or study is not allowed. This, in a way, dissuades skilled migrants. The blue card could solve this problem."
Good for migrants - and for Europe
Todd Chakara from Zimbabwe, who currently works in South Africa as a privatisation consultant, said "I view the US green card or the proposed blue card as a bureaucratic hurdle rather than an aid. Perhaps this is a matter of inadequate publicity or public awareness. A set of clear, well publicized immigration regulations would perhaps be adequate."
However, Zarifa Abbasova from Baku in Azerbaijan was quite positive about the scheme. "It is also good for Europe as it can benefit from the skills and experience that people from outside the EU can bring" she said.
If the blue card is introduced Todd says it must be accompanied by a change in mentality: "Facing scepticism and suspicion of one’s intentions by immigration authorities keeps me away." He explained, "The officer that has the desire to recruit professionals cannot be combined with the officer that has the desire to limit the number of immigrants."
Language barrier
For many would be migrants the language barrier is a key issue. "English is one major factor that draws skilled migrants to the US. But, of late, English is also increasingly being viewed as the preferred second language across the EU," Nandagopal said.
For Masayo - a Japanese post graduate student studying in Italy who speaks English - Europe's many languages can act a as barrier for the highly skilled. Therefore she would "not enthusiastically" consider the blue card but she wouldn't rule it out.
Rights for card holder and family
The Blue Card provides a certain number of rights for the holder and their family. "The advantage of blue card system is that it allows the spouse to work legally. It might be more attractive for a married couple," says Masayo.
Zarifa agreed, "It would be great to be able to come with family as many people in Azerbaijan marry young and have children"
The verdict: red card for the blue card?
One concern raised by some MEPs is that a blue card could lead to a "brain drain" from poorer countries. Zarifa said she thought doctors from her country, for example, might only go abroad for 3 years or so.
Overall the verdict is positive. "I think a blue card will be more attractive because the EU offers more opportunities - in terms of jobs and study - when compared to the US," said Nandagopal. The "sheer diversity of the EU is the primary reason for this," he added.
Todd - who has lived in Europe said, " I think the balance of work and social life is done better in Europe than in the US."
MEPs will debate the proposed blue card scheme in Strasbourg on Wednesday 19 November and vote on it a day later. MEPs on the Civil Liberties Committee backed the scheme on 4 November.
20081107STO41561 A European "Blue Card" for highly-skilled immigrants File Blue card scheme backed by MEPs Strasbourg agenda
EN
1
PHOTO
20081112PHT41869.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5553642
EN
5
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?language=EN&reference=2008-11
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081022BRI40443 ITEM-014-EN NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081013STO39205 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
