Celebration of 50th anniversary of the European Parliament in Dublin
Institutions
Ireland
2008-11-17 - 15:45
Sir Julian Priestley on the European Parliament at 50 On 13 November, the Office of the European Parliament in Ireland hosted an event, celebrating the 50th Anniversary of the European Parliament. Keynote speakers at the event included Pat Cox, former President of the European Parliament, Sir Julian Priestley, former Secretary General of the European Parliament and Dick Roche, Irish Minister for European Affairs.
Celebration of the 50th Anniversary in Dublin
To celebrate the 50th Anniversary of the European Parliament, the Office of the European Parliament in Ireland hosted an event at which Parliament's former President, Pat Cox, and its former Secretary-General, Sir Julian Priestley, were the keynote speakers, and at which Ireland's European Affairs Minister, Dick Roche, also spoke.
Francis Jacobs, Head of the European Parliament Office in Ireland, opened the event in which he emphasised that during his own career at the Parliament, the latter had expanded from 198 members from 9 countries to 785 from 27, and from a Parliament with mere consultative powers to one with very real legislative, budgetary and appointment powers. He also paid tribute to the large number of former Irish members of the Parliament who had come to the event, as well as to the longest-serving member of the EP staff in Ireland, Mary Killoran, who had started work with the office in 1978, but who was retiring at the end of the year.
European Affairs Minister Dick Roche then highlighted the three basic principles of the European Union: democracy, freedom and the rule of law. He went on to speak with emotion about a recent visit he had made to the battlefields at Verdun which had underlined the fact that "Europe's greatest achievement is the longest period of peace in European History".
The first keynote speech was then given by Pat Cox, who served as a member in the European Parliament from 1989 to 2004, and was then its President between 2002 and 2004. He highlighted the uniqueness of the European Parliament in respect to its power to making supranational law and being a forum for discussion forum for political opinions from all across Europe. Looking ahead to the upcoming European elections, he expressed his regret that he would still be waiting for the first "true European Elections". He called for a debate on European topics in the campaign rather just discussing national issues. Finally he stressed the key and evolving role of members and civil servants of the European Parliament. He went on to say that "The European Parliament, represented by its former and current members, has always been a successful tribune, where all voices of assent or dissent have found their expression and may do so for a long time to come."
The final keynote speech was given by Sir Julian Priestley, the Parliament's Secretary-General between 1997 and 2007, and who has just written a book on some key moments in the evolution of the European Parliament, entitled "Six Battles that shaped Europe's Parliament". Pointing out that the European Parliament had now become a fully-fledged Parliament with real powers, he mentioned four important features which illustrated its new importance: legislative powers, budgetary powers, control of the executive and being a forum for peaceful expression of opinions. He highlighted how the Parliament had gained these powers in the past, and how it executes them today. Julian Priestley concluded his journey through the history of the European Parliament, looking forward to future challenges for the Parliament: "Although it has become much more visible of late, the European Parliament is still not seen by much of its electorate as its Parliament - its voice in Europe's construction. In this lies the greatest challenge."
The event was attended by a wide range of guests, including members of the European and Irish national parliament, journalists and diplomats, government officials and representatives of Irish civic society. In particular, a considerable number of former Irish Members of the European Parliament from different parties and constituencies took part in the event, including two from the pre-1979 nominated Parliament. The last two heads of the Dublin Office were also present.
20081110IPR41593 European Parliament Office in Ireland
EN
1
PHOTO
20081117PHT42232.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.europarl.ie/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
