Challenges ahead after 10 years of Economic and Monetary Union
Economic and monetary union
2008-11-18 - 14:25
MEPs have set out their views on how the Economic and Monetary Union could be developed in the years to come. They adopted a report focusing on the ECB, the Lisbon Strategy, the Stability and Growth Pact, external representation for the eurozone and financial services supervision, among other issues, all seen in the light of the current economic downturn.
The report, drawn up by Pervenche Berès (PES, FR, Chair of the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee) and Werner Langen (EPP-ED, DE), adopted on Tuesday by 545 votes in favour to 86 against with 37 abstentions, stresses that euro has helped economic stability, but that more needs to be done to get most from the Economic and Monetary Union, including coordinated economic reforms as set out in the Lisbon Strategy - this would also help in recovering from the current financial crisis.
Parliament stresses the need to need to stick closely to the Stability and Growth Pact, and argue for more budgetary consolidation - but also efficient public spending. MEPs say budgetary policy should draw fully on the degree of flexibility permitted by the revised Pact.
Price stability and inflation targeting
MEPs say wage moderation should not be seen as the exclusive way to achieve price stability – in fact, real wages should rise in line with productivity levels.
They strongly back the independence of the European Central Bank. When it comes to its definition of price stability, MEPs suggest the ECB should move towards a direct inflation targeting regime, where a point inflation target is supplemented by a range of permitted fluctuations around the target rate – this would be similar to the targets set for the Bank of England in Britain. This should not, say MEPs, preclude focussing on the dynamics of monetary aggregates in order to avoid new asset bubbles.
Parliament repeats is calls for the ECB executive board to be made up of peoples with a variety of economic, financial and monetary backgrounds. It says that, in future, the board should have nine members, and be exclusively responsible for setting interest rates.
Parliament is calling for the EU to play a leading role in international efforts to reform regulatory system for financial markets.
Euro area enlargement
MEPs stress the need for equal treatment for euro Member States and those seeking to join. They also insist that joining the euro requires full adherence to all the Maastricht criteria. They argue that the Commission should Commission should undertake intensive information campaign in new MS to prepare citizens for euro.
Governance and international representation of the euro area
Parliament says it regrets the lack of progress in improving euro area international representation and that ultimately, the area should have single seat in international financial institutions. In the meantime, the MEPs encourage the idea that common EU positions could be represented by Eurogroup chair, Commission and ECB President in international bodies.
The report identifies a wide range of areas where the economic governance of the euro area could be improved. Among the proposals is the idea that the Eurogroup should have formations consisting of competitiveness, environment, employment and education ministers as well as the current Eurogroup of finance ministers. MEPs also want to see a world monetary conference for global consultations – and perhaps also a monetary dispute settlement mechanism under the IMF.
20081117IPR42143 EMU@10: The first 10 years of Economic and Monetary Union and future challenges Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 18 November)
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5651032
EN
2
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
