Environmental inspections will damage the environment, say MEPs
Environment
2008-11-20 - 13:09
The Commission's conclusion that full implementation of environmental legislation in the EU cannot be ensured will lead to "continuing damage to the environment" and to "distortions of competition", say MEPs. Information submitted by Member States showed that only a few have achieved full implementation and that there are still large gaps in the way environmental inspections are carried out.
The resolution, adopted Thursday by 390 votes in favour to 8 against with 11 abstentions, opposes the Commission's intention of dealing with disparate environmental inspections through a non-binding recommendation and through the insertion of specific legally binding requirements in sectoral legislation.
Parliament emphasises that good and even enforcement of environmental law is essential, and that anything less "falls short of public expectations and undermines the reputation of the EU as an effective guardian of the environment".
Actions to be taken by the Commission
According to the Commission the situation of incomplete implementation is partially due to differing interpretations by Member States of the definitions and criteria of the recommendation and of the reporting requirements.
The Commission also recognises that the scope of the recommendation is inadequate and does not include many important activities, such as Natura 2000, the control of illegal waste shipments, the registration and authorisation of chemicals (REACH), the restriction of certain hazardous substances in products (e.g. the RoHS Directive), trade in endangered species as well as activities related to genetically modified organisms and producer responsibility systems.
In light of this, MEPs urge the Commission to draw up a proposal for a directive, defining and extending the scope of environmental inspections.
They also call on the Commission to establish a Community inspection force and to report on possible ways of strengthening the European Union Network for the Implementation and Enforcement of Environmental Law (IMPEL) - all before the end of 2009.
Support for environmental education
Parliament proposes that greater emphasis be placed on supporting environmental education and information provision, the specific content of which would be determined at local, regional or national level.
20081117IPR42211 Text adopted will be available here (clic on 20 November)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
