The Week Ahead 24-30 November 2008
2008-11-21 - 12:18
External Parliamentary Activities Week
EP/Northern Ireland. EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering makes an official visit to Northern Ireland, where he will meet First Minister Peter Robinson, Deputy First Minister Martin McGuinness and the Speaker of the Northern Ireland Assembly, William Hay (Monday).
EP/Ireland. President Pöttering also visits Dublin, where he will meet Irish Foreign Minister Micheál Martin and parliamentarians from the Sub-Committee on Ireland's Future in the European Union (Tuesday).
ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly. The assembly which brings together MEPs with MPs from African, Caribbean and Pacific countries meets in Papua New Guinea. Economic partnership agreements and food and energy prices will be on the agenda, as well as developments in Mauritania and Zimbabwe (Monday- Friday).
EP/Egypt. Parliament's delegation for relations with the Mashreq countries will be in Egypt for meetings with parliamentarians and officials, including the Speaker of the People's Assembly and the Foreign Minister (Monday-Friday).
EP/Turkey. A delegation in Ankara ahead of Parliament's report on Turkey's progress towards EU membership will meet President Abdullah Gul and the Foreign Minister (Monday-Wednesday). A second delegation, from the Human Rights Sub-Committee, will be discussing human rights issues with officials, journalists and NGOs (Monday-Thursday).
External activities. There are no official meetings in Brussels during the week ahead as it is set aside for MEPs to work in their constituencies or to take part in working visits of parliamentary delegations.
As well as those mentioned above, these include a delegation from the Civil Liberties Committee in Senegal to discuss immigration issues and a group from the Economics Committee in Prague for meetings with the Czech government.
Climate change negotiations. Discussions between MEPs and Council representatives will continue with the aim of reaching a first-reading compromise on the climate change package.
2008-11-24 The President's diary
Official visit to Northern Ireland
10.00 - Meeting with First Minister, Hon Peter Robinson, and deputy First Minister, Martin Mc Guinness
11.00 - Address to the Legislative Assembly
12.30 - Meeting with the Speaker, William Hay
14.30 - Visit to St Joseph’s Primary School 10:00 15:30 Belfast, United Kingdom 2008-11-25 The President's diary
11.00 - Exchange of views with the Irish Catholic Bishops Conference
13.30 - Meeting with Micheál Martin, Minister for Foreign Affairs and Members of the Sub-Committee on Ireland's Future in the European Union followed by a press point 11:00 14:30 Dublin, Ireland
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AGD DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AGD DOC XML V0//EN
