EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering condemns terrorist attacks in Mumbai
Institutions
2008-11-27 - 15:09
EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering condemns terrorist attacks in Mumbai Following the terrorist attacks last night in Mumbai, the President of the European Parliament, Hans-Gert Pöttering, made the following statement:
“I strongly and vehemently condemn these tragic multiple terrorist attacks during which more than 100 people were killed and few hundred injured. This is a crime that cannot be tolerated under any circumstances. Terrorism represents one of the greatest dangers to security, stability and democratic values of the international community.
On behalf of the European Parliament, I would like to convey a message of solidarity to the Indian people and their authorities. We stand with the families of the victims at this time of mourning.
We are very much relieved that the French Consulate is now working in close cooperation with the European Parliament to ensure a quick return of the delegation of the European Parliament that was visiting Mumbai and was staying in one of the hotels that was attacked. I have been personally in touch with them and assured myself that they and the Parliament staff are as well as can be expected, and would like to thank all diplomats who help our delegation in this extremely critical situation.
Fighting terrorism must remain a key political priority for the international community. It is a global problem and a challenge for everyone. We must use all the resources that the rule of law places at our disposal to defeat terrorism together once and for all.”
The MEPs were in Mumbai as a delegation of the EP International Trade Committee. The delegation was led by Ignasi Guardans Cambó (ALDE, ES), and included Erika Mann (PES, DE), Syed Kamall (EPP-ED, UK), Béla Glattfelder (EPP-ED, HU), Daniel Caspary (EPP-ED, DE), Jan Tadeusz Masiel (UEN, PL), and Sajjad Karim (EPP-ED, UK).
20081127IPR43127 EP President Pöttering website FTP to download statement from EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering
EN
1
PHOTO
20081124PHT42906.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/president/defaulten.htm?agenda
EN
3
LINK
ftp://epavvideoget:mo12ssb@ftpeps01.europarl.eu.int/epavvideo/EBS/MumbayAttack/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
