ACP-EU Assembly says financial crisis should not mean aid cuts
Development and cooperation
2008-11-28 - 09:33
The world financial crisis should not be used to justify cuts in development aid, says a Port Moresby Declaration adopted at the 16th Africa Caribbean Pacific - European Union Joint Parliamentary Assembly in Papua New Guinea on 24-28 November. The JPA debated the EU's economic partnership agreement with the Pacific region, passed resolutions on the political crises in Mauretania and Zimbabwe, and adopted reports on protecting civilians, aid effectiveness and child labour.
Twice a year the ACP-EU JPA brings together 78 members of the European Parliament and 78 parliamentarians from the African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) states.
Port Moresby Declaration on the global food and financial crises
The current financial crisis must not be used to justify aid cutbacks, says the Port Moresby Declaration, which calls on EU Member States to honour their official development assistance commitments - i.e. 0.56% of gross national income by 2010 and 0.7% by 2015.
ACP and EU governments should also jointly ensure that "sufficient aid and public spending is channelled towards achieving food security", says the declaration.
The declaration also calls on the international community to reform and regulate the global financial system to guarantee transparency and ensure developing nations have a greater say.
"If the strongest economies in the world need economic stability - and they do - the weaker ones need economic dependability", commented JPA Co-President Glenys Kinnock (PES, UK).
Economic partnership agreements with the Pacific
The Assembly debated the EU's economic partnership agreements (EPAs) with third countries, and specifically those with the Pacific region (15 countries. including East Timor). The erosion of trade preferences, particularly for sugar (Fiji) and tuna (Papua) prompted these countries to sign a provisional agreement in November 2007.
The key issues debated were the rate at which "interim" versions of these agreements are being signed, whether or not services and intellectual property protection should be built into them, and whether the European Parliament should give its assent, in spring 1999, to their taking effect.
Outlining what he would like to see in the final agreement for Papua New Guinea and Fiji, EP rapporteur for the EPA with the Pacific Glynn Ford (PES, UK) listed: progress on allowing export taxes for development purposes, adequate protection for infant industries, intellectual property protection, not just for western artefacts but also for traditional knowledge, opening up public procurement to an extent consistent with Pacific states' needs, and for services, recognising the need for work visas for the EU.
If the Commission cannot accept this basis for further negotiation, said Mr Ford, then he would recommend voting "no" to the interim agreement.
Restoring democracy in Mauritania
The Assembly condemns the overthrow of President Sidi Mohamend Ould Cheikh Abdullahi and the government by the armed forces in Mauritania in August 2008, and calls for his immediate release, in an urgent resolution adopted on 28 November. It also urges the ruling military authorities to commit themselves forthwith to a timetable for restoring constitutional order, democratic institutions and the ineligibility of the military to stand in elections.
Any sanctions should target the military putschists, not affect the population.
Assembly backs unity government in Zimbabwe
The Assembly confirms that a government of national unity is a solution for ending the political, economic and social crisis that followed Zimbabwe's widely-criticised elections of June 2008, in an urgent resolution adopted on 28 November. It also calls on the parties to a power-sharing deal of September 2008 to work together for a lasting democratic and peaceful solution, and advocates setting up a peace and reconciliation commission.
Assembly debates North Kivu conflict escalation fears
Fears that the North Kivu conflict in the Democratic Republic of Congo could escalate throughout the Great Lakes region, calls for a European peacekeeping force, and control of Congolese mineral resources were debated by the ACP-EU Assembly on 27 November with EU Development Commissioner Louis Michel.
Reports adopted
Stepping up civilian protection in peacekeeping operations
Civilian protection needs to be made an integral part of peacekeeping operations, in a "routine process" enabling parties to settle their disputes, says a report adopted by the Assembly on 28 November. The report calls for permanent civilian peace services to be set up at national level and in regional organisations such as the African and European unions.
Rapporteurs: Komi Selom Klassou (Togo) and Johan Van Hecke (ALDE, BE)
Combating child labour
Measures to harness the power of consumers and industry to discourage the exploitation of child labour - including a "without child labour" kite mark and a requirement that large firms eliminate child labour from their supply chains within three years, are set out in a report approved by the Assembly on 28 November.
Rapporteurs: Ana Rita Sithole (Mozambique) and Liam Aylward (UEN, IE)
Redefining development aid
Official Development Assistance (ODA) needs to be more tightly defined, so that it cannot be made to include non-aid items such as military spending, says the Assembly in a report adopted on 28 November. Spending on debt relief should also be separated from other ODA accounting, and aid generally needs to be scaled up and better aligned with national systems, it says.
Rapporteurs: Anne Van Lancker (PES, BE) and Waven William (Seychelles)
Next meeting of the JPA: Prague
The 17th ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly is due to be held in Prague on 6-9 April 2009.
20081124IPR42866 ACP-EU JPA Website ACP-EU JPA review
EN
1
LINK
/intcoop/acp/60_16/default_en.htm
EN
2
MULTIMEDIA
20080714MLT34132.pdf
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
