MEPs in terror attack: "The international community must stand together"
Delegations
2008-12-02 - 14:03
MEPs speak of the terror attacks in Mumbai, 26 November 2008 November 26 2008 will be a date that resonates with the international community for many years to come. The world watched in horror as gunmen in Mumbai, India killed nearly 200 people, injuring countless more.
Of the numerous nationalities affected by the atrocity, a delegation committee of MEPs were visiting in the city.
The delegation of the International Trade Committee representing the European Parliament was scheduled to spend 1 week in Mumbai meeting with NGOs, state officials and trade councillors. Staying at the Taj Mahal Hotel, the 8 MEPs and 9 officials became embroiled in the terror attacks.
All members of the Committee escaped the city with their lives but what happened on that day of chaos and violence will stay with them for much longer.
Chairman of the delegation Mr Ignasi Guardans, a member of the liberal group ALDE said: "we have been extremely lucky."
Evacuated by EU government authorities, Mr Guardans watched the unfolding episode with mixed views, finding elements both to praise and critique: "Now it is the moment to thank the French Presidency for what they have done, besides certain specific things could have been improved. It has been a very interesting experience just to be a part of an evacuation plan by the European Union and to see which things worked and which things did not work. It is indeed a lesson in crisis management. Some consulates have worked better than others."
Mr Guardans commented on the Indian authorities, again seeing room for improvement: "I am not here now to start any criticism, but it is very obvious that Indian authorities and the security forces need to be reviewed. Of course certain things could not have been foreseen but others in terms of security and law enforcement could have been dealt with completely differently."
Mr Guardan's interview can be viewed in its entirety by clicking on the link at the end of the article.
Mr Sajjad Karim of the centre right EPP-ED group spoke of this being a time not for blame, but a time for future planning: "The international community must stand together, share intelligence and ensure we do all we can to foil their future plans."
Mr Karim was in the Taj Mahal hotel lobby when the gunmen entered. Fearing for his life Mr Karim ran into the kitchen as people were being shot dead all around him.
Fellow delegation member Ms Erika Mann of the socialist PES group believed that new measures need to be implemented in combating this ever-evolving form of global terrorism: "The attack we experienced in Mumbai involved a wide range of people, from young people influenced by fundamentalism to business people. This cannot be left as a problem for India alone. Ordinary people are as fed up as anyone else," she said.
Managing to escape the Taj Mahal hotel through an underground passage accompanied by military and hotel staff, Ms Mann recalls terrorists shooting all around them. "It was the worst situation of my life," she said. However "the Indian people were wonderful in their support."
Ms Mann added that efforts to conclude the new trade deal between EU and India would continue and be strengthened.
20081201STO43284
EN
1
PHOTO
20081124PHT42912.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
