Too many violations of fundamental rights in the EU, says the Civil Liberties Committee
Fundamental rights
2008-12-02 - 19:40
MEPs in the Civil Liberties Committee expressed their concern on Tuesday over the "high number of fundamental rights violations in the EU" , pointing to instances of serious discrimination against minorities and threats to privacy. They also urged EU Institutions and Member States to cooperate in the field of immigration and asylum.
In a report drafted by Giusto Catania (GUE/NGL, IT), the committee adopted its overview of the situation of fundamental rights in the EU. A previous report on this issue was rejected by the plenary session in 2004 and the committee has aimed for a broad compromise, with the final text being adopted by 29 votes in favour, 7 against and 7 abstentions. The report will now go to the 15-18 December plenary session for a debate and vote.
MEPs address fundamental rights in its various aspects, voicing recommendations on a broad range of issues like discrimination, immigration, social rights or gender equality.
Excesses in the fight against terrorism
MEPs point out that over these last few years, the fight against terrorism has often served to diminish the level of protection of human rights and fundamental freedoms, notably the right to privacy, data protection and freedom from discrimination. They call on the EU and Member States to ensure full compliance with international standards in this matter.
CIA activities in Europe : Member States deaf to EPs recommendations
Concerning Parliament's report on CIA activities in the EU adopted in February 2007, MEPs stress that their recommendations have not been followed so far by Member States and EU institutions. However, they welcome the statement by US President-elect Barack Obama that he intends to close the Guantanamo Bay detention facility, and call on Member States to "find solutions" for the inmates who cannot be put on trial.
Discrimination against Roma people : members oppose fingerprinting
MEPs point to the "segregation" faced by Roma people in Member States and the "widespread anti-Roma sentiments" leading to "frequent denial of their rights by public authorities and their political under-representation". Moreover, they suffer "discrimination by the police, in particular deliberate shootings, arson, assault or other violent acts (...) inter alia by taking fingerprints or other forms of data collection", MEPs in the committee say. They call on the Member States to "take measures to put an end to the practice of unofficial marriage of minors, often at a very young age, existing in some Roma communities".
Same-sex couples: partnerships should be recognised
The committee calls on Member States to take legislative action to overcome discrimination experienced by same-sex couples by recognising such relationships. Member States with legislation on same-sex partnerships are invited to recognise provisions with similar effects adopted by others.
Immigration and integration: the need to avoid exclusion
"Rather than focusing all their efforts on preventing illegal immigration", which led to "deploying a growing range of frontier checks" MEPs say, EU Institutions and Member States should introduce "effective, long term and legal migration policies" and "more flexible and coordinated rules" for asylum seekers. The committee also condemns "the lack of effective integration policies", causing "the exclusion of hundreds of thousands of non-nationals", putting them "in a vulnerable position, opening the way to radicalisation, trafficking and other forms of exploitation".
Regional languages
The Civil Liberties Committee wants to promote regional or minority languages, as "the right to speak and to be educated in one's mother tongue is one of the most basic fundamental rights", MEPs say.
Procedure: Own-initiative report -- Plenary vote: December II, Strasbourg 2008-12-02 Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs In the chair Gérard DEPREZ ADLE BE
20081201IPR43354 Civil Liberties Committee website
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=LIBE
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
