Highlights of Brussels plenary session 3-4 December
Institutions
2008-12-03 - 03:12
Among the highlights of the December Brussels plenary session are: Dalai Lama to address MEPs 11.30am on Thursday, a debate on the preparations for the European Council, debate on the Climate Change package ahead of the Strasbourg vote later this month, a debate and vote on €1 billion for agriculture in developing countries, and a debate on vote on herring stocks off the West coast of Scotland.
Preparations for the European Council - 11-12 December 2008 - Brussels
Parliament will debate the forthcoming European Council of 11-12 December to be held in Brussels at which EP President Hans Gert Pöttering will address the Heads of State and government. The agenda will focus on the Lisbon Treaty, the EU's response to the financial / economic crisis, climate change and energy package, Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) and external relations and security. Following the conclusions of the last European Council meeting (15-16 October 2008), the Lisbon Treaty is on the 11-12 December European Council agenda for discussion with a view to defining the elements of a solution and a common path to be followed. President Pöttering welcomed the November 2008 Irish Parliament report on Ireland's future in the European Union which has addressed a clear set of issues which need to be addressed. Mr Pöttering said he was certain that solutions can be found to respond to these concerns.
Dalai Lama addresses the European Parliament on Thursday
The Dalai Lama, widely regarded as the spiritual leader of the Tibetan people, will address a formal sitting of the European Parliament on Thursday 4 December as part of European Year of Intercultural Dialogue. Tenzin Gyatso, the 14th Dalai Lama, was born on 6 July 1935. In 1959, with the suppression of the Tibetan national uprising in Lhasa by Chinese troops, he fled into exile. Since then he has been living in Dharamsala, northern India and was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1989 for his consistent opposition to the use of violence in his quest for Tibetan self-rule.
Parliament to debate energy and climate change package
On Thursday from 8.30am, MEPs will debate the state of the ongoing negotiations between Parliament, Council and Commission on the climate change package. The package lays down the legislative measures needed to achieve the EU's climate targets agreed by the March 2007 European Council for the year 2020: to cut the EU's greenhouse gas emissions by 20%, to increase the share of renewable energies in the energy consumption to 20% and the share of biofuels to 10%.
Pre-registration of phase-in substances according to the REACH Regulation
The questions to the Commission concern the so called pre-registration phase at the European Chemicals Agency (ECHA), responsible for the registration and authorisation of chemicals under REACH. The pre-registration phase runs from 1 June to 1 December 2008. It only applies to certain substances (so called phase-in substances - certain chemical substances already on the EU market).
Financial crisis and EU economic recovery plan
Parliament will debate the future global architecture of financial markets and the EU economic recovery plan proposed by the Commission on 26 November with both the Commission and Council. The Council and Commission will be questioned on the future global architecture of financial markets.
Budget facility for rapid response to soaring food prices in developing countries
The nine-hour negotiation on 21 November between representatives of Parliament and the Council of Ministers delivered an overall deal on the 2009 budget and on the €1 billion agricultural aid for developing countries, the so called "food facility". The report by Gay MITCHELL (EPP-ED, IE) says that the Commission's proposal for a 1-billion-euro fund to address the food crisis is a major, and very timely, contribution to meeting this urgent challenge.
Herring stocks off the West of Scotland
Struan STEVENSON (EPP-ED, UK) for the Fisheries Committee will be proposing a report in a proposal to introduce a multi-annual management plan for West of Scotland herring. The rapporteur recommends that, rather than complete closure of the fishery, a stock recovery plan should be put in place where the biomass falls below 50,000 tonnes. The West of Scotland herring stock is fished mainly by vessels from the UK, Netherlands, Germany and France.
European Cormorant Management Plan
Heinz KINDERMANN (PES, DE) for the Fisheries Committee is urging the Commission and the Member States to create appropriate conditions for the drafting of a Europe-wide cormorant population management plan. With a daily consumption of 400-600g fish, cormorants take more than 300,000 tonnes of fish from European waters every year. In many Member States this is many times more than the volume of edible fish produced by professional inland fishermen and fish farmers. 300,000 tonnes is more, for example, than the combined fish production from aquaculture of France, Spain, Italy, Germany, Hungary and the Czech Republic.
Step towards improving the environments for SMEs in Europe - Small Business Act
Considering the importance of small and medium-sized enterprisess (SMEs) to Europe's economy and their contribution to the EU's competitiveness and employment, providing over 100 million jobs, contributing to economic growth, being a major source of innovation and promoting gender equality and regional development, Edit HERCZOG (PES, HU) and Nicole FONTAINE (EPP-ED, FR will be asking the Council what steps can be taken towards improving the environment for SMEs in Europe - Small Business Act. The House will also adopt a resolution on this topic.
EU strategy on Roma
MEPs will debate the EU strategy on Roma after hearing statements from the Council and Commission. Roma communities in Europe – including those describing themselves as Roma, Gypsies, Travellers and Sinti – have long faced discrimination and persecution. With the enlargement of the European Union in 2004 to include new members in central and eastern Europe, the Roma population living in the EU now numbers several million.
Arms exports Code of Conduct
The EU Code of Conduct on arms exports builds on the Common Criteria for arms exports adopted in 1991 and 1992 and also includes a denial notification and consultation mechanism, the first such mechanism ever applied to conventional arms exports. The adoption of the Code marked a qualitatively new stage in the EU's development of a common approach to arms exports as an important element of the Common Foreign and Security Policy. Following a Council statement, MEPs will debate arms exports and the EU Code of Contact. The House will also vote on a resolution.
Preventing VAT fraud: yes to better data collection and exchange
As part of a series of measures to help prevent VAT fraud, the Commission is proposing to accelerate the collection and exchange of data on intra-Community transactions, by having companies make monthly electronic statements of their data, as opposed to quarterly statements, often on paper, and imposing a one-month, rather than three month, deadline on Member States to share this information. José-Manuel Garcia Margallo (EPP-ED, ES) on behalf of the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee will be presenting two reports which, while supporting the changes, want to clarify some procedural aspects, and ensure Member States publicise and share best practice.
Tackling VAT fraud: Administrative cooperation
According to the European Court of Auditors, the UK is estimated to have lost €18.2 billion in VAT revenue for the tax year 2005-06. However, solid estimates of the actual volume of VAT fraud are still not available for all Member States. While the report, drafted by Bart STAES (Greens, BE), acknowledges that the actual volume of VAT evasion and fraud is difficult to fully assess, it welcomes the Commission's study on VAT and tax fraud, which is expected to be finalised in 2008 and "should provide reliable estimates". Overall, the Budgetary Committee supports the proposal, but is concerned that the factual basis for the discussion is still incomplete.
Gender inequality and human trafficking in the Balkans
The process of democratic stabilisation is on its way in the Balkans, but there is still a lot of work to be done, particularly with regard to women's rights, says the Committee on Women's Rights and Gender Equality. The report, drafted by Zita GURMAI (PES, HU), evaluates the current situation of women in the areas of employment, health and the democratisation process in the candidate countries Croatia and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and the potential candidate countries Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro, Serbia and Kosovo.
Cooperation agreement between EU and South Korea to stop anti-competitive behaviour
Noting that competition law between the European Community and South Korea is the most efficient way to tackle anti-competitive behaviour, the Committee on International Trade considers that the Korea-EC Agreement, concluded in early 2008, should be considered in the context of the overall framework of existing agreements between the European Community and the Republic of Korea and those currently under negotiation, in particular the negotiations concerning a potential free trade agreement.
Council regulation on maintenance claims will simplify the lives of EU citizens
Currently, the average maintenance claim in the EU is estimated to be around €4,000 a year. In the UK, 70% of child support maintenance is considered to be "probably uncollectable". The report drafted by Genowefa GRABOWSKA (PES, PL) says the regulation, which will enforce an operational system of cooperation between the central authorities of the Member States, will "result in simplifying the lives of citizens". A Council regulation, which aims to eliminate legal obstacles surrounding maintenance claims within the EU will make decisions on maintenance obligations made in one Member State being legally binding in another.
20081127IPR43134 Briefing - 3-4 December 2008 Final draft agenda - 3-4 December 2008 Live broadcasts from Brussels plenary
EN
2
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?reference=2008-12&language=EN
EN
3
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/faces/live/live-video.jsp?language=en
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081113BRI41902 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
