The Week Ahead 8-14 December 2008
2008-12-05 - 10:45
Committee meetings and political groups week
European Council. EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering will address EU leaders at the start of a summit focused on climate change, the economy and the Lisbon Treaty (Thursday, press conference at 1700, Justus Lipsius building).
President’s activities. President Pöttering will also have meetings with French President Nicolas Sarkozy (Paris, Tuesday) and Lithuanian Prime Minister Andrius Kubilius (Brussels, Thursday).
Jean-Claude Trichet. A few days after announcing a further cut in interest rates, the ECB President will take part in the last of this year’s quarterly monetary dialogue sessions with the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee (Monday).
French Presidency. A number of French ministers, including Europe Minister Jean-Pierre Jouyet, will be taking part in meetings of EP committees as the French Presidency of the Council draws to a close (Monday).
Climate change. A delegation of MEPs will be in Poznan for the UN climate change conference, as negotiations continue on the EU’s package of measures aimed at reducing CO2 emissions (Tuesday-Sunday).
Preparing for the plenary. Parliament’s political groups will devote most of the week to preparations for the 15-18 December plenary session in Strasbourg. The agenda includes a debate with French President Nicolas Sarkozy, votes on the climate change package, the working time directive, the 2009 EU Budget and measures to ensure those committing cross-border driving offences do not escape fines. A ceremony will mark the awarding of the 20th anniversary Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought to imprisoned Chinese dissident Hu Jia.
2008-12-08 The President's diary
17.00 - Meeting with Bronisław Komorowski, Speaker of the Polish Sejm 17:00 17:30 Brussels Parliamentary committees DEVE Committee on Development
Discussion with Alain JOYANDET, Minister of State responsible for Cooperation and Francophony, on the achievements of the French Presidency in the field of Development Cooperation
Financing of actions other than Official Development Assistance in countries falling under Regulation (EC) 1905/2006 - vote on report by Thijs BERMAN (PES, NL)
Development impact of Economic Partnership Agreements (EPAs) - vote on report by Jürgen SCHRÖDER (EPP-ED, DE)
Discussion with Louis MICHEL, Commissioner for Development Cooperation and Humanitarian Aid 15:00 18:30 Brussels, ASP 3G2 ECON Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs
Monetary dialogue with Jean-Claude TRICHET, President of the European Central Bank (15.00 - 16.00 in public, 16.00 - 17.00 in camera ) 15:00 17:00 Brussels, PHS 3C50
Deposit guarantee schemes - vote on report by Christian EHLER (EPP-ED, DE)
Discussion with Joaquín ALMUNIA, Commissioner for Economic and Monetary Affairs 17:00 18:30 Brussels, PHS 3C50 ENVI Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety
Classification, labelling and packaging of substances and mixtures - vote on corrigendum 15:00 18:30 Brussels, PHS 1A02 TRAN Committee on Transport and Tourism
The performance and sustainability of the European aviation system - vote on report by Marian-Jean MARINESCU (EPP-ED, RO)
Aerodromes, air traffic management and air navigation services - vote on report by Marian-Jean MARINESCU (EPP-ED, RO) 16:00 18:30 Brussels, ASP 3G3 AGRI Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development
The Common Agricultural Policy and Global Food Security - vote on report by Mairead MCGUINNESS (EPP-ED, IE)
Workshop on " Strict cut-off criteria for plant protection products: what consequences for agricultural production?" - see "Other Events" 15:00 18:30 Brussels, ASP 3E2 CULT Committee on Culture and Education 15:00 18:30 Brussels, ASP 5G3 LIBE Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs
Combating discrimination beyond the field of employment: the new Article 13 EC Directive - see "Public Hearings"
Security features and biometrics in passports and travel documents - vote on report by Carlos COELHO (EPP-ED, PT) 15:00 18:30 Brussels, PHS 4B001 AFCO Committee on Constitutional Affairs
Challenge of Democracy: empowering the EU citizen - see "Other Events" 15:00 18:30 Brussels, ASP 5G2 DROI Subcommittee on Human Rights
Discussion with the French Presidency on the results of their presidency programme in Human Rights
Outcome of EU-China Human Rights dialogue (28 November in Beijing)
Discussion on the Human Rights situation in the Western Balkans (Following publication by the Commission of progress reports on FYROM, Croatia and Serbia and upcoming AFET reports) 15:00 18:30 Brussels, PHS 5B001 SEDE Subcommittee on Security and Defence
Latest developments in ESDP - Discussion with Christine ROGER, French Ambassador, Chair of the PSC 15:00 18:30 Brussels, ASP 1E2 Public hearings Combating discrimination beyond employment
Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs
Civil Liberties Committee MEPs will hold a public hearing on "Combating discrimination beyond the field of employment: article 13 Directive", dedicated to a recent proposal by the European commission on implementing the principle of equal treatment between persons irrespective of religion or belief, disability, age or sexual orientation. The debate will take place in view of drafting a report by Kathalijne Maria BUITENWEG (Greens/EFA, NL) and Elizabeth LYNNE (ALDE, UK). 15:00 18:00 Brussels, PHS 4B1 Other events Workshop "Empowering EU citizens: challenge for European democracy"
Committee on Constitutional Affairs
The Constitutional Affairs Committee is organising a workshop "Empowering EU citizens: challenge for European democracy" on the 8 December at 15.00. The workshop is part of the preparations for a report by Andrzej Wielowieyski. The programme consists of two panel discussions on questions on why and how the citizens should be consulted and involved in the EU decision making. 15:00 18:30 Brussels, ASP 5G2 Programme Workshop - Strict criteria for pesticides: what consequences for agriculture?
Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development will hold a workshop with two experts on the proposed criteria for banning plant protection products. Focussing on the available impact assessments regarding the health criteria proposed by the Commission on one hand and the EP's first reading on the other, MEPs expect to get more detailed information about the consequences of the different policy options for farming and food production in Europe.
Main invited experts:
- Dave Chandler, University of Warwick (UK),
- Panagiotis Theodoris, Representative of Greece to the "pesticides" group of the EU's Standing Committee on the Food Chain and Animal Health, Member of the Executive Committee of the European and Mediterranean Plant Protection Organisation (EPPO). 16:30 18:30 Brussels, ASP 3E2 2008-12-09 The President's diary
09.00 - Speech at campaign "Diversity as a Chance" 09:00 09:30 Frankfurt, Germany
13.00 - Meeting with French President Nicolas Sarkozy 13:00 13:30 Paris, France Press conferences Today's press conferences
10.30 - Investigations Paul van Buitenen EU Antifraud Office - state of play - Paul VAN BUITENEN (Greens/EFA, NL)
11.00 - EPP-ED key policies for the future - Jaime MAYOR OREJA (EPP-ED, ES)
15.00 - SITIP project: the Italian "best practice" from Puglia region on the good circulation in the ports - Vincenzo AITA (GUE/NGL, IT), Vincenzo LAVARRA (PES, IT) 10:30 15:30 Brussels, PHS 0A50, Anna Politkovskaya Parliamentary committees AFET Committee on Foreign Affairs
Discussion with Jean-Pierre JOUYET, Minister of State to the Minister of Foreign and European Affairs of the French Republic and acting President-in-Office of Council, on the results of the General Affairs and External Relations Council (GAERC) meeting of 8 and 9 December 2008 18:00 19:00 Brussels, ASP5G2 Delegations UN Climate Change Conference in Poznan
A delegation of 33 MEPs led by Guido SACCONI (PES, IT), Chairman of the Temporary Committee on Climate Change, will be in Poznan for the the UN Climate Change Conference in Poznan between the 9th and 13th of December.
The EP delegation, which will consist of members from the three committees most involved with parliamentary work on climate change -- the Environment, Industry and Climate Change Committees -- will organise two side events: one jointly organised with Council and Commission on the "Climate and Energy package" to explain the main political lines and the state of play and another event to present the political outline of the recommendations "2050: the future begins today" adopted recently by the Climate Change Committee. MEPs will also hold numerous high-level meetings with other delegations and civil society organisations, and liaise daily with the European Commission and Council.
Parliament’s role in tackling climate change
The European Parliament is co-legislator (with the Council) on issues such as the EU Emissions Trading Scheme, the proposal on renewable energies, the law on curbing car emissions, as well as projects on Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS). Negotiations on several legislative proposals are ongoing at the moment in the view to find a first reading agreement within this year.
The EP delegation will also hold four press conferences -- three, jointly with the European Commission and the French Presidency, on Wednesday 10 December, Friday 12 December and on Saturday 13 December; the other on Friday 12 December.
Commitments made under the Kyoto Protocol for reductions in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions run to 2012. It is the EU's aim to ensure that the Poznan Conference will mark an important step in building a post-2012 framework on climate protection. The Conference, hosted by the Government of Poland, will bring together representatives of over 190 countries, along with observers from intergovernmental and nongovernmental organisations. 09:00 19:00 Poznan, Poland 2008-12-10 The President's diary
15.00 - Meeting with Rajan Zed, Hindu Leader
15.30 - Handing over of declaration European Academy of Sciences and Art
18.00 - Opening of exhibition "Athenian Democracy"
19.00 - Speech at European Book Prize 15:00 19:30 Brussels Press conferences Today's press conferences
10.00 - Rights of the Basque people in France - visit of a delegation from the French Basque Country - Mikel IRUJO AMEZAGA (Greens/EFA, ES)
11.00 - Rare tumours in Europe - challenges and solutions - Irena BELOHORSKÁ (NI, SK)
11.30 - European Petition for life - Carlo CASINI (EPP-ED, IT), Anna ZÁBORSKÁ (EPP-ED, SK) 10:00 12:00 Brussels, PHS 0A50, Anna Politkovskaya Delegations UN Climate Change Conference in Poznan
A delegation of 33 MEPs led by Guido SACCONI (PES, IT), Chairman of the Temporary Committee on Climate Change, will be in Poznan for the the UN Climate Change Conference in Poznan between the 9th and 13th of December.
The EP delegation, which will consist of members from the three committees most involved with parliamentary work on climate change -- the Environment, Industry and Climate Change Committees -- will organise two side events: one jointly organised with Council and Commission on the "Climate and Energy package" to explain the main political lines and the state of play and another event to present the political outline of the recommendations "2050: the future begins today" adopted recently by the Climate Change Committee. MEPs will also hold numerous high-level meetings with other delegations and civil society organisations, and liaise daily with the European Commission and Council.
Parliament’s role in tackling climate change
The European Parliament is co-legislator (with the Council) on issues such as the EU Emissions Trading Scheme, the proposal on renewable energies, the law on curbing car emissions, as well as projects on Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS). Negotiations on several legislative proposals are ongoing at the moment in the view to find a first reading agreement within this year.
The EP delegation will also hold four press conferences -- three, jointly with the European Commission and the French Presidency, on Wednesday 10 December, Friday 12 December and on Saturday 13 December; the other on Friday 12 December.
Commitments made under the Kyoto Protocol for reductions in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions run to 2012. It is the EU's aim to ensure that the Poznan Conference will mark an important step in building a post-2012 framework on climate protection. The Conference, hosted by the Government of Poland, will bring together representatives of over 190 countries, along with observers from intergovernmental and nongovernmental organisations. 09:00 19:00 Poznan, Poland Other events Seminar for journalists on the Working Time Directive
The proposed revision of existing legislation on working time takes into account recent case law from the European Court of Justice regarding on-call time. It mainly concerns derogations to the applications of the maximum weekly working time and the possibility not to apply these limits if the worker agrees to opt-out (a clause used mainly in the UK).
The seminar, organised by the European Parliament's press service, takes place a few days before the debate in plenary and in the middle of negotiations with Council aiming for a compromise. After the vote in plenary, if no agreement is reached, a third phase of this co-decision procedure is launched: - conciliation, which implies further negotiations over a few weeks and is the last chance to reach agreement.
The aim of this seminar is to exchange views between Members of Parliament and journalists on the revision of the working time directive, so participants can explore the political views on this issue and better understand how decisions are taken in the European Union.
Wednesday morning - Room PHS 7C 50 Presentations from the EP Press Service
10:30 - 11:00 Introduction
11:00 - 11:30 Working time legislation History of procedure and vote in the Employment Committee
11:30- 12:00 An introduction to the European Parliament A presentation in view of the forthcoming European elections
12:15 - 13:00 The co-decision procedure How decisions are taken in the European Union Steps ahead in the adoption of the Working Time Directive
Wednesday afternoon Room ASP A5 G3 (interpretation EN, FR, ES, DE, PT, EL) Technical briefing on the directive and political debate
14:30 - 15:30 An introduction to the Working Time Directive proposal The proposal of the European Commission and position of the parliamentary committee - background and steps taken (with officials from the Commission and Parliament's Employment Committee)
15:30 - 17:30 Panel with MEPs: Alejandro CERCAS (PES, ES) - Rapporteur José Albino SILVA PENEDA (EPP-ED, PT) - Shadow rapporteur Elisabeth SCHROEDTER (Greens/EFA, DE) - Shadow rapporteur Elizabeth LYNNE (ALDE, UK) - Shadow rapporteur Dimitrios PAPADIMOULIS (GUE/NGL, EL) - Shadow rapporteur 10:30 13:00 Brussels, PHS 7C50 14:30 17:30 Brussels, ASP 5G3 2008-12-11 The President's diary
09.00 - Meeting with Andrius Kubilius, Prime Minister of Lithuania
13.00 - EPP Summit
15.00 - Speech at European Council meeting 09:00 15:30 Brussels Press conferences Today's press conferences
11.30 - A promise to keep: time to end the international isolation of the Turkish Cypriots - Marco CAPPATO (ALDE, IT), 2008 Human rights rapporteur for the EP, Mensur AKGUN, Program Director of TESEV, Marco PERDUCA and Maurizio TURCO, Italian MPs, and Theo van den HOOGEN, Professor of International and European Law at Groningen University 11:30 12:00 Brussels, PHS 0A50, Anna Politkovskaya Parliamentary committees BUDG Committee on Budgets 09:00 12:30 Brussels, ASP 5G2 ITRE Committee on Industry, Research and Energy
Mini-Hearing on the 2nd Strategic Energy Review - see Public Hearings (09.00 - 11.00)
Discussion with Valérie PECRESSE, French Minister for Higher Education and Research, Presidency-in-Office of the Council of the European Union, on the progress made in the field of research 09:00 12:30 Brussels, JAN 4Q2 15:00 18:30 Brussels, JAN 4Q2 Delegations UN Climate Change Conference in Poznan
A delegation of 33 MEPs led by Guido SACCONI (PES, IT), Chairman of the Temporary Committee on Climate Change, will be in Poznan for the the UN Climate Change Conference in Poznan between the 9th and 13th of December.
The EP delegation, which will consist of members from the three committees most involved with parliamentary work on climate change -- the Environment, Industry and Climate Change Committees -- will organise two side events: one jointly organised with Council and Commission on the "Climate and Energy package" to explain the main political lines and the state of play and another event to present the political outline of the recommendations "2050: the future begins today" adopted recently by the Climate Change Committee. MEPs will also hold numerous high-level meetings with other delegations and civil society organisations, and liaise daily with the European Commission and Council.
Parliament’s role in tackling climate change
The European Parliament is co-legislator (with the Council) on issues such as the EU Emissions Trading Scheme, the proposal on renewable energies, the law on curbing car emissions, as well as projects on Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS). Negotiations on several legislative proposals are ongoing at the moment in the view to find a first reading agreement within this year.
The EP delegation will also hold four press conferences -- three, jointly with the European Commission and the French Presidency, on Wednesday 10 December, Friday 12 December and on Saturday 13 December; the other on Friday 12 December.
Commitments made under the Kyoto Protocol for reductions in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions run to 2012. It is the EU's aim to ensure that the Poznan Conference will mark an important step in building a post-2012 framework on climate protection. The Conference, hosted by the Government of Poland, will bring together representatives of over 190 countries, along with observers from intergovernmental and nongovernmental organisations. 09:00 19:00 Poznan, Poland Public hearings Mini-hearing on the Second Strategic Energy Review
Committee on Industry, Research and Energy
The Industry Committee will hold a public hearing on the Second Strategic Energy Review. MEPs will debate with experts how to develop a short-term strategy for improving energy efficiency. The hearing will also focus on the EU's future energy mix and structural changes necessary in the long term. The committee is currently working on the legislative proposals of the energy efficiency package, which were put forward by the Commission on 13 November, as well as on an own-initiative report on the Second Strategic Energy Review. 09:00 11:00 Brussels, JAN 4Q2 Programme 2008-12-12 Delegations UN Climate Change Conference in Poznan
A delegation of 33 MEPs led by Guido SACCONI (PES, IT), Chairman of the Temporary Committee on Climate Change, will be in Poznan for the the UN Climate Change Conference in Poznan between the 9th and 13th of December.
The EP delegation, which will consist of members from the three committees most involved with parliamentary work on climate change -- the Environment, Industry and Climate Change Committees -- will organise two side events: one jointly organised with Council and Commission on the "Climate and Energy package" to explain the main political lines and the state of play and another event to present the political outline of the recommendations "2050: the future begins today" adopted recently by the Climate Change Committee. MEPs will also hold numerous high-level meetings with other delegations and civil society organisations, and liaise daily with the European Commission and Council.
Parliament’s role in tackling climate change
The European Parliament is co-legislator (with the Council) on issues such as the EU Emissions Trading Scheme, the proposal on renewable energies, the law on curbing car emissions, as well as projects on Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS). Negotiations on several legislative proposals are ongoing at the moment in the view to find a first reading agreement within this year.
The EP delegation will also hold four press conferences -- three, jointly with the European Commission and the French Presidency, on Wednesday 10 December, Friday 12 December and on Saturday 13 December; the other on Friday 12 December.
Commitments made under the Kyoto Protocol for reductions in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions run to 2012. It is the EU's aim to ensure that the Poznan Conference will mark an important step in building a post-2012 framework on climate protection. The Conference, hosted by the Government of Poland, will bring together representatives of over 190 countries, along with observers from intergovernmental and nongovernmental organisations. 09:00 19:00 Poznan, Poland 2008-12-13 Delegations UN Climate Change Conference in Poznan
A delegation of 33 MEPs led by Guido SACCONI (PES, IT), Chairman of the Temporary Committee on Climate Change, will be in Poznan for the the UN Climate Change Conference in Poznan between the 9th and 13th of December.
The EP delegation, which will consist of members from the three committees most involved with parliamentary work on climate change -- the Environment, Industry and Climate Change Committees -- will organise two side events: one jointly organised with Council and Commission on the "Climate and Energy package" to explain the main political lines and the state of play and another event to present the political outline of the recommendations "2050: the future begins today" adopted recently by the Climate Change Committee. MEPs will also hold numerous high-level meetings with other delegations and civil society organisations, and liaise daily with the European Commission and Council.
Parliament’s role in tackling climate change
The European Parliament is co-legislator (with the Council) on issues such as the EU Emissions Trading Scheme, the proposal on renewable energies, the law on curbing car emissions, as well as projects on Carbon Capture and Storage (CCS). Negotiations on several legislative proposals are ongoing at the moment in the view to find a first reading agreement within this year.
The EP delegation will also hold four press conferences -- three, jointly with the European Commission and the French Presidency, on Wednesday 10 December, Friday 12 December and on Saturday 13 December; the other on Friday 12 December.
Commitments made under the Kyoto Protocol for reductions in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions run to 2012. It is the EU's aim to ensure that the Poznan Conference will mark an important step in building a post-2012 framework on climate protection. The Conference, hosted by the Government of Poland, will bring together representatives of over 190 countries, along with observers from intergovernmental and nongovernmental organisations. 09:00 19:00 Poznan, Poland
EN
1
LINK
/meetdocs/2004_2009/documents/dv/754/754475/754475en.pdf
EN
2
LINK
/meetdocs/2004_2009/organes/itre/itre_meetinglist.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AGD DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AGD DOC XML V0//EN
