Parliament delegation welcomes conclusions of Poznań Climate change conference
Environment
2008-12-13 - 16:41
Members of the European Parliament's delegation to the UN Climate Change Conference in Poznań welcomed the conclusions of the meeting as an important half-way mark to the 2009 Copenhagen conference. The decision to give the chair of the ad-hoc working group a mandate to prepare a negotiating text and the setting of a clear roadmap to the Copenhagen Conference are the main achievements of this week's talks, according to MEPs.
The parties of the conference decided to shift from discussion into 'full negotiating mode' and agreed that the first draft of the text of the future climate change agreement would be available at the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) gathering in Bonn in June 2009. The future climate change agreement is to replace the Kyoto protocol for reductions in greenhouse gas emissions, which runs until 2012.
Financing of adaptation in developing countries
"One of the most important issues discussed in these negotiations was the financing of climate change measures, and in particular of adaptation, in developing countries. We are, therefore, happy that an important step to address the concerns of developing countries was made here in Poznań by agreeing on the modalities by which the Adaptation Fund should function, thereby making it operational in the coming months" said Romana Jordan Cizelj (EPP-ED, SI), Co-Chair of the EP delegation. According to the UNFCCC Executive Secretary Yvo de Boer the adaptation fund will be able to receive first projects in the course of 2009.
Commitment from the incoming US administration
"A positive message that we will bring back from Poznan is also the confirmation of the clear commitment by the incoming US administration actively to contribute to the fight against climate change, both through domestic measures and at the international level," said Guido Sacconi (PES, IT), Chair of the Temporary Committee on Climate Change and Co-Chair of the EP delegation. "The words of optimism we heard from both Senator John Kerry and [former Vice-President] Al Gore do give us great hope that next year in Copenhagen the EU will not be alone in leading towards an ambitious international agreement," he added.
The 33-member EP delegation consisted of members from the three committees most involved with parliamentary work on climate change - the Environment, Industry and Climate Change Committees. In the course of the visit it met Senator John Kerry, Festus Mogae, former president of Botswana and UN Special Envoy for Climate Change in Africa, representatives of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, UN Environment Programme, US Congress, governments of Australia and Norway, authorities of the state of California, business representatives and NGO activists.
20081208IPR44000 Website of the Temporary Climate Change Committee Website of the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety Committee Website of the Industry, Research and Energy Committee
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=CLIM
EN
2
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=ENVI
EN
3
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=ITRE
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
