Cleaning up heavy vehicle exhaust emissions: MEPs agree new Euro VI standards
Transport
2008-12-16 - 11:04
Proposed tougher limits on harmful exhaust emissions from trucks, lorries and buses, including ozone precursors such as nitrogen oxides and hydrocarbons as well as particles were backed in a compromise adopted between Parliament and Council representatives. The European Parliament adopted the compromise in Strasbourg, the new "Euro VI" regulation emission limits will apply de facto from 31.12.2013 for new vehicles, nine months earlier than the Commission proposed.
The proposal concerns the so-called Euro VI regulation, laying down harmonized technical rules for trucks, lorries and buses (heavy vehicles over 2,610 kg), which all new vehicles will have to comply with in order to get the necessary type approval.
Rapporteur Matthias Groote (PES, DE) said "Euro VI is an important instrument to achieve a better air quality; it reduces particles and Oxides of Nitrogen. Since particles are responsible for more than 348 000 early deaths, I would have wished for more ambitious limit, but the packet achieved is a good compromise. We'll achieve a reduction of particules of 66 % compared to the existing limits and a reduction of Oxides of Nitrogen of80 %. Oxides of Nitrogen are dangerous for babies, children and elder people, since they lead to more ozone next to the ground". He welcomed that "the new limits will be introduced at an earlier stage which will lead to a better air quality" and added: "Air quality and quality of live will be improved through the instrument."
The new tougher emission limits (on harmful exhaust emissions, including ozone precursors such as nitrogen oxides and hydrocarbons as well as particles) are to replace both the "Euro IV" limits (which have applied since November 2006), and the "Euro V" emission limits, which will apply from October 2008.
The proposed Euro VI regulation, lays down harmonized technical rules for heavy vehicles over 2,610 kg, which all new vehicles will have to comply with in order to get the necessary type approval. The new emission limits are eventually to replace both the "Euro IV" limits (which have applied since November 2006), and the Euro V emission limits, which will apply from October 2008. The compromise broadens the scope of the regulation for certain cases if the manufacturer requests so.
Stricter limits of pollutants, no changes of Commission Proposal
The compromise backs the Commission's proposed lower limit values for damaging emissions of several pollutants (CO, THC, NMHC, CH4, NOx, NH3). For example the limit value for total Oxides of Nitrogen (NOx), will be 400 mg/kWh (80 % less compared with EURO V), and the agreed particle mass limit will be 10 mg/kWh - a 66% reduction compared with the Euro V stage limits.
According to Commissions information the new limits will also be a step forward towards global harmonisation since the limit values are similar to those of the USA.
The Commission is asked to specify - if appropriate - in addition to the limit value for total Oxides of Nitrogen (NOx) a specific limit value for Nitrogen Dioxide (NO2) . If the Commission concludes that it is appropriate to regulate the emissions of additional pollutants it shall submit a proposal to the EP and Council.
All new vehicles to comply with Euro VI standards from 31.12.2013 at the latest
The compromise will in practice require all new heavy goods vehicles to comply with the standards from 31.12.2013, nine months earlier than the Commission's proposal. Thereafter, the registration, sale and putting into service of vehicles that do not comply with the standards will be prohibited. New types of vehicles must meet the standards one year earlier. The Commission is asked to adopt the associated technical regulation by the 1 April 2010, after which manufacturers will have time to make the necessary technical changes to the vehicles.
Access to vehicle repair information and financial incentives
The compromise backs the Commission's proposal to include measures relating to access to repair information in the regulation, so as to ensure effective competition on the market in repair and maintenance services. Similar measures already exist for the relevant legislation on passenger cars (Euro 5). The compromise foresees an adaptation of those provisions to the particularities of heavy goods vehicles.
Finally, the compromise also follows the Commission's proposal to enable Member States to provide for financial incentives to accelerate the placing on the market of vehicles meeting the new requirements.
The report was adopted with 610 votes in favour, 11 against and 22 abstentions.
20081216IPR44606 Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 16 December)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
