Christa Prets on media literacy in a digital world
Education
2008-12-17 - 18:04
Schools can play a key role says report We all need to better understand the media we are touched by daily, especially the young, says Austrian Socialist Christa Prets. MEPs backed her report on "media literacy in a digital world" on Tuesday. In an exclusive interview Ms Prets explained to us what media literacy actually is, how we can improve it and how it can be used to teach the young.
What is "media literacy" and why does it matter?
Media literacy is the ability to use the media, to understand and bring critical assessment to bear on it. The media offers opportunities to engage in worldwide communication, impart knowledge and advance the development of democracy.
However, there is also danger of manipulation. Society has to keep pace with rapid technological change and learn to cope with a flood of information.
Why should funding be available to help young people use the internet better?
Especially for young media users, the internet is the first and principal source of information. Most users realise that information obtained from the Internet should, for safety's sake, be checked against information from other sources.
The knowledge needed to use the internet is passed on chiefly within circles of friends and to a lesser extent by parents, but rarely by schools. But schools have an essential role to play to moulding people capable of communicating and of exercising judgement.
Media education is a precondition to achieve a high level of media literacy. Also important is personal data on the internet. All media users must bear in mind that all the information they provide on social networking websites is public and can be widely accessed. Private data soon becomes public. Media education should help to sensitise media users to this fact and protect them.
How can we improve media literacy in the EU?
Media education should be an element of formal education and must extend to lifelong learning and this must also involve older people.
That's why the European Parliament also recommended that compulsory media education modules be incorporated into teacher training for all school levels. At national level, small local entities such as libraries, adult education centres, citizens' cultural and media centres, further education and training establishments and citizens' media can make an active contribution to promoting media literacy in addition to policy-makers, journalists, newspapers, radio and television-broadcasters.
The recognition of the importance of media education and media literacy has to be strengthened and all stakeholders involved in promoting it.
20081211STO44311
EN
1
PHOTO
20081217PHT45105.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
