Post-Briefing - 15-18 December 2008 - Strasbourg plenary session
2008-12-18 - 15:38
MEPs debate the French Presidency with President Sarkozy
MEPs in Strasbourg debated the six-month French Presidency of the EU which comes to an end on 31 December. Many group leaders welcomed President Sarkozy's and the French government's swift and successful reaction to events in Georgia, and the rapid reaction to the economic and financial crises. Other political group leaders criticised the French Presidency for backing down on the climate change package and for pushing forward with the Lisbon ratification despite the initial No in Ireland. Introducing President Sarkozy , EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering said: "You took over the EU Presidency at a time that needed action and negotiations, and you took on the challenges of Georgia, the financial crisis, the European economy and other problems."
Working Time Directive: No exceptions to the 48-hours maximum working week and opt-out scrapped after three years say MEPs
MEPs say that there must be no exceptions to the 48 hours-maximum working time calculated over a reference period of 12 months and say the opt-out must end three years after adoption of the directive. It also says that any period of on-call time should count as working time. A conciliation committee with the Council is now likely. MEPs adopted the amendment on the abolition of the opt-out 36 months after the entry into force of the directive with 421 votes in favour to 273 against and 11 abstentions. By adopting amendments from Alejandro Cercas (PES, ES), the Parliament expressed its disagreement with the Council (where a common position was adopted on 9 June 2008) notably regarding the “opt-out” and on on-call time, an issue of particular importance for the health sector.
The European Parliament sets out new rules on European Works Councils
MEPs adopted an agreement at first-reading on the recast directive on European Works Council following a vote of the Employment Committee on the 17 November. The recast of the directive, proposed by the Commission in July as part of a new social agenda, is aimed at tightening up the definitions of information and consultation of workers. MEPs abolished the threshold of 50 employees for setting up special negotiating bodies (as a first step to constituting European works councils)
Establishing common points of reference for vocational education and training
MEPs adopted an agreement at first reading, on two reports related to Vocational Education and Training. They aim at establishing common points of references to ensure quality in the education systems, create transparency for professional qualifications gained abroad, and help ease cross-border mobility of workers. However, participating in the initiatives should be voluntary and diversity between national systems should be respected.
European Parliament seals climate change package
After eleven months of legislative work, the European Parliament gave its backing to the EU's climate change package which aims to ensure that the EU will achieve its climate targets by 2020: a 20% reduction in greenhouse gas emissions, a 20% improvement in energy efficiency, and a 20% share for renewables in the EU energy mix. Ahead of Parliament's first-reading vote, MEPs had reached informal agreements with the French Presidency on the six proposals which all fall under the co-decision procedure, placing the European Parliament and Council on an equal footing as co-legislators. Full details on the six pieces of legislation can be found in the background note on our website in this publication.
Sakharov human rights prize awarded to China's Hu Jia
The award of the 2008 Sakharov prize for human rights to jailed Chinese dissident Hu Jia took place at midday Wednesday. In his absence his wife gave an emotional and moving video message from under house arrest in Beijing to MEPs.. Zeng Jinyan spoke about her husband's poor health and his continued fight for human rights. A symbolic empty chair was in the middle of the Chamber for Hu Jia.Zeng Jinyan said she had been forbidden by prison guards to discuss the prize when she last visited her husband on 21 November: "We were both warned...that we were forbidden to talk about the fact that he had been awarded the Sakharov Prize."
MEPs adopt toy safety directive ahead of festive season
MEPs adopted the toy safety proposal with 481 votes in favour, 73 against, 40 abstentions. The text aims at making toys safer and will beef up safety regulations, ban carcinogenic, mutagenic or toxic for reproductions substances and restrict the use of heavy metals and fragrances. The EP and the Council reached a first-reading agreement before the plenary vote so that "toys can be made safe as quickly as possible" according to the rapporteur, Marianne Thyssen (EPP-ED, BE).
Stop misleading advertising by business directory companies, say MEPs
MEPs call on Member States to act together to put an end to misleading advertising by business directory companies, further to 400 complaints from small firms across Europe that they had been misled into committing themselves to pay for adverts costing €1,000 per year. They also call upon the Commission to introduce a blacklist of such misleading practices, and upon victims to report business scams. The report was adopted with 632 votes in favour, 4 against and 12 abstentions.
European Parliament approves increase in bank deposit guarantee
MEPs adopted a report by Christian Ehler (EPP-ED, DE) with 556 votes in favour, 21 against and 3 abstentions, to amend existing legislation on deposit guarantee schemes and raise the guarantee level in the event of deposits being unavailable. The aim of this new legislation, which may be approved in only 9 weeks since the Commission put forward its proposal, is to "bring some calm in the financial market" as the rapporteur explained during a press conference in the EP.
Financial services rules: clearing and settlement and credit claims
MEPs have adopted updates to European law on two aspects of the “plumbing” of the financial system: the aim, on the one hand, is to reflect in law the increasingly interconnected operation of clearing and settlement systems, and, on the other hand, to create a level playing field for central banks in Europe regarding the rules on accepting credit claims (receivable assets resulting from bank loans) as collateral from commercial banks.
Parliament adopts the EU Budget 2009 - €134 billion or 1.03 percent of EU GNI
The European Parliament adopted the 2009 general EU budget at second-reading. The level of payments is set at €116.096 billion which amounts to 0.894 percent of the European Union's Gross National Income (GNI). The level of commitments has been set at €133.845 billion, which is 1.03 percent EU GNI. EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering signed off the official 2009 EU budget in Strasbourg.
Lifelong learning: making Europe the world's leader in education
MEPs call on the Commission to support knowledge, creativity and innovation in order to make Europe the world's leader in education and training systems in a report on lifelong learning adopted by the EP. The House approved a report by Ljudmila NOVAK (EPP-ED, SL) with 551 votes in favour, 31 against and 11 abstentions to support a better implementation of the 'Education & Training 2010 work programme', which seeks to make Europe the world's main actor in education and training systems by 2010.
New employment and payment system for MEPs' assistants
The European Parliament endorsed legislation to add-on contracts of Brussels-based MEPs' assistants to the statute for European civil servants. This new scheme, of which the outlines were set out by the European Parliament in July, is part of a larger package of measures taken by the Parliament to overhaul the entire system of employing and paying MEPs' assistants. The report adopted aims at ensuring transparency and non-discrimination through a set of common rules on the system for hiring MEPs' assistants. The new regulation, once approved by the Council, will replace 27 different national systems on contractual relationships, taxation and social security with a single scheme.
Building a genuine and transparent EU arms market
The European Union should create a genuine single market for defence equipment. This is the aim of a directive on the transfer of defence-related products. Parliament adopted a first-reading deal which strengthens provisions to guarantee the security of transfers, notably with respect to the final recipients of products or components, inter alia to ensure that arms and other defence-related products do not reach conflict zones.
Cleaning up heavy vehicle exhaust emissions: MEPs agree new Euro VI standards
Proposed tougher limits on harmful exhaust emissions from trucks, lorries and buses, including ozone precursors such as nitrogen oxides and hydrocarbons as well as particles were backed in a compromise adopted between Parliament and Council representatives. The compromise adopted by the European Parliament says that the new "Euro VI" regulation emission limits will apply de facto from 1.1.2014 for new vehicles, nine months earlier than the Commission proposed.
Traffic offences: MEPs for effective cross-border enforcement
At present, drivers committing an offence under the Highway Code in a Member State other than their own often avoid paying the penalty imposed on local drivers. The European Parliament approved legislation to ensure that drivers will be able to be identified and fined for offences they commit anywhere in the EU. Speeding, drink-driving, not wearing a seat belt and failing to stop at a red light should all be covered by the proposal.
Development as a cross-cutting issue in post-conflict situations
Immediate priorities in post-conflict situations are access to fresh water, food, sanitation, essential medicines and to incentivise local leaders into power-sharing, according to a report adopted today by the European Parliament. There are 42 ongoing civil conflicts around the world. Half of all countries that emerge from conflicts return to conflict within five years. The report drafted by Nirj DEVA (EPP-ED, UK) believes that in post-conflict situations there should be coordination among peace-building, humanitarian aid and development activities, in accordance with the "Linking Relief, Rehabilitation and Development” (LRRD) strategic framework. 20081216BRI44590 Texts adopted in December Strasbourg plenary Draft Agenda for 12-15 January 2009 Strasbourg plenary
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
2
LINK
/activities/plenary.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
European Council
MEPs debate the French Presidency with President Sarkozy
2008-12-18 - 15:38
MEPs in Strasbourg debated the six-month French Presidency of the EU which comes to an end on 31 December. Many group leaders welcomed President Sarkozy's and the French government's swift and successful reaction to events in Georgia, and the rapid reaction to the economic and financial crises. Other political group leaders criticised the French Presidency for backing down on the climate change package and for pushing forward with the Lisbon ratification despite the initial No in Ireland. Introducing President Sarkozy , EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering said: "You took over the EU Presidency at a time that needed action and negotiations, and you took on the challenges of Georgia, the financial crisis, the European economy and other problems."
Sarkozy: "Europe is not the enemy of nations and nations are not the enemy of Europe"
In a wide-ranging review of the work done under the French presidency of the EU over the last six months, President Nicolas Sarkozy told the House that France had sought to organise the work of its presidency on the basis of "two convictions: that the world needs a strong Europe and that Europe cannot be strong if it is not united". A strong Europe was one that "rejects consensus based on pushing problems to one side".
Georgia
Turning to the many challenges faced during his government's tenure of the EU presidency, Mr Sarkozy spoke first of the Georgian crisis, where his main aim had been "to stop the war and not fall into the same trap as in Bosnia", where the USA had taken the lead and Europe followed. It had been a "real obsession" of France's presidency that Europe should "take responsibility" over Georgia and fortunately Europe had remained united over the issue.
Financial crisis
In the global financial crisis, too, unity had been crucial and a European recovery plan had been agreed. If Europe's countries and institutions had not taken responsibility, this would have led to "the destruction of the European banking system". Arguing that "we in Europe want entrepreneurial capitalism not speculative capitalism" and that "we have said this with one voice", he added "our economies and our political cultures are not the same but we all agreed in the end".
Mediterranean Union
The Mediterranean Union was another project where compromise had proved crucial, and would provide a way to ensure that Europe plays a part in the Middle East. The EU, he believed, "must cease to be just a fund provider and must have a say in the peace process".
Climate change and energy
Mr Sarkozy told the House that "we had an enormous fight" about climate change and energy because "each Member State had reason for dissatisfaction". Here too, compromises had been accepted. Unanimity had been important to ensure that any deal would be implemented and he added that "the European Parliament's determination to get an agreement was a powerful factor in securing a deal" among the governments.
Immigration, defence
Negotiation and compromise over migration policy had been essential since most EU countries are in the Schengen area and Mr Sarkozy was glad that "now we have the foundations for a common immigration policy". Similarly, on defence, he said, referring to next year's NATO summit, "the 27 must understand that European security and defence policy is complementary to NATO".
Lastly, turning to the "constitutional question", he pointed out that the Czech constitutional court had just indicated that the Lisbon Treaty ratification process could go ahead. This left Ireland. He emphasised that as part of a compromise every country would have a Commissioner and Ireland would have guarantees for its neutrality, fiscal independence and family law. He hoped for a positive result from a fresh referendum by the end of 2009.
It's easier for Europe to have big ambitions than small ones
In conclusion, Mr Sarkozy said Europe required an understanding between different nations, though he stressed he was not an integrationist but he was determined to preserve the nation state. Nevertheless, "however European you are, Europe is not the enemy of the nations and the nations are not the enemy of Europe". Above all, he believed "it is easier for Europe to have big ambitions than small ones, because only big projects have the power to overcome national egos".
European Commission President
President of the European Commission José Manuel BARROSO said: "The balance sheet of the last EU summit will go down in history - rarely has Europe been able to express its satisfaction at so many positive results". And he welcomed the essential partnership between the Parliament, Council and Commission, which meant that we can now speak of a 'new era' in Europe. With tomorrow's vote on the climate change package, "the European Parliament holds the last key to the last door enabling a Europe of the 21st century to start working".
With the climate change initiatives, Europe will be the first to accept legally binding rules by 2020 and we will be strengthening these limits as agreement is reached globally. We can now turn to our friends in America and say to them: " Yes, you can!"
Mr Barroso also gave an insight into some of the measures that lie ahead . He spoke of advance payments being made available so that Member States would have early access to €1.9bn; h e spoke of €5bn for 2009-2010 to be re-allocated to Trans-European Energy networks, broadband infrastructure projects and energy efficiency ; and on state aid, while announcing an extension of exemptions on state aid rules, he insisted that this should not be used as a pretext for suspending competition rules and reiterated the need for keeping internal market rules if a European response to the crisis was to be maintained.
Political group speakers
For the EPP-ED group, Chairman Joseph Daul (FR) saluted the French Presidency's efforts, which he said, had helped to win worldwide respect for Europe's policies on climate change and immigration, and its co-ordinated response to the financial crisis.
The Presidency's sang-froid and pragmatism illustrate the centre-right philosophy that guided the joint responses of Council, Commission and Parliament to the financial crisis, brought about co-ordinated protection for savers' deposits and recapitalisation for banks, and thus prevented a chain reaction in which thousands of jobs could have been lost, he continued, stressing that it is the social market economy that guarantees balance between management and the workforce.
Mr Daul also paid tribute to the Presidency for the outcome of the climate change negotiations - this complex agreement among 27 Member States would protect both the environment and jobs he said, adding that the EU must now lead the worldwide fight against climate change, press the worst polluters to act, and seek tangible commitments from President Obama.
The Union needs more political stability and more effective decision-taking and the Lisbon Treaty offers "the tools to finish the job", he concluded.
"You changed Europe, but Europe has changed you, too" said PES Chairman Martin Schulz (DE) to Mr Sarkozy, whom, he added, had "come out of the closet, as a pro-European".
The Presidency had been "quite good" overall, said Mr Schulz, noting that the climate change package in particular had been a "huge success", on which Parliament's rapporteurs, with just 3-5 workers each (compared to the "Commission's 22,000", had done a "top notch" job. As social democrats, "we sought a balance between economic necessity and ecological obligation", he said.
The Presidency also "did well" on the financial crisis, he said, noting that Mr Sarkozy had reacted, albeit "somewhat late" to the time-bomb of social imbalances in Europe.
"We still don't have the Lisbon Treaty, and what you have decided will not help, unless an Irish leader points out to the people that the response to the financial crisis has been a European success", said Mr Schulz, thanking the French Presidency for helping Europe to "make progress".
The Presidency had some a "fairy tale" qualities, noted Graham Watson (ALDE, UK) for the Liberal Democrats, citing inter alia its riding to the rescue of "our lady of Georgia" and welcoming the "Cinderella of London" to the ball.
The Presidency had not chosen its challenges, but had tackled them with energy, enthusiasm and creativity, he said, praising its efforts to restore market confidence, and parry protectionism. The "concessions" agreed on state aid and public procurement are reasonable, if taken with the Presidency's commitment to accompany them with Lisbon Strategy structural reforms, he added.
Liberal Democrats urge the Council to cut VAT now on energy saving and renewable energy equipment, so as to help industry and the environment. They also welcome the renewed commitment to sustainable public finances and a rapid return to medium-term budgetary targets , he said, adding that " o ur response to the recession must be based on solidarity and sound economics".
The Presidency appears to have found a practical answer to Ireland’s worries about the new treaty - it may not be elegant, but it is worthy of Henry IV: "Si Paris valait une messe, Dublin vaut un commissaire", he said.
On climate change, "a blizzard of corporate concessions has been written into the Council conclusions", and "cap and trade emissions permits will be given away when they should have been auctioned". Derogations like these will "push down the cost of carbon, cut the cash raised and makes the emission targets harder to hit", said Mr Watson, who nonetheless welcomed the agreements on energy saving, earmarking half the revenues from emissions to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and on carbon capture and storage.
Daniel Cohn-Bendit for the Greens/EFA said: "Presidents - Yes we do acknowledge your desire to move forward. Yes, you want Europe to progress, Nicolas the first came in 2008 to the parliament; that unanimity kills democracy. We were astounded. You reduce the parliament to a kind of government Viagra. That is not our role. Nobody has said they want a Europe that is against the nations. We represent the peoples in this house and if you come to get the Lisbon Treaty ratified, then unanimity kills democracy. Mrs Merkel was here when she stood down and just heeded the German interests and not European. We won't accept any blackmail; yes I think the first reading is blackmail.
Mr Obama will say to you, no you cannot! The recovery plan is not sufficient, there is not enough money going with it. Our policy to China was that we shouldn't humiliate the Chinese, but I say that they walked all over you! I'm proud we haven't bowed under the Chinese for every day them trample human rights. We're saying no, it has to be spelt out No."
Cristiana Muscardini UEN said "We are the union for the Europe as nations- look at the ability to steer us through the economic crisis, look we have given support to a presidency which has repositioned Europe at the centre of the world debate. We must look at our institutions. Crises cannot be solved by the central banks. The climate package has been a major success; we must go down this road to peace and prosperity particular in the Mediterranean. We talk about equal treatment by means of the pension age; we need to look at wage equality before we go any further. You said this crisis is a systemic crisis, so we are with you to get reforms of the system. We must make sure that manufacturing is more important than plastic. "
Francis Wurtz GUE/NGL said "We will stand by this French presidency. We will remember it because of the seriousness of the events of this half year. Yet we see policies creeping in which we do not need. We need to underscore the importance for the EU that there is a compromise that has been reached between the 27. This is not a historic agreement. Does it risk in letting the big players off the hook for damage to the environment? Only a small share of Europe's emissions will be tackled outside of the Union. If this model becomes the general model then we will miss some of the clear objectives that the scientific and world community has set.
I think to mind this is counter productive where consumption is falling and jobs are being cut, where social worries are now rising to the surface, so it is recovery for who? One state increases purchasing power and the other does not. Why is there not systematic control so there is a fair management of resources so we can create useful jobs for society?
My group will not be congratulating the pressure used by the council on the Irish people. You cannot treat them this way. You have to listen to them and understand them. When things are on the table you have to deal with them."
For the IND/DEM group, Nigel Farage (UK) complimented the French presidency on its "energy and dynamism" but was unhappy that its goal was "more power for the Union". He then complained of what he described as "an appalling attack on President Klaus" by Green group leader Daniel Cohn-Bendit at the recent meeting in Prague of EP political group leaders with the president of the Czech Republic ahead of that country's assumption of the EU presidency in January. In particular he accused Mr Cohn-Bendit of behaving like "a thug and a bully" towards Mr Klaus and said "Danny the libertarian is now Danny the authoritarian".
Bruno Gollnisch (NA, FR ) for the non-aligned MEPs, believed the current financial crisis showed the Union is "not fit for purpose", since solutions would have been best found at national or at global level. The energy and climate change package had been "emasculated", and the EU immigration legislation had been undermined by Italy's action in granting a mass regularisation of immigrants "when the ink was barely dry". On Lisbon Treaty, Mr Gollnisch felt we were witnessing a form of "servitude" of the people, with the same question being put time and again until the right result was obtained.
British and Irish speakers
Timothy Kirkhope (PPE-DE, UK) acknowledged the role that President Sarkozy has played during his time as President of the Council. Mr Kirkhope believed that the EU should continue to take a lead in relation to climate matters. The British economy, he said, is heading for probably the longest and deepest recession of all the major EU economies, and the British Prime Minister has lost any claim to fiscal prudence and sound economic management.. Concluding, he congratulated President Sarkozy on his six months in office and he hoped that the next six months will be good for the people of Europe.
On the economy, Ian Hudghton (Greens/EFA, UK) noted that Mr Sarkozy acknowledged that Ireland was first to support its banks, and now the whole of the European Union is following – more accurate I think than Gordon Brown’s recent slip-of-the-tongue statement that he, in fact, had saved the world single-handedly.
Mr Hudghton thanked the Irish Government for once again demonstrating how influential small Member States can be in the European Union. He also thanked the Irish people too for ‘interrupting’, as President Sarkozy put it, the Lisbon ratification process. "The assurances given to Ireland will help my country, Scotland, too, by underlining that there is fiscal independence in Europe and that we could nominate a Commissioner as an independent Member State." Quoting Mr Sarkozy who said "we cannot have a strong Europe if Europe is not united" let us remember that unity in diversity is not just a slogan but something we must aspire too: we must not lose sight of that which makes us proud to be Scottish, Welsh, Irish, French, Czech, whatever, as well as citizens – not subjects – of the European Union.
Brian Crowley (UEN, IE) congratulated President Sarkozy on his efforts and not just with regard to Ireland. We, he said, greatly appreciate the compromise that has been reached to allow for a second decision from the Irish people with regard to the Lisbon Treaty.
In relation to what Mr Crowley was attributed to saying in Prague, "I never mentioned my father, according to the transcript that President Klaus released. Secondly, I never said that the Irish wished for Europe. I said that it is up to the Irish people to determine what will happen with the Lisbon Treaty. As move forward, in the light of our experience over the last six months in particular, I think that what is really needed is a Europe that cooperates, coordinates and works together to achieve common goals with a basis of understanding and tolerance for the differing opinions and the different economic cycles which take place within the European Parliament."
Stating that Ireland should be in the European Union, Bairbre De Brún (GUE/NGL, UK) said cooperation with our European colleagues is extremely valuable. But the manner in which the 'No' vote in Ireland was dealt with is not creating goodwill. It could even add to the stand against the EU, and not only in Ireland. The Council, she said, did not address the main concerns of the Irish people have in relation to the militarisation of the EU, the rights of works and public services. And the gap between the leaders of the Union and its citizens is becoming deeper as a result of the response to the 'No' vote in Ireland in other places. She warned that fear and false projections will have primary place in the re-run of the referendum. In relation to the Conclusions of the Council concerning the energy and climate change package, she said it is extremely important that legislation will exist with legally-binding objectives.
Kathy Sinnott (IND/DEM, IE) said a a poll two weeks ago showed that an overwhelming number of voters do not want a second referendum. They have made their decision and it makes no sense to them to continue the debate in the middle of a global economic meltdown. They are concerned with unemployment and with budget cuts that are affecting the most vulnerable. They feel alone in these problems, with their leaders chasing the Lisbon phantom. It is, she said, especially annoying because the issues that brought about the ‘no’ vote, starting with the lack of democracy in the Treaty itself, have not been addressed; rather we have been told that the Treaty will remain unchanged and that what is offered is cosmetic. We are an island nation, she said, yet our fish and fishing industry are vanishing. Pro-life people remain concerned about the destruction of embryos in research funded by the EU. In voting ‘no’ voters voted to protect their jobs, their farms, their families and their constitution. "You talk about uniting Europe, but I put to you that what should unite us is democracy and what divides us is Lisbon."
Andrew Duff (ALDE, UK) said that the package on the Treaty should be sufficient to persuade the Irish to change their minds. Mr Duff suspected that that Mr Sarkozy would describe himself, following this experience of the financial crisis, as a Keynesian. In the absence of a prudent stimulus to productive employment from Germany, he thought that there cannot be a sure recovery from the economic recession.
Marian Harkin (ALDE, IE) said that subject to satisfactory conclusions, the Irish Government will run a second referendum, and that is the essence of democracy: politicians working to produce a solution and then asking the people for their consent. However, she warned that we must not, again, underestimate the forces at play here. We must, she said, pay very careful attention to those who are trying to influence the outcome and those who are funding part of the ‘no’ campaign. We must fully understand that some on the ‘no’ side, who profess to be pro-European, want to see an unravelling of the EU and its institutions. Ireland was and will be a battleground for the heart and soul of Europe. That is what is at stake – nothing less – and it is worth our every cooperation, our every commitment and our every effort. "To those, like Nigel Farage, who lecture us on democracy and others who say that the people of Europe, given a chance in a direct vote, would say ‘no’ to Lisbon, I want to say: you have neglected to check the facts and figures. The results from five direct votes – four on the Constitution and one on Lisbon – have yielded 27 million EU citizens voting ‘yes’ and 23 million voting ‘no’, so the majority of EU citizens who have voted directly have voted ‘yes’."
For Colm Burke (EPP-ED, IE) the key point was the concerns expressed during the Lisbon referendum in relation to taxation, military neutrality and abortion were largely based on misinformation. The reality is that these issues are either unaffected by the Lisbon Treaty or have protocols already attached safeguarding Ireland’s position. For example, Protocol 35 to the present Lisbon Treaty protects Ireland’s stance on abortion. There must, he said, be a meaningful engagement with the Irish people to rebuild understanding of, and support for, the European process. Voter research after the referendum revealed a very low level of public understanding of the role and functions of the European Union. This disengagement is a major challenge for both the European Union itself and for the national political system and should not be under-estimated again by the Irish Government. He proposed a constitutional change to allow future international treaties to be referred to the Irish Supreme Court when they are agreed, to establish which provisions should be put to the Irish people. Such a mechanism would tease out the issues in need of debate in Ireland, would let the Irish electorate have their say and would finally allow Ireland to ratify the spirit of such treaties overall without stalling progress for other concerned parties. He also proposed the establishment of a new constitutional office of European Union citizens’ officer. The appointee would act as an independent advisory officer on all aspects of EU legislation, including its transposition into Irish law. This individual would be responsible for providing impartial information on the facts about European issues, including when conflicting arguments arise.
Richard Corbett (PES, IE) was surprised that the other Member States conceded so quickly to reverting to the size of the Commission that will be one Commissioner per country. This shows the willingness of other Member States to move to meet the concerns that were expressed in the Irish 'No' campaign and the Irish ‘No’ vote. This is not an attempt to ignore the ‘No’ vote. It is an attempt to respond to the ‘No’ vote, to move to meet half way and to try and find a solution that is acceptable to all 27 countries. In this Union, he said, when there is a divergence like that, we try to bridge the gap. The other Member States have shown their willingness to move to meet Irish concerns. Mr Corbett hoped that will be sufficient to enable a positive result in a new referendum to be held next year, when it is up to the Irish people to make their choice.
Proinsias De Rossa (PES, IE). welcomed the decisions on the Lisbon Treaty by the European Council. Unsurprisingly, the Europhobic ‘no’ campaigners continue to prattle on with their threadbare arguments reflected here today by Ms de Brún, Ms Sinnott and Mr Farage. The right of each Member State to nominate a Commissioner has been secured; the guarantees have been negotiated to address other concerns, the content and nature of which have still to be negotiated. Workers’ rights issues arising from the Laval and other judgments must be comprehensively addressed. But these ECJ judgments are based on the Posting of Workers Directive, not the Lisbon Treaty, and it is that directive that needs not only to be amended but also implemented by the Member States comprehensively.
The content of the guarantees have to satisfy the broad majority of Irish and European citizenship. They must not be used to freeze social progress in Ireland or Europe or to deny any of us the benefits of the Charter of Fundamental Rights. This Parliament, and indeed all politicians in Ireland, have a responsibility to participate in shaping the content of those guarantees and to ensure that the conclusions are not regressive.
What we have learned, Gary Titley (PES, UK) said, is that Europe stands or falls together. He welcomed the dynamic leadership we have had, "in contrast with Mr Kirkhope’s party, whose members, like rabbits paralysed in the headlights, think that doing nothing is the only solution to our great crisis." He emphasised the importance of Europe working with the new American administration in January, so that we have a united front to the great challenges such as climate change and the financial crisis.
To those Member States which had doubts about aspects of what we were seeking, Avril Doyle (EPP-ED, IE ) said " I thank you for making the effort to accommodate us with a Commissioner all round and legal guarantees on taxation, neutrality, the right to life, education and the family. There will still be those who will continue to argue against a second referendum. But the majority of the Irish continue to acknowledge and fully appreciate our EU membership, particularly at this time of unprecedented global economic difficulty, when marginalisation and loss of influence cannot be an option for us and when unfettered access to the single market of 500 million consumers is critical for Irish exports – including our delicious pig meat by the way – so we can trade our way out of growth."
The problem for Ireland, Mairead McGuinness (PPE-DE, IE) said is not so much the contents of the Treaty – we know that from the first vote – it is in dealing with the issues that people have concerns about, and the Council has done that. It rests, therefore, she said, on those of us who fully back the Treaty and the legal arrangements, which we hope will be in place, to canvas widely for the values that are in the Treaty and to divide the issues of national concern from those at European level. It will be a tough job but, with the support of this House, it can be done, she concluded. BRUSSELS EUROPEAN COUNCIL 11 / 12 DECEMBER 2008 PRESIDENCY CONCLUSIONS audio, 35:45 - Council statement (French President Nicolas Sarkozy) - EN audio, 38:19 - - Extracts from the plenary 16/12/2008 - Political group leaders - EN audio, 43:49 - - EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering and French President Nicolas Sarkozy - EN
EN
1
LINK
http://www.consilium.europa.eu/ueDocs/cms_Data/docs/pressData/en/ec/104692.pdf
EN
2
MULTIMEDIA
20081216MLT44637.asf
EN
3
MULTIMEDIA
20081216MLT44745.asf
EN
4
MULTIMEDIA
20081216MLT44996.asf
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Employment policy
Working Time Directive: No exceptions to the 48-hours maximum working week and opt-out scrapped after three years say MEPs
2008-12-18 - 15:38
MEPs say that there must be no exceptions to the 48 hours-maximum working time calculated over a reference period of 12 months and say the opt-out must end three years after adoption of the directive. It also says that any period of on-call time should count as working time. A conciliation committee with the Council is now likely. MEPs adopted the amendment on the abolition of the opt-out 36 months after the entry into force of the directive with 421 votes for 273 against and 11 abstentions. By adopting amendments from Alejandro Cercas (PES, ES), the Parliament expressed its disagreement with the Council (where a common position was adopted on 9 June 2008) notably regarding the “opt-out” and on on-call time, an issue of particular importance for the health sector.
Mr Cercas said after the vote in plenary: "This is a triumph for all the political groups in the European Parliament - for the whole Parliament. It is a victory for the two million doctors and medical students across the EU. I would like to congratulate the ETUC. This is an opportunity for the Council to engage with the citizens' agenda and to have a constructive conciliation. I call on the Commission to stop supporting the Council and play the role of an arbitrator."
Conciliation
The directive is now likely to go into conciliation -the final stage of negotiations with Council.
An absolute majority of 393 votes was needed in plenary to confirm the Employment Committee's amendments or to adopt any other amendment to the Council's common position.
The future of the opt-out clause
In 1993 the United Kingdom won an opt-out clause allowing it not to apply the maximum 48-hour working week if a worker agrees to work longer. The Parliament proposes the abolition of this clause, which is used in some Member States, three years after the revised directive, enters into force. Most MEPs feels that an annualisation of the reference period for calculating weekly working hours would allow a sufficiently flexible organisation of working time. Fifteen Member States currently exercise the opt-out.
MEPs adopted the amendment on the abolition of the opt-out 36 months after the entry into force of Directive with 421 votes in favour 273 against and 11 abstentions.
In June this year, EU employment and social affairs ministers reached an agreement. Under their common position of 15 September 2008, working time in the EU must be limited to 48 hours maximum unless a Member State introduces an opt-out clause and a worker decides to use that clause. For workers who opt for the derogation, the legislative text lays down a maximum of 60 hours of work a week on average over a three-month period. This can be increased to 65 hours a week on average over three months where there is no collective bargaining agreement and where the inactive period of on-call time is regarded as working time. The text also stipulates various safeguards for workers who use the opt-out clause.
Annualisation of the reference period
In May 2005, at first reading, Parliament proposed extending the reference period for calculating weekly working hours from four to twelve months under certain conditions, in order to prevent any risk to workers' health and safety.
The aim was to strike a balance between health and safety and the need for work to be organised flexibly, as well as to simplify the existing directive, which allowed various derogations and exceptions.
The text approved by the Council allows Member States to provide for a twelve month reference period in the legislation following consultations with employers' and employees' organisations. However, the maximum reference period will be six months in Member States which decide not to use the opt-out clause.
Definition of on-call time as working time
The Council and Commission introduced the ideas of "active" on-call time (a period during which the worker must be available at the workplace in order to work when required by the employer) and "inactive" on-call time (a period when the worker is on call but is not required by his employer to work).
In its common position the Council says that inactive on-call time should not count as working time unless otherwise decided by national law or by agreement between employers' and employees' representatives in accordance with national law.
At its second-reading vote, the Parliament reiterated its position that any period of on-call time, including inactive time, is to count as working time. However, inactive on-call periods can be calculated in a specific way for the purposes of complying with the maximum weekly average working time.
Other provisions
In addition, Member States must ensure that employers inform workers in good time of any planned major changes in the organisation of working hours. For the Parliament, employers will have to inform workers well in advance of any changes in working hours. In addition, workers will be entitled to request changes in their working hours, and employers will have to take account of such requests in a fair manner and can only refuse them for valid reasons
Regarding rest periods, the general principle is that, where normal rest periods cannot be taken, workers should be given periods of compensatory rest. The Council's common position states that it shall be up to Member States to determine the length of a "reasonable period" within which compensatory rest is to be granted. The EP believes that compensatory rest periods should be granted "following periods of time spent on duty", in accordance with the relevant law or an agreement between the two sides of industry.
The Parliament adopted other amendments clarifying the situation of workers bound by more than one contract. Here it says that working time is to be defined as the sum of the periods of time worked under each contract.
It also stipulates the categories of senior executive exempted from the directive: chief executive officers, senior managers directly subordinate to them and persons directly appointed by a board of directors.
Background
The 1993 directive on the organisation of working time lays down basic principles concerning maximum weekly working hours, daily rest time, breaks, weekly rest time, annual holidays and the duration of night work. It also lists various derogations that Member States may allow for certain categories of worker (for example senior executives) or certain sectors.
Some articles of the directive were due to be reviewed after ten years. The review must also take account of rulings of the Court of Justice regarding on-call time. The Court has delivered two judgments - in the SIMAP and Jaeger cases - which define as working time doctors' on-call periods taken as a whole, in the light of the rules requiring their physical presence in a health care establishment.
Against this background, the Commission in September 2004 put forward a proposal to amend the directive. Parliament voted at first reading in May 2005. After three years of deadlock, the Council reached an agreement in June 2008 (Belgium, Cyprus, Greece, Spain and Hungary did not support the compromise). The EP Committee on Employment and Social Affairs voted at second reading on 5 November 2008 (rapporteur: Alejandro Cercas, PES, ES) and restated its first-reading position, notably on the two controversial points: opt-outs and on-call time.
Debate 15 December 2008
In the debate on Monday (15 December), MEPs were divided on the continuation of the opt-out. The Employment Committee, ahead of the vote, said that the ability to opt-out from the EU maximum should end within 3 years after adoption. In 1993, the UK won a general opt-out clause allowing it not to apply the maximum 48-hour working week if a worker agrees to work. In other Member States the opt-out applies only in some sectors.
The Employment Committee calls for no exceptions to the 48-hours maximum working time calculated over 12 months and calls for the end of the opt-out within three years after adoption of the directive. The committee also says that any period of on-call time, including inactive time, should count as working time.
An absolute majority of MEPs (393) is needed in plenary to confirm the Employment Committee's amendments or to adopt any other amendment to the Council's common position.
Rapporteur
The revision of the directive is worrying millions of workers and this vote is an opportunity to reconnect with citizens, said the rapporteur Alejandro CERCAS (PES, ES). The 48 hour working week was established in the first ILO convention. The idea to "work to live and not live to work" has been achieved, "we cannot go backwards".
The opt-out abrogates this law and will lead to social dumping. In addition, surveys show that it harms health and safety at work, and makes it very difficult for people to reconcile work and family life. The proposed Council compromise makes "the opt-out a permanent general rule", said Mr Cercas.
On-call time should be considered as working time. In addition, the compromise by the Council weakens the right to compensatory rest.
The Council did not want to negotiate with the Parliament. "We need to put a stop to the Council's intentions. We hope, at conciliation, an acceptable compromise can be reached so that flexicurity and reconciliation of work and family life has a real meaning".
Council -French Presidency
The text is very important for all European workers, stated Valérie LÉTARD , French Secretary of State for Solidarity. The compromise reached in June, was a deal that improves the conditions of interim workers. The compromise established limits to the opt-out, i.e. 60 to 65 hours instead of the current 78 hours maximum.
The compromise also enables employers to take into account the specificity of on-call time. This text is a compromise, which means that some of the initial objectives are abandoned such as the phasing out of the opt-out. The objective is to have an acceptable text and to avoid conciliation.
European Commission
"Does the EP want to stick to its first reading position in 2005 or does it want to take into account the Common position of the Council and changes its initial position? That is the key question", stated Commissioner Vladamír SPIDLA responsible for Employment and Social Affairs.
The revision constitutes an important task to clarify the legal position on on-call time, there has been such a lack of certainty so far, he said.
In 2005, the Commission suggested the abolition of the opt-out, taking into account the EP first reading. "But the EP has to take reality into account: in 2003 only 4 Member States were using the opt-out, now they are 15". "We need to make sure that we get guarantees for the people who want to sign an opt-out clause".
"The position of the EP and Council are clearly different, it will not be easy to reach an agreement, we don't have much time this parliamentary term. It will be difficult to make changes to the compromise. The Commission is willing to play the role of arbitrator", he concluded.
Political group speakers
Speaking for the EPP-ED group, José Albino SILVA PENEDA (PT) believed that agreement could have been reached before the EP's second reading but, "thanks to the French presidency, the Council seemed to have no negotiating mandate". He stressed "We seek compromise, dialogue with Council".
Regarding on-call time, Mr Peneda asked "why not implement the ECJ's position", especially if we go to Conciliation? This has been accepted by the European doctors' associations who've been demonstrating outside the building.
Regarding the opt-out, he said "This has nothing to do with labour market flexibility. The key issue: do we want Europe's workers to do more than 48 hours/week?" and argued that it damaged the relationship between work and family life. In this connection, he reminded the House that the legal basis was health and safety of workers.
For the Socialists, Jan ANDERSSON (SE) asked "Do we need a directive on working time?" and his answer was "Yes, because we have a common market", so we need common rules on health and safety.
Of the differences between the two sides (EP and Council), he said "Council is saying that on-call time is time off. We say that if you've left the house you're working". Regarding the opt-out, he contended "it can't be voluntary in today's jobs market". He added "What about equal opportunities? Who is working a 60-65 hour week? It's men who have women looking after the home. That's why women support the directive".
Elizabeth LYNNE (UK), for the ALDE group, believed that "the Council position is not ideal but it is the fruit of many years of negotiations by the Member States." She had always supported retention of the opt-out and was now "pleased that the opt-out cannot be signed at the same time as a contract", adding that "it's more transparent now" since "employers can't put the same employee on one, two or three contracts".
She felt that "In difficult economic times it is important to allow workers to work overtime" so flexibility was needed. However, on-call time was a more difficult matter. She had submitted amendment in the Employment Committee saying on-call time should be classed as working time, but "I got no support from PES and EPP". "I suspect this may have to go to Council and Council might not move", she said.
On behalf of her group, Elisabeth SCHROEDTER (Greens/EFA, DE) emphasised that "Excessive working time makes you ill" and "This affects not just individuals but those around them", in the case of drivers, for example.
Her group would be tougher than the Council, she said, in that it would vote for definite "figures, not just guidelines". She believed it was right for Member States to have three years to implement the legislation but "we would not vote for a British-style opt-out, nor for on-call time to be classed as resting time".
She also insisted that "Working hours should be calculated for the individual, not for each contract". Concluding, she told the House "We must confirm the EP first reading position and try to preserve jobs".
Roberta ANGELILLI (UEN, IT) said that any 'cut-price compromise' would be at the cost of Europe's workers in terms of health, safety and reconciliation of work and family life. On the opt-out, she spoke of a 'hidden ransom' if Parliament accepted the position of the Council.
Dimitrios PAPADIMOULIS (EL) said that his group, the GUE/NGL, was radically opposed to the Council position, which would turn back the clock of history by 90 years to when the idea of the 48-hour week was introduced. The opt-out was, he said a 'trick' begun by Mrs Thatcher years ago and to keep it would be to deny the very basis of social Europe. He urged the Council, if they truly had workers' interests in mind, to listen to the ETUC and the medical council rather than the employers.
Derek Roland CLARK (IND/DEM, UK) went though the history of various EU presidencies attempting to find agreement on the issue. But the Working Time Directive is a waste of time, he said. It raises unit costs, means companies fail to compete and jobs are lost, which is why the French had abandoned the 35-hour week.
Irena BELOHORSKÁ (NI, SK) argued that if workers are on call they cannot freely organise their time and feared that a whole 'army' of health professionals would be open to abuse unless on-call time was considered as working time, with the end-result being that patients could be put at risk.
British and Irish speakers
Philip BUSHILL-MATTHEWS (EPP-ED, UK) congratulated the Commission and the French Presidency, which has "displayed great skill to get as far as we've got" on an issue that has been blocked by previous Presidencies. He said that millions of EU citizens are worried that politicians are going to block them from working freely. "I was elected to look after the people I serve. I was elected to help and not to stand in their way. If people don't get the opt-out, they will know who to blame," he concluded.
Jean LAMBERT (Greens/EFA, UK) pointed out that the long hours culture is contributing to illness and depression, which is costing the EU a lot in economic terms. "There is enough flexibility in the current directive and proposed changes for companies to be able to cope if they have a sudden rush of work on," she said. She also stressed that tired workers are dangerous workers. "The decline in productivity and creativity is not good for a knowledge-based society. 66% of workers in the UK are not paid for the overtime that they do, and their commitment is shown by being present and not through productivity".
Speaking for the non attached groups, Jim ALLISTER (UK) said that the Parliament and Council "need to get their priorities right". "Control of working hours is exclusively for national control and not for European dictates. If British workers are permitted by their own elected government to work more that 48 hours per week, then why should it matter to other Member States that are more prescriptive?" "At the time of an economic downturn, less regulation is key to economic recovery," he added.
Marian HARKIN (ALDE, IE) said we need to send a clear signal to the EU that a "social Europe is alive and well". In Ireland we ask if we are closer to Boston or Berlin, and in this context we need to be closer to Berlin, but only if Paris and Berlin can deliver on health and safety. This directive, she said, is an opportunity for the European Parliament and Council to ensure that citizens can achieve a good work/life balance.
Stephen HUGHES (PES, UK) said he was in favour of scrapping the opt-out because the directive is a health and safety law, and the 12 month averaging of working time, as opposed to the four-month average, offers businesses "phenomenal flexibility" for work time planning. So much so that that "Council was going to fix a limit of 65 hours a week depending on the averaging period," he said.
Proinsias DE ROSSA (PES, IE) said he supported the Cercas package. The bottom line in this debate is, he said, that human beings are social beings: they are not machines and they should not be treated as such in the workplace. A person applying to an employer for a job has no freedom to refuse to sign a form saying they are denying themselves the right to the coverage of the Working Time Directive, so to argue that abolishing the opt-out is in some way an attack on freedom is not right: it is actually an attack on the abuse of an employee who needs to work in order to live. Mr De Rossa was of the view that the current opt-out in use in 14 Member States is an attack on the idea of building Europe on the basis of common decent working and living conditions, and this, he said, must not be allowed to happen.
Mairead McGUINNESS (EPP-ED, IE) in writing . – "The debate on the organisation of working time is complex. But the most difficult issues are the future of the opt-out and the treatment of on-call time." "Under the Council agreement, the possibility for an employee to opt out of the maximum average working week of 48 hours, provided for in the original Working Time Directive, is subject to more stringent conditions in order to protect the health and safety of workers. Employees will not be required to work in excess of 60 hours a week averaged over three months, or 65 hours a week averaged over three months, when the inactive part of on-call time is regarded as working time. Ireland has never used the opt-out, so a stricter implementation of the available opt-out is both welcome and necessary." Vote : Wednesday, 17.12.2008
Revision of Working Time Directive - state of play - 9.12.2008 Organisation of working time (amend. Directive 2003/88/EC)
EN
2
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5202562
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081208BKG44002 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Employment policy
The European Parliament sets out new rules on European Works Councils
2008-12-18 - 15:38
MEPs adopted an agreement at first-reading on the recast directive on European Works Council following a vote of the Employment Committee on the 17 November. The recast of the directive, proposed by the Commission in July as part of a new social agenda, is aimed at tightening up the definitions of information and consultation of workers. MEPs abolished the threshold of 50 employees for setting up special negotiating bodies (as a first step to constituting European works councils) The amendments to Directive 94/45/EC proposed by the Commission are designed to ensure that employees' transnational information and consultation rights are effective, and cover the restructuring of firms, increasing the proportion of European works councils in firms, (currently established in only 36% of businesses, to which the directive applies), increasing legal certainty and ensuring better linkage between the directives on information and consultation of employees. The Committee on Employment and Social Affairs had proposed 17 amendments to the draft last November. Council and the European Parliament reached an informal agreement on 4 December. Amendments relating to the social partners The compromise text includes proposals on the social partners taken up in the report by Philip Bushill-Matthews (EPP-ED, UK). They were forwarded to French Minister Xavier Bertrand, who chairs the Council on Employment and Social Affairs in a letter on the 29 August. The directive defines the general principle and norms for information and consultation. The amendments state that information transmitted from employer to employees' representatives must be "given at such a time, in such a fashion" to enable employees' representatives "to undertake an in-depth assessment of the possible impact and, where appropriate, prepare consultations with the competent body of the Community-scale undertaking or Community-scale group of undertakings in question". The text stresses that members of the European Works Council must have the means required to apply the rights stemming from this Directive and to collectively represent the interests of the employees of the Community-scale undertaking or Community-scale group of undertakings. Moreover, the obligations arising from this Directive do not apply to Community-scale undertakings or Community-scale groups of undertakings in which there was already an agreement, or in which an agreement is signed or an existing agreement is revised during the two years following the adoption of this Directive, or in undertakings in which such agreements exist. Other provisions The directive also states that matters which concern the entire undertaking or group or at least two Member States, or which exceed the powers of the decision-making bodies in a single Member State in which employees who will be affected are employed, are considered to be transnational. Following the court judgments in the Vilvoorde, British Airways and Marks and Spencer cases, MEPs also adopted amendments to clarify where a situation is "transnational". They decided that where a decision of closure or restructuring is taken in one Member State but affects the workers in another, it must be considered transnational. They also abolished the threshold of 50 employees for setting up special negotiating bodies (as a first step to constituting European works councils) so as not to discriminate against small Member States which would have difficulty reaching this threshold. For the purpose of the negotiations, the special negotiating body may request assistance with its work from experts of its choice , who may include representatives of the competent recognised Community-level trade union organisations. Such experts and trade union representatives may be present at negotiation meetings in an advisory capacity at the request of the special negotiating body. Finally, Member States must ensure that measures taken in the event of a failure to comply with this Directive are "adequate, proportionate and dissuasive". Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 16 December)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Employment policy
Establishing common points of reference for vocational education and training
2008-12-18 - 15:38
MEPs adopted an agreement at first reading, on two reports related to Vocational Education and Training. They aim at establishing common points of references to ensure quality in the education systems, create transparency for professional qualifications gained abroad, and help ease cross-border mobility of workers. However, participating in the initiatives should be voluntary and diversity between national systems should be respected. European credit system for vocational education and training (ECVET) The European credit system for vocational training is a methodological framework that can be used to describe qualifications in terms of units of learning outcomes with associated points. Thomas MANN (EPP-ED, DE) recommends that the initiative be introduced gradually with the voluntary participation of Member States. The report was adopted by 564 votes in favour, 12 against and 8 abstentions. The Recommendation will improve the mobility and portability of qualifications at national level between the various sectors of the economy and within the labour market. It will also contribute to the development and expansion of European cooperation in education and training. The deadline of 2012 put forward by the Commission for the introduction of ECVET is to be extended to allow for a test period. The Commission should promote and participate together with the Member States in an ECVET network and carry out a report five years after the adoption of this Recommendation to the Parliament and the Council on the experience gained and the implications for the future. European Quality Assurance Framework for Vocational Education and Training Across the EU, vocational training is organised at national and regional levels with different standards. The aim of the Framework is to have common points of reference to ensure quality of Vocational Education and Training (VET) systems. The report by Jan ANDERSSON (PES, SE) asks that a framework for the identification, support and exchange of best practices be provided at national, local and regional levels. The report was adopted by 561 votes in favour, 16 against and 10 abstentions. The Framework does not prescribe a particular quality system or approach but provides common principles, quality criteria, indicative descriptors and indicators that may help in assessing and improving existing systems and provision. It should be implemented in accordance with national legislation and practice, says the report, and a review of the implementation process should be undertaken every four years. If used and further developed by the Member States, the report states, the Framework "could help them to further improve and develop their VET systems, support lifelong learning strategies, further European labour market integration and the implementation of the European Qualification Framework and promote a culture of quality improvement at all levels, while respecting the rich diversity of national education systems." This Recommendation should also contribute to modernising education and training systems, improving the effectiveness of training to ensure that people do not leave without qualifications. Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 18 December)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Environment
European Parliament seals climate change package
2008-12-18 - 15:38
After eleven months of legislative work, the European Parliament gave its backing to the EU's climate change package which aims to ensure that the EU will achieve its climate targets by 2020: a 20% reduction in greenhouse gas emissions, a 20% improvement in energy efficiency, and a 20% share for renewables in the EU energy mix. Ahead of Parliament's first-reading vote, MEPs had reached informal agreements with the French Presidency on the six proposals which all fall under the co-decision procedure, placing the European Parliament and Council on an equal footing as co-legislators. (Full details on the six pieces of legislation can be found in the background note - see link below)
Revising the EU's Emission Trading System - report by Avril Doyle (EPP-ED, IE)
The revised EU Emission Trading System (ETS) is a key tool for achieving the EU's aim of reducing its greenhouse gas emissions. It will apply from 2013 to 2020 and should lead to a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions of 21 % compared to reported 2005 levels. The EU ETS is a "cap and trade" system: it caps the overall level of emissions allowed but, within that limit, allows participants buy and sell allowances as they require, so as to cut emissions cost effectively. The Community-wide quantity of allowances issued each year will decrease in a linear fashion, so as gradually to reduce the overall level of emissions each year.
The ETS currently covers over 10,000 installations in the energy and industrial sectors, which are collectively responsible for close to half of the EU's emissions of CO2 and 40% of its total greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions (the remaining 60 % will be covered by the 'non-ETS' Effort Sharing decision).
In the first and second ETS trading periods (2005 -2012) the great majority of allowances were allocated free of charge to installations. The revised directive establishes auctioning from 2013 in principle (as proposed by the Commission and backed by the Environment Committee) but it includes several exceptions, as advocated by the European Council on 12 December 2008.
The legislative resolution was adopted with 610 votes in favour 60 against and 29 abstentions.
Effort sharing: Member States targets for CO 2 reduction - report by Satu Hassi (Greens/EFA, FI)
The "effort sharing" decision sets binding national targets for each EU Member State to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from non-ETS sources (e.g. road and sea transport, buildings, services, agriculture and smaller industrial installations), between 2013 and 2020. These sources currently account for about 60% of all EU greenhouse gas emissions. The decision aims to reduce these emissions by 10% overall between 2013 and 2020, so as to contribute towards the EU's overall aim of a 20% reduction in total greenhouse gas emissions by 2020. The effort sharing decision is the first of its kind worldwide.
National targets for UK and Ireland
Member State greenhouse gas emission limits by 2020 compared to 2005 greenhouse gas emission levels for sources not covered under Directive 2003/87/EC:
Ireland - minus 20%
United Kingdom - minus 16%
The legislative resolution was adopted with 555 votes in favour, 93 against and 60 abstentions.
Equipping power plants to store CO 2 underground - report by Chris Davies (ALDE, UK)
Parliament also approved a proposed directive providing for the legal framework for the new carbon dioxide capture and storage technology (CCS). To cut their CO2 emissions, industrial installations and power plants could in future use this new technology to capture CO2 and store it "permanently and safely underground" in geological formations. MEPs secured the funding of demonstration projects by ensuring that 300 million ETS allowances will be awarded to large scale CCS projects in the EU.
The legislative resolution was adopted with 623 votes in favour, 68 against and 22 abstentions.
20% renewable energy in the EU's energy mix by 2020 - report by Claude Turmes (Greens/EFA, LU)
A new directive will lay down mandatory national targets to be achieved by the Member States through promoting the use of renewable energy in the electricity, heating and cooling, and transport sectors in order to ensure that by 2020 renewable energy makes up at least 20% of the EU's total energy consumption. The agreement foresees that by 2020 renewable energy - biofuels, electricity and hydrogen produced from renewable sources - account for at least 10% of the EU's total fuel consumption in all forms of transport.
The legislative resolution was adopted with 635 votes in favour, 25 against and 25 abstentions.
National targets for UK and Ireland
National overall targets for the share of energy from renewable sources in final consumption of energy in 2020.
Share of energy from renewable sources in final consumption of energy, 2005 (S 2005 )
UK - 1.3%
Ireland - 3.1%
Target for share of energy from renewable sources in final consumption of energy, 2020 (S 2020 )
15% UK
16% Ireland
Reducing CO 2 emissions from new cars - report by Guido Sacconi (PES, IT)
A new regulation will set emission performance standards for new passenger cars registered in the EU. The compromise backs the Commission's proposed target of an average of 120g of CO2/km for the whole car industry by 2012, compared to the current levels of 160g/km. The regulation sets an average target of 130g CO2/km for new passenger cars to be reached by improvements in vehicle motor technology. It will be supplemented by additional measures to achieve a further 10g/km reduction, so as to reach the 120g/km target, through other technical improvements. The compromise introduces a long term target for 2020 for the new car fleet of average emissions of 95 g CO2/km.
Manufacturers will be given interim targets of ensuring that average CO2 emissions of 65% of their fleets in January 2012, 75% in January 2013, 80% in January 2014 and 100% from 2015, have to comply with each manufacturer's specific CO2 emissions target. In case the average emissions of CO2 exceed the targets, manufacturers will have to pay fines.
The legislative resolution was adopted with 559 votes in favour, 98 against and 60 abstentions.
Less greenhouse gas emissions from fuels - report by Dorette Corbey (PES, NL)
The revised fuel quality directive requires fuel suppliers to reduce greenhouse gas emissions caused by extraction or cultivation, including land-use changes, transport and distribution, processing and combustion of transport fuels (i.e. fossil fuels like petrol, diesel and gas-oil and also biofuels, blends, electricity and hydrogen) of up to 10% by 2020.
The legislative resolution was adopted with 670 votes in favour, 20 against and 25 abstentions. Background Note : Climate Change Package up for plenary vote Briefing article : Climate change and energy package 20 20 20 by 2020 Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 17 December)
EN
3
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081208BKG44004 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081208BRI43933 ITEM-002-EN NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Human rights
Sakharov human rights prize awarded to China's Hu Jia
2008-12-18 - 15:38
The award of the 2008 Sakharov prize for human rights to jailed Chinese dissident Hu Jia took place at midday Wednesday. In his absence his wife gave an emotional and moving video message from under house arrest in Beijing to MEPs today. Zeng Jinyan spoke about her husband's poor health and his continued fight for human rights. A symbolic empty chair was in the middle of the Chamber for Hu Jia. Zeng Jinyan said she had been forbidden by prison guards to discuss the prize when she last visited her husband on 21 November: "We were both warned...that we were forbidden to talk about the fact that he had been awarded the Sakharov Prize."
President Hans-Gert Pöttering said Hu Jia "was nominated as the representative of the silenced voices of China and Tibet, but today we will hear that voice."
Elena Bonner, the widow of Andrei Sakharov, was also in the Chamber for the award as were former winners of the Sakharov prize which celebrated 20 years this year.
“Repression has failed to silence the voices of courage”
Opening the award ceremony Mr Pöttering said today "is a day when we recall the fundamental principles of our Union as a force for peace, progress and human rights. As Dr Andrei Sakharov said "it is impossible to achieve any one of these goals if one of the other two is ignored."
"In 1988, one of our first prize winners, Nelson Mandela, was in jail. In 1988, there was also an empty chair for Andrei Sakharov; here today, there is an empty chair for Hu Jia," he added. The "2008 Sakharov Prize winner Hu Jia was nominated as the representative of the silenced voices of China and Tibet, but today we will hear that voice" he said.
Zeng Jinyan: the voice of Hu Jia
MEPs then heard a recorded speech by Zeng Jinyan, herself a cyber-dissident and currently under house arrest.
Zeng Jinyan made the following comments from her husband, "Perhaps the European Parliament was thinking of the work I did in the areas of AIDS and the environment, because what I did in terms of human rights was very far from sufficient and I will need to redouble my efforts."
She said Hu Jia is far from being the only prisoner of conscience in China. "Sometimes the price to be paid is very, very high." Not only activists but also their relatives have been "harassed by the police, lost their jobs or have been put under house arrest. And more serious still, some have even been tried and convicted," she said.
She also said that Hu Jia had "hoped he would be the last political prisoner".
Prize money to fund support network for persecuted activists and their families
Hu Jia had "often said he would like to set up a support network to help the families of human rights activists. To provide moral support for the families, to ease their mental and life pressure to which they are subjected," she said. Consequently, "I would like to use the €50,000 Sakharov Prize as start-up money, to establish a foundation to support the families of human rights activists."
Hu Jia’s path: from AIDS and environment to human rights
Until 2004, Hu Jia devoted most of his activities to the problems of AIDS and the environment," she said. "From 2004, the police regularly denied him his freedom of movement and he had no other choice but to participate in human rights movements from his home, writing articles and publishing reports."
"During all these years, the most important and most interesting thing he did was to have constantly persisted in speaking the truth. He never stopped writing about the phenomena he observed. He never stopped describing, one by one, all the realities that the Chinese media cannot say," she said.
Optimism for a more democratic China
Hu Jia has always remained optimistic, said his wife. "He said he thought China was experiencing the most open period of its history...whether the government wants it or not…China is moving at great speed towards an open and democratic society," she said. "We are full of hope of soon being able to hail the arrival of an open China. We are full of energy for China to become a country at peace."
At the end of the video message former winners and MEPs gave the message a standing ovation.
Human rights not a threat to any nation
Elena Bonner, Andrei Sakharov’s widow and herself a renowned human rights and democracy campaigner, praised Zeng Jinyan and asked the House "if everyone present had done enough to protect Hu Jia, his wife and their child from the State (namely China) that they want to do business with?"
Ms Bonner was in trenchant mood. She reaffirmed her husband's belief that "people should always follow their consciences". She went on to say that "human rights the basis of civilisation".
She also questioned whether the position of the EP and Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe on human rights is always based on principle.
Ms Bonner also unveiled a list of 97 titles and awards received by Andrei Sakharov so people could know him better.
President Hans-Gert Pöttering had earlier added that "we speak out on human rights as a friend of the Chinese people and we know how much we can do together for peace and progress".
The ceremony ended with a one minutes of applause for Hu Jia Sakharov homepage Eurinfo - 2008 Sakharov Prize to Hu Jia Watch the award of Sakharov Prize
EN
1
LINK
/sakharov/default_en.htm
EN
2
LINK
/eplive/public/default_en.htm
EN
3
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/faces/vod/player.jsp?date=20081217
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Human rights
Human Rights: Humanitarian crisis in Zimbabwe, political rights abuses in Nicaragua, assassination attempts in Russia
2008-12-18 - 15:38
In three resolutions on democracy and human rights adopted at the end of this week's Strasbourg plenary session, the European Parliament voices concern at the humanitarian crisis "of massive proportions" in Zimbabwe, condemns attacks on human rights defenders in Russia, and voices its regret at the "lack of democratic legitimacy" of the Nicaraguan local elections. Catastrophic humanitarian situation in Zimbabwe Parliament voices its "deep concern" at the catastrophic humanitarian situation in Zimbabwe, the cholera epidemic, the hunger and the complete refusal of the Mugabe regime to respond positively to the crisis, and expresses its outrage at the spate of recent abductions of human rights defenders. With 5.1 million Zimbabweans (almost half of the population) facing hunger, 16 400 infected with cholera, and 300 000 seriously weakened by food and in grave danger from the epidemic, Zimbabwe is "facing a humanitarian crisis of massive proportions". According to the international medical humanitarian organisation Médecins Sans Frontières, at least 1.4 million people are at risk of contracting cholera if the outbreak is not contained by addressing its root causes. Noting that the EU has just released EUR 10 million in aid, the EP calls on the Zimbabwean authorities to "lift all restrictions on humanitarian aid agencies and to ensure that humanitarian aid can be delivered in accordance with the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence." Abductions of human rights defenders In view of the "worsening human rights crisis" and the "unprecedented spate of abductions of human rights defenders", the EP calls for the immediate release of those abducted, including a number of members of the Movement for Democratic Change (MDC), the main opposition party, and civil society activists, and calls for the perpetrators of these abductions "to be held to account". Sanctions The EP welcomes the recent extension of the EU's list of banned individuals in the Mugabe regime, and calls for further names of key Mugabe loyalists to be added. It also calls on the UN Security Council to consider imposing targeted sanctions, such as travel bans and asset freezes on Mr Mugabe and persons actively engaged in violence or human rights infringements. International community urged to provide support Turning to measures the EU could take, Parliament urges the Council and Member States to step up their diplomatic action in Africa in order to secure active support for change in Zimbabwe. It also calls on the Council to encourage the African Union to prepare contingencies for active intervention, and to "remain vigilant in relation to the possible consequences for the region of ZANU-PF's deliberate neglect and misgovernance that is destabilising Zimbabwe". The EP strongly appeals to all stakeholders and the international community to "be prepared to support the economic and social recovery of Zimbabwe once a government has been formed which genuinely reflects the will of the Zimbabwean people at all levels and once there are tangible signs of a return to respect for democracy, human rights and rule of law". * * * Attacks on human rights activists, civil liberties and democracy in Nicaragua In a resolution on Nicaragua adopted by 52 votes to 5 with one abstention, MEPs voice their regret at the way in which the local elections of 9 November were conducted, stating that "the results lack all democratic legitimacy". Parliament is concerned that the progress of democratic consolidation and governance in Nicaragua, particularly with regard to inclusion and active participation, is being flouted. Two political parties were unable to take part in the local elections. The issue of possible fraud over the results of the municipal elections of 9 November 2008 raised in the reports of the EU expert team highlight the unwillingness of the Nicaraguan authorities to hold a genuinely democratic vote. There has also been accompanying violence, targeted in particular on the media The UN, the EU, the US and several Nicaraguan NGOs have expressed concern over the transparency of the elections. Parliament regrets the fact that the climate of suspected fraud in some municipalities has provoked demonstrations and clashes between supporters of different parties, leaving a number of people injured and aggravating an already profound political crisis. The resolution calls on the government of Nicaragua to take urgent measures to pacify the situation created, and on political parties to condemn their supporters' acts of violence. With regard to the numerous attacks on human rights organisations and their members, independent journalists and the representatives of the Commission delegation in Nicaragua in the last few months, on the part of individuals, political forces and bodies linked to the state, the EP asks the Nicaraguan authorities to respect the work of the human rights organisations. The resolution also urges the Nicaraguan government and the state authorities to "protect freedom of expression and the independence of the judiciary and thus ensure preservation of their country's democratic bases, and to ensure that as soon as possible Nicaragua ratifies the Rome Statute setting up the International Criminal Court". Recalling the negotiations on the Association Agreement between the EU and the countries of Central America, Parliament stresses that Nicaragua must be reminded of the need to respect the principles of rule of law, democracy and human rights, as defended and promoted by the EU. MEPs call on the EU Member States to ensure that the situation in Nicaragua is placed on the agenda of all meetings with the Nicaraguan authorities, whether bilateral or multilateral. * * * Attacks on human rights defenders in Russia Parliament, in a resolution adopted unanimously, firmly condemns attacks on human rights defenders, including lawyers who are representing citizens' rights, and voices concern at recent moves to rehabilitate the Stalinist regime as well as growing trends of targeted violence. "Only by coming to terms with its tragic past can Russia establish a true democratic culture". Between July and October 2008, there have been numerous attempts on the lives of human rights defenders. In mid-October a leading Russian human rights lawyer, Karinna Moskalenko, who has successfully represented 30 Russian citizens in the Strasbourg human rights court, was the victim of an attempt to poison her by placing mercury in her car in Strasbourg. The EP appeals to both the French and Russian authorities to identify the perpetrators and their motives. In terms of targeted violence, more than 100 people were killed in 2008 on the basis of their race, nationality, religion or sexual orientation, according to the Moscow Bureau for Human Rights, raising concerns of an absence of effective condemnation of such hate crimes by Russian authorities. Concern has also been expressed at the continuing, large-scale abuses against conscripts in the Russian armed forces. The Parliament calls on the Russian authorities to "investigate and prosecute those responsible and to uproot abusive practices within the armed forces and demonstrate a determination to modernise the prevailing culture". Lack of respect for the rule of law highlighted by case of Anna Politkovskaya Two years after the brutal killing of the Russian independent journalist Anna Politkovskaya, who has become a symbol for freedom of the press, serious concerns have been raised with regard to transparency and respect for the rule of law in the criminal investigation and trial following the murder. Parliament calls on the court to fully respect the jury's decision, open the proceedings to all journalists and media, and "establish not only who committed and assisted in the murder of Anna Politkovskaya, but also who ordered it". Parliament also condemns the police raid on 3 December 2008 on the Memorial Research and Information Centre, an organisation, which has been conducting research into Stalinist repression in the Soviet Union. The EP asks the Russian authorities and the St Petersburg Public Prosecutor's Office to return without delay eleven hard drives and CDs that were taken from the centre during a police raid that contain invaluable data on more than 50 000 victims of Stalinist-era repression. Human rights integral to EU-Russia relations The EP points out that "human rights, the rule of law and democracy must remain core issues for the further development of EU-Russia relations". The resolution stresses the importance of the continuous exchange of views on human rights with Russia as part of the EU-Russia human rights consultations, and calls for the format of such meetings to be improved so as to involve relevant ministries, the judiciary and representatives of Russian civil society. In terms of the ongoing negotiations for a new agreement on a new comprehensive framework for EU-Russia relations (re-launched during the last EU-Russia Summit in November 2008), Parliament takes the view that respect for human rights, democracy and the rule of law should be an integral part of the new framework agreement. Call for EU institutions to give practical support Finally, Parliament strongly encourages the EU institutions to give practical expression to their support for human rights defenders by setting up a focal point for defenders in all three institutions, so as to better coordinate their actions with the other international and European organisations. Full text of adopted resolutions will appear here (click on 18 December 2008)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Consumers
MEPs adopt toy safety directive ahead of festive season
2008-12-18 - 15:38
MEPs adopted the toy safety proposal with 481 votes in favour, 73 against, 40 abstentions. The text aims at making toys safer and will beef up safety regulations, ban carcinogenic, mutagenic or toxic for reproductions substances and restrict the use of heavy metals and of fragrances. The EP and the Council reached a first-reading agreement before the plenary vote so that "toys can be made safe as quickly as possible" according to Marianne Thyssen (EPP-ED, BE), the rapporteur. The aim of the new draft directive on the safety of toys is to strengthen and update the rules on toy safety. The existing directive has given good service but needs replacing. New types of toy have appeared on the market, with new materials and technologies being used for their manufacture. In addition, cases of toxic or dangerous toys being placed on the market, such as Mattel in 2007, have shown the need for tighter safety rules. Lastly, new horizontal rules, such as those on the "goods package", are about to enter into force and the toys directive needed to be brought into line with these. MEPs gave their backing to the Commission's draft legislation but adopted amendments tightening restrictions on the use of chemicals, fragrances and heavy metals in toy manufacture and clarifying the rules on warnings. Is this a toy which I see before me? A toy is defined under the directive as a product intended to be used for playing by children under 14 years of age. A list of products not regarded as toys is annexed to the text. It includes party decorations, collectors' items clearly intended for people aged fourteen or over (including reproductions of real firearms or faithful scale models), puzzles with more than 500 pieces, fireworks and new products such as video games and game consoles. Safety first Manufacturers will have to ensure that toys are not harmful or toxic to children's health. MEPs want Member States to apply the precautionary principle when enacting the legislation, especially if scientific evidence cannot determine whether a toy poses a risk. Any toy placed on the EU market must meet general safety standards. MEPs backed a clause proposed by the Commission which requires manufacturers and importers to keep the technical documentation and the EC declaration of conformity for a period of 10 years after the toy has been placed on the market Warning! MEPs also clarified and strengthened the rules regarding warnings on packaging and on toys themselves: to make them more visible, they must be preceded by the word "Warning" Warnings must be in a language that is understandable to consumers and be visible at the point of sale, including on line shops. Specific provisions concern warning stating that the toy is not suitable for children under 36 months. "Not suitable for under-threes" Toys for children under 36 months must meet higher safety standards. Some toys bearing the warning "Not suitable for children under three years" are clearly intended for such children (e.g. rattles). If a toy is obviously intended for the under-threes, it will no longer be possible to use this misleading. Allergenic fragrances The Commission proposal bans the use of some allergenic fragrances. MEPs did not back a total ban but reached a compromise expanding considerably the list of banned fragrances up to 55 substances. This will affect toys such as play dough and dolls. A limited number of substances, traces of which must not exceed a certain limit, will be allowed in educational toys designed to develop the senses, such as "olfactory, gustative and cosmetic games" but these need to be clearly labelled. Carcinogenic, mutagenic or toxic for reproduction substances The European Parliament also tightened up the restrictions on substances that are carcinogenic, mutagenic or toxic for reproduction (CMR), saying these should be almost completely banned. Exception can only be granted if the European Scientific Committee has confirmed there are no risks. The EP has also restricted the use of heavy metals by an overage reduction of 50% (in comparison with the EC standards) of migration limits of the following metals: arsenic, cadmium, chromium (VI), lead, mercury and organic tin. Do not swallow Other amendments toughened up the clauses seeking to reduce the risk of suffocation or strangling by small detachable parts or toys contained in food such as chocolate eggs. No more deafening toys New provisions on noise emitted by toys will be established. The aim is to protect children from the risk of impairment of hearing caused by sound emitting toys. New standards will be stronger and more comprehensive, they will limit the peak values for both impulse noise and prolonged noise emitted by toys. Legal update The broad legal framework governing the sale of goods in the EU, including CE marking provisions, has recently been updated. The toy safety directive is the first to reflect the requirements of the new framework. The old directive "is not sufficient to deal with the risks from imported toys, since 95% of toys in Britain and 80% in the EU as whole are imported from China", said Arlene McCarthy (PES, UK), chair of the Internal Market Committee. The new legislation will require Member States to carry out stricter checks on all toys that come onto market under Directive 2001/95/EC on general product safety. In the future, the European Commission may, for the purposes of adapting the legislation to technical and scientific developments, amend the directive by the way of comitology, for instance regarding the use of CMR specific limit values for chemicals used in toys intended for children under 36 months or in other toys intended to be placed in the mouth. Entry into force and implementation The directive shall enter into force twenty days after its publication inn the Official Journal. Member States shall bring into force the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply with this Directive by 18 months after the publication of this Directive at the latest. However, in order to allow toy manufacturers and other economic operators sufficient time to adapt to the new requirements, it is necessary to provide for a transitional period of two years after the entry into force of this Directive during which toys which comply with the current legislation (Directive 88/378/EEC) may be placed on the market. In the case of chemical requirements, this period should be set at four years so as to allow the development of the harmonized standards which are necessary for compliance with those requirements. Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 18 December) Child health protection: safety of toys (repeal. Directive 88/378/EEC)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
2
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5588232
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Consumers
Stop misleading advertising by business directory companies, say MEPs
2008-12-18 - 15:38
MEPs call on Member States to act together to put an end to misleading advertising by business directory companies, further to 400 complaints from small firms across Europe that they had been misled into committing themselves to pay for adverts costing €1,000 per year. They also call upon the Commission to introduce a blacklist of such misleading practices, and upon victims to report business scams. The report was adopted with 632 votes in favour, 4 against and 12 abstentions. Parliament has received more than 400 petitions from small businesses who claim to have fallen victim to misleading advertising by business-directory companies. Business-directory company usually approached by mail to businesses inviting them to complete or update their business name and contact details and giving them the false impression that they will be listed in a business directory free of charge. Signatories later discover that they have, in fact, unintentionally signed up to a contract, normally binding them for a minimum of three years, to be listed in a business directory at a yearly charge of some €1.000. MEPs express concern at the problem raised by the petitioners and underline the cross-border nature of this problem. Not only small businesses but also non-profit making entities such as NGOs, charities, schools, libraries and local social clubs have suffered financial loss due to these abuses. Future measures Parliament says that the validity of contracts should be annulled or terminated and that victims may be reimbursed. Victims should report cases of business scams to national authorities and Member States should provide small firms with the "know-how" needed to file complaints and to ensure that victims seek appropriate advice before they pay fees demanded by business directory companies. Member States are urged to set up and maintain a centralised database of complaints. International co-ordination The report welcomes action taken by Italy, Spain, Netherlands, Belgium, the UK, and notably Austria, to try to prevent business directory companies from using misleading practices, but says that these efforts remain inefficient and need to be co-ordinated internationally MEPs regret that the EU directive on misleading advertising, which applies to business-to-business transactions, appears insufficient and asks the European Commission to report by December 2009 on the feasibility of including a blacklist of misleading practices in the directive. The European Parliament also regrets that Member States appear reluctant to extend the scope of the EU directive on unfair commercial practices to business-to-business transactions, and asks the Commission to report by December 2009 on the feasibility of this measure. Austria, an example of good practice The report welcomes the example set by Austria, which specifically prohibits advertising in business directories unless prospective clients are unequivocally and clearly informed that such advertisement is solely an offer for a contract against payment. The House also calls on the Commission to propose EU legislation based on the Austrian model. Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 16 December)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Economic and monetary affairs
European Parliament approves increase in bank deposit guarantee
2008-12-18 - 15:38
If a European bank fails, citizens' savings should be guaranteed up to €100,000, says the European Parliament, endorsing a Commission proposal to raise the deposit guarantee to this amount. MEPs also decided that bank customers should be given faster access to their deposits in emergencies and that a mechanism be established for cross-border cooperation in the event of another economic crisis. MEPs adopted a report by Christian Ehler (EPP-ED, DE) with 556 votes in favour, 21 against and 3 abstentions, to amend existing legislation on deposit guarantee schemes and raise the guarantee level in the event of deposits being unavailable. The aim of this new legislation, which may be approved in only 9 weeks since the Commission put forward its proposal, is to "bring some calm in the financial market" as the rapporteur explained during a press conference in the EP. The report, which also modifies the deadline for payouts and proposes setting up an emergency fund, reflects an agreement reached with the Council for an immediate approval. Agreement to raise the deposit guarantee level Members approved the Commission proposal to raise the level of guarantee to at least €50,000 when the new legislation enters into force in June 2009. They considered the current level of protection, set at €20,000, to be inadequate for a large number of deposits in the EU. The proposed increase to €100,000 will only be effective by the end of 2010, as agreed by the Parliament and the Council. MEPs also amended the proposal so that this increase will take effect unless a Commission impact assessment, to be ready by 31 December 2009, suggests it is not financially viable for all Member States. The coverage level will apply to all depositors in all Member States, regardless whether the currency is the Euro or not. Faster payouts and an emergency fund MEPs agreed to reduce the payout period, in the event of deposits being unavailable, from three months to 20 days. The extension of this period, up to maximum 10 days, could only be admitted in exceptional circumstances and by approval of competent authorities. MEPs also called on Member States to consider setting up an emergency pay-out system to make an appropriate amount available to the depositor within three days or less. The objective is to make "a positive impact on the confidence of depositors and the proper functioning of the financial markets". After the approval of Parliament's plenary, the Council has to formally endorse the new legislation and Member States will be required to bring it into force by 30 June 2009 at the latest. Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 18 December)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Economic and monetary affairs
Financial services rules: clearing and settlement and credit claims
2008-12-18 - 15:38
MEPs have adopted updates to European law on two aspects of the “plumbing” of the financial system: the aim, on the one hand, is to reflect in law the increasingly interconnected operation of clearing and settlement systems, and, on the other hand, to create a level playing field for central banks in Europe regarding the rules on accepting credit claims (receivable assets resulting from bank loans) as collateral from commercial banks. Clearing and settlement is the process by which, after trades are made in financial markets, ownership of the shares, financial instruments or other products is actually transferred to the buyer and the funds for the sale actually transferred to the seller. The EU has been encouraging competition and choice between the systems involved. There are also increasing links between different systems, enabling more efficient operation, but the law needs to be updated to provide a framework for such interlinked operation, to make it clear, for example, how supervisory arrangements work in these cases, and where liabilities lie in case of insolvencies of some of the actors concerned. MEPs adopted a number of amendments resulting from an informal agreement with the Council presidency, mostly aimed at improving definitions and clarifying the text. Credit claims (i.e. the fact that a bank has a loan outstanding with an individual or company) have been able to be used as collateral for commercial banks in their arrangements with the ECB since 2007; some central banks already accepted them, but with differing rules applying. The directive seeks to harmonise the rules on their acceptance. MEPs adopted several changes, again in informal agreement with the Council, notably regarding exceptions for consumer loans and to small enterprises and regarding formal notification arrangements. Given the informal agreement with the Council, these changes should now become law at this first-reading stage. The legislative resolution was adopted with 538 votes in favour, 17 against and 28 abstentions. Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 18 December)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Budget
Parliament adopts the EU Budget 2009 - €134 billion or 1.03 percent of EU GNI
2008-12-18 - 15:38
The European Parliament adopted the 2009 general EU budget at second-reading. The level of payments is set at €116.096 billion which amounts to 0.894 percent of the European Union's Gross National Income (GNI). The level of commitments has been set at €133.845 billion, which is 1.03 percent EU GNI. EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering signed off the official 2009 EU budget in Strasbourg. Food facility for developing countries
MEPs approved the agreement with Council that will allow the payment of around €1 billion in farm aid to developing countries. Parliament successfully pressed for this instrument, known as the "food facility", to be financed mainly from €760 million of new money, with transfers from Heading 4 (external relations) being limited as far as possible. It was on this condition that MEPs agreed to spread the programme, originally earmarked for 2008/2009, into 2010.
For 2009, the European Parliament created a special budget heading of €568 million in commitments and rectified the structure of the expenditure, to take account of the amounts needed to finance this aid.
EU economic recovery plan
Parliament expresses its strong willingness to enter into negotiations with the Council on the basis of the Commission's proposal for a revision of the financial frameworks 2007-13 for €5 billion n the framework of the proposed European Economic recovery plan. MEPs takes note in this regard of the Conclusions of the December 2008 European Council in that respect.
The rapporteur for the 2009 general EU Budget, Jutta HAUG (PES, DE), said: "For me, it was particularly important to give strong financial support to the following: firstly, policies that tackle climate change, secondly, maintaining the social dimension in the context of growth for jobs, thirdly, in measures shaping globalisation, and finally in the support of small and medium-sized enterprises. Generally, the European Parliament safeguarded its priorities. Additionally, it was important for the European Parliament to finance the €1 billion for the Food Facility."
Janusz Lewandowski (EPP-ED, PL), rapporteur on the "other institutions" part of the 2009 EU Budget, stated that "there are no routine budgets and the procedure for preparing the 2009 EU budget illustrates that. We are glad that Parliament's concerns were met thus leading to a satisfactory agreement. Next year's budget is characterised by three main topics - it responds to current challenges, enhances the safety and security of our citizens and is efficiently managed".
The Chair of the European Parliament's Budgets Committee, Reimer Böge (EPP-ED, DE) said: "With this budget we are able to finance the basic needs of the European Union. We also agreed on the establishment of the Food Facility for developing countries. Other steps which we need to take now are new provisions on structural funds and the rural development plan, as well as the Economic Recovery plan. On the first, the simplification of procedure announced by the Commission will mean a request to amend the budget. As regards the recovery plan, the European Parliament is ready to open negotiations including on energy interconnections and high speed internet."
133.845.980.852 (commitments); as percentage of GNI: 1,03%
( The EP will maintain the level on non-obligatory expenditure in commitments adopted at the first reading)
116.096.062.329 (payments); as percentage of GNI: 0,894%
(agreed with the Council on 21.11.2008)
3.187.019.148 - margins (difference between Multiannual Financial Framework 2007-20013/Financial Perspectives and the annual budget commitments)
Headings' amounts:
Heading
Commitments
Payments
Margins left by EP
1a
Growth and employment: Competitiveness
11.768.997.000
11.024.385.513
3.003.000
1b
Growth and employment: Cohesion
48.426.884.669
34.975.134.166
1.115.331
2
Natural resources (including environment, fisheries, and rural development)
56.121.437.011
52.566.129.680
3.517.562.989
3a
Freedom, Security and Justice
863.925.000
617.440.000
8.075.000
3b
Citizenship
650.963.000
678.960.000
37.000
4
The EU as a global player
8.103.930.360
8.324.169.158
- 419.930.360
5
Administrative expenditure
7.700.730.900
7.700.730.900
76.269.100
6
Compensations for Bulgaria and Romania
209.112.912
209.112.912
887.088 Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 18 December)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Education
Lifelong learning: making Europe the world's leader in education
2008-12-18 - 15:38
MEPs call on the Commission to support knowledge, creativity and innovation in order to make Europe the world's leader in education and training systems in a report on lifelong learning adopted by the EP. The House approved a report by Ljudmila NOVAK (EPP-ED, SL) with 551 votes in favour, 31 against and 11 abstentions to support a better implementation of the 'Education &amp; Training 2010 work programme', which seeks to make Europe the world's main actor in education and training systems by 2010. MEPs call on Member States to effectively implement lifelong learning strategies and tools to attain this goal. The role of media literacy, foreign languages and values in lifelong learning Media literacy and ICT knowledge, especially among teachers and elderly people, should be taken into account in the promotion of lifelong learning objectives, said the Members. MEPs also agree that the knowledge of a second foreign language must be introduced as early as possible in children's education. The approved text also draws attention to the importance of including issues such as environment, human rights and European values in the different subjects. Cooperation between higher education institutions and mobility A stronger cooperation between European higher education institutions should be pursued, regarding matters such as the transference of qualifications. In addition, the text suggests that the mobility of students and teachers should be enhanced. Integration of Roma people MEPs stress the need of working on the inclusion of groups with special needs (like women, disable and elderly people) and integrating migrants and minorities, such as Roma people, in all levels of education. "Roma people should be assisted by trained staff which belong to the same minority or at least speak their native language", said the approved text. Providing education to employees and supporting entrepreneurship The motivation of workers to keep learning throughout their lives is also among the requests of the Parliament. Employers should provide their employees with education and training to achieve this objective. Members also emphasise the importance of supporting entrepreneurship through lifelong learning programmes, for instance by informing citizens on how to set up small and medium sized firms. Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 18 December)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
New employment and payment system for MEPs' assistants
2008-12-18 - 15:38
The European Parliament endorsed legislation to add-on contracts of Brussels-based MEPs' assistants to the statute for European civil servants. This new scheme, of which the outlines were set out by the European Parliament in July, is part of a larger package of measures taken by the Parliament to overhaul the entire system of employing and paying MEPs' assistants. The report, drafted by Giuseppe Gargani (EPP-ED, IT), was adopted by 598 votes in favour, 19 against and 47 abstentions. It aims at ensuring transparency and non-discrimination through a set of common rules on the system for hiring MEPs' assistants. The new regulation, once approved by the Council, will replace 27 different national systems on contractual relationships, taxation and social security with a single scheme. After the vote, the rapporteur read a joint political declaration of the European Parliament and the Council stating that the transition to the new regime will not entail an increase of the Parliament budget line. Mr Gargani also commented on the result of the vote: "I think we have reached a good compromise between the right of free choice of the Members and the need for transparency", he said. Common rules for all Brussels-based assistants Assistants based in Brussels will constitute a specific category of staff, taking into account their specific task of supporting Members in carrying out their duties. The present proposal means assistants' employment contracts will be concluded for a specific period, although all contracts will end automatically at the end of a legislature. Assistants will have similar social benefits to those of EU civil servants. Their salaries will be dependent on their grade. The contracts of, and salary payments to, the assistants will be handled by the Parliament's financial services, but the MEPs will be entirely free in their choice of assistants, the tasks to be assigned to them and the duration of the labour contracts. New rules also for assistants working in Member States The larger package of measures includes not only a European statute for assistants working in Brussels but also the handling of contracts of and payments to assistants working in the Member States by qualified and duly recognised payroll organisations in those countries. In addition, the approved text sets out that a maximum of 25% of the parliamentary assistance allowance may be used for services such as research studies or other advisory work. The legislative procedure As the statute for Brussels-based assistants entails an adaptation of the regulations covering EU civil servants and other staff, a formal legislative procedure was required. After the plenary vote, the changes will need the final approval of the Council. The aim is to have the new assistants' statute enter into force in July next year, right after the European elections, at the same time as the new statute for Members of the European Parliament. Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 16 December)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Free movement of goods
Building a genuine and transparent EU arms market
2008-12-18 - 15:38
The European Union should create a genuine single market for defence equipment. This is the aim of a directive on the transfer of defence-related products. Parliament adopted a first-reading deal which strengthens provisions to guarantee the security of transfers, notably with respect to the final recipients of products or components, inter alia to ensure that arms and other defence-related products do not reach conflict zones. In spite of coordinating efforts being undertaken between a limited number of Member States, the European defence market remains fragmented and divided. Twenty seven national licensing regimes currently exist. These regimes diverge widely in terms of procedure scope and required delays. Further, in all EU Member States, the export of defence related products (including comprehensive military equipments as well as sub-systems, components, spare parts, technologies) are subject to national licensing schemes. This patchwork of schemes not only imposes a significant administrative burden on companies, it also includes significant lead times – up to several months. These burdens are out of proportion with actual control needs: license applications for intra-Community transfers are rarely rejected. Such divergences constitute a major impediment to industrial competitiveness, and a considerable obstacle to the emergence of a European Defence Equipment Market (EDEM) as well as the functioning of the Internal Market. According to a study carried out for the European Commission in 2005, the direct and indirect cost of obstacles to intra-community transfers amounts to €3.16 billion per year. The processing of licences has a direct cost of €434 million per year while indirect costs have been estimated at €2.73 billion/year. The purpose of this proposal, therefore, is to reduce existing obstacles to the circulation of defence-related goods and services (products) within the Internal Market, and to diminish the resulting distortions of competition Defence-related products: simplifying transfer conditions The report by Heide RÜHLE (Greens/EFA, DE) focuses on simplifying and harmonising the rules for granting licences to transfer military equipment from one country to another. There are currently 27 different regimes. This patchwork of rules prevents the free movement of equipment within the EU, whether for trade, repairs, modernisation or simply for trade fairs. The new proposal creates a European system of licences which will be uniform and applicable throughout the EU. Licences will nonetheless be granted by Member States, which will be free to impose sanctions if party to whom the licence is granted fails to observe the licensing conditions. Treaty Article 296 will continue to apply. The text also stipulates that the directive shall apply without prejudice to Treaty articles 296 and 30. The text adopted by MEPs strengthens provisions to guarantee the security of transfers, notably with respect to the final recipients of products or components, inter alia to ensure that arms and other defence-related products do not reach conflict zones. Prior authorisation The transfer of defence-related products between Member States shall be subject to prior authorisation. No further authorisation by other Member States shall be required for the passage through Member States or for the entrance on the territory of the Member State where the recipient is located of defence-related products without prejudice to the application of provisions necessary for the protection of public security or public policy such as, inter alia, the safety of transport. Public policy or public security Member States may revoke withdraw, suspend or limit the use of transfer licences they have issued at any time, for reasons of protection of their essential security interests, of public policy or public security or for non-compliance with the terms and conditions attached to the licence. The report was adopted with 545 votes in favour, 66 against and 44 abstentions. Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 16 December)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Transport
Cleaning up heavy vehicle exhaust emissions: MEPs agree new Euro VI standards
2008-12-18 - 15:38
Proposed tougher limits on harmful exhaust emissions from trucks, lorries and buses, including ozone precursors such as nitrogen oxides and hydrocarbons as well as particles were backed in a compromise adopted between Parliament and Council representatives. The European Parliament adopted the compromise in Strasbourg, the new "Euro VI" regulation emission limits will apply de facto from 1.1.2014 for new vehicles, nine months earlier than the Commission proposed. The proposal concerns the so-called Euro VI regulation, laying down harmonized technical rules for trucks, lorries and buses (heavy vehicles over 2,610 kg), which all new vehicles will have to comply with in order to get the necessary type approval.
Rapporteur Matthias Groote (PES, DE) said "Euro VI is an important instrument to achieve a better air quality; it reduces particles and Oxides of Nitrogen. Since particles are responsible for more than 348 000 early deaths, I would have wished for more ambitious limit, but the packet achieved is a good compromise. We'll achieve a reduction of particles of 66 % compared to the existing limits and a reduction of Oxides of Nitrogen of80 %. Oxides of Nitrogen are dangerous for babies, children and elder people, since they lead to more ozone next to the ground". He welcomed that "the new limits will be introduced at an earlier stage which will lead to a better air quality" and added: "Air quality and quality of live will be improved through the instrument."
The new tougher emission limits (on harmful exhaust emissions, including ozone precursors such as nitrogen oxides and hydrocarbons as well as particles) are to replace both the "Euro IV" limits (which have applied since November 2006), and the "Euro V" emission limits, which will apply from October 2008.
The proposed Euro VI regulation, lays down harmonized technical rules for heavy vehicles over 2,610 kg, which all new vehicles will have to comply with in order to get the necessary type approval. The new emission limits are eventually to replace both the "Euro IV" limits (which have applied since November 2006), and the Euro V emission limits, which will apply from October 2008. The compromise broadens the scope of the regulation for certain cases if the manufacturer requests so.
Stricter limits of pollutants, no changes of Commission Proposal
The compromise backs the Commission's proposed lower limit values for damaging emissions of several pollutants (CO, THC, NMHC, CH4, NOx, NH3). For example the limit value for total Oxides of Nitrogen (NOx), will be 400 mg/kWh (80 % less compared with EURO V), and the agreed particle mass limit will be 10 mg/kWh - a 66% reduction compared with the Euro V stage limits.
According to Commissions information the new limits will also be a step forward towards global harmonisation since the limit values are similar to those of the USA.
The Commission is asked to specify - if appropriate - in addition to the limit value for total Oxides of Nitrogen (NOx), a specific limit value for Nitrogen Dioxide (NO2) . If the Commission concludes that it is appropriate to regulate the emissions of additional pollutants it shall submit a proposal to the EP and Council.
All new vehicles to comply with Euro VI standards from 1.1.2014 at the latest
The compromise will in practice require all new heavy goods vehicles to comply with the standards from 1.1.2014, nine months earlier than the Commission's proposal. Thereafter, the registration, sale and putting into service of vehicles that do not comply with the standards will be prohibited. New types of vehicles must meet the standards one year earlier. The Commission is asked to adopt the associated technical regulation by the 1 April 2010, after which manufacturers will have time to make the necessary technical changes to the vehicles.
Access to vehicle repair information and financial incentives
The compromise backs the Commission's proposal to include measures relating to access to repair information in the regulation, so as to ensure effective competition on the market in repair and maintenance services. Similar measures already exist for the relevant legislation on passenger cars (Euro 5). The compromise foresees an adaptation of those provisions to the particularities of heavy goods vehicles.
Finally, the compromise also follows the Commission's proposal to enable Member States to provide for financial incentives to accelerate the placing on the market of vehicles meeting the new requirements.
The report was adopted with 610 votes in favour, 11 against and 22 abstentions. Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 16 December)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Transport
Traffic offences: MEPs for effective cross-border enforcement
2008-12-18 - 15:38
At present, drivers committing an offence under the Highway Code in a Member State other than their own often avoid paying the penalty imposed on local drivers. The European Parliament approved legislation to ensure that drivers will be able to be identified and fined for offences they commit anywhere in the EU. Speeding, drink-driving, not wearing a seat belt and failing to stop at a red light should all be covered by the proposal. The European Parliament adopted a report by Inez Ayala Sender (PES, ES) by 594 votes in favour to 35 against and 40 abstentions.
Members agree that the current situation where drivers can often avoid penalties not only jeopardises road safety, but is also discriminatory with respect to local residents committing similar offences, who do face penalties.
A ticket from abroad on your doormat which you will have to pay
The proposal establishes an electronic system for exchange of information between Member States on offences committed. The vehicle registration number and other personal data will be transmitted to be checked once an offence is spotted. After this verification by the Member States where the vehicle is registered, the relevant national authority will send an offence notification to the owner of the vehicle, asking for the payment of the penalty. Authorities will be designated in each Member State to assist them with the application of the directive. The Parliament makes proposals to ensure the protection of personal data that will be exchanged.
What if you do not pay?
If an offender receives an offence notification, this should, as a minimum, contain the name of the authority responsible for enforcing the sanctions. It should specify the amount of the fine, possible payments procedures, by when it must be paid, the possibilities for contesting the grounds of the offence and for appealing against a decision imposing a financial penalty. Members also say that the notification should inform the holder that, if he refuses to pay, his refusal will be communicated to the authorities of his Member State for enforcement. Such enforcement will be governed by the law in the same way as for similar fines within the home Member State.
A further evaluation
The Commission was asked to submit, two years after the directive has entered into force, a report on its implementation. On the basis of that report, it should be considered whether the scope of the rules might be extended to other road traffic infringements.
EU-wide road safety guidelines
Members also insert in the Commission proposal a range of EU-wide road safety guidelines. As regards speed, they asked for increase by 30% of the numbers of speed checks in those Member States where the number of fatalities is above the EU average. As far as blood alcohol testing in concerned, Member States should, says MEPs, ensure that at least 30% of the drivers can be tested annually. As regards seat belt operations, intensive checks should be conducted at least for six weeks a year by Member States where less than 70% of the population wear seat belts, in particular where at times the non-compliance is frequent.
Information for European drivers
The European Parliament feels that, if this proposal is to be effective, road users should be informed about its rules. This information should be passed on to drivers by, for example, road safety bodies and automobile clubs.
More safety on our roads
Members believe that, by adopting these measures, a contribution will be made to more safety on our roads. The EU has set itself the ambitious objective of reducing by 50% the number of persons killed on the roads by 2010. The four offences covered by this proposal are the leading causes of road deaths: almost 75%. Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 17 December)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Development and cooperation
Development as a cross-cutting issue in post-conflict situations
2008-12-18 - 15:38
Immediate priorities in post-conflict situations are access to fresh water, food, sanitation, essential medicines and to incentivise local leaders into power-sharing, according to a report adopted today by the European Parliament. There are 42 ongoing civil conflicts around the world. Half of all countries that emerge from conflicts return to conflict within five years. MEPs call on the Commission to designate conflict prevention as a cross-cutting issue in development cooperation and to integrate conflict sensitivity and conflict analysis into existing and future policies. The report drafted by Nirj DEVA (EPP-ED, UK) believes that in post-conflict situations there should be coordination among peace-building, humanitarian aid and development activities, in accordance with the "Linking Relief, Rehabilitation and Development” (LRRD) strategic framework. MEPs also stress the need to enhance Civil-Military Coordination (CMCO); takes the view that in post-conflict situations the transition from military to civilian security must take place as soon as is practicable. MEPs also support human rights training for the army and police (including human and civil rights campaigns for effected segments of the population). There are two phases of peace building and state building: the stabilisation phase where the emphasis is on security, law and order and provision of basic services. The second phase of state-building focuses on governance and the institutions which will deliver it; with the provision that: the second phase should not take place until the country is stabilised, as institutions created before stabilisation will reflect the character of the conflict and not what the country needs for a stable and enduring peace. Small arms and light weapons A majority of victims in conflict situations are killed by small arms and light weapons (SALW) and landmines. MEPs call upon the Council and the Commission to accelerate the implementation of the European Strategy to combat illicit accumulation and trafficking of SALW and their ammunition (Court of Justice ruling of May 2008). The House stresses that "Responsibility to Protect" should be considered as a means to promote human security; by stressing that the primary responsibility for the prevention of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity against a population lies with the state itself, reinforces the responsibility of each government towards the protection of its own citizens. MEPs urge the EU and the African Union Member States to address the implementation of all warrants of arrest issued by the International Criminal Court in a consistent way in all conflict situations. Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 18 December)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-FULL DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-FULL DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081216BRI44590 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
