China "deaf"& "blind" to human rights in Darfur - Osman
Human rights
2008-12-18 - 14:28
Osman: "Darfur is worse than Rwanda" Last year's winner of the Sakharov Prize Salih Mahmoud Osman from Sudan's conflict-torn region of Darfur was in Parliament yesterday to commemorate the work of those who champion human rights. He said what is happening in Darfur is worse than Rwanda and called on China, in particular, to review its policy there.
Britain's Chief Rabbi told MEPs recently that "It takes courage to have hope". Do you see in your people that courage to hope for the future?
We should always be optimistic about the future. Though today it is very frustrating; my region Darfur is torn apart by ethnicity...More than 4 million people have been forcibly displaced, are living in camps, and are not able to go back to their homes. Even in the camps they are targeted by the Janjaweed and Government soldiers – even in broad daylight and in front of the UN and African Union forces.
What about the ceasefire?
The ceasefire is not there. Aerial bombardments continue; the government is indiscriminately bombarding villages, markets, schools, wells and killing people. This is happening in front of everybody in the world. Victims see no action by the international community to protect the innocent.
Without the help of the international community, 5 million people would not be alive today. But it's not enough to feed them in the camps; it is also about their hope to go back to their homes. By confining them to camps we are establishing ethnic cleansing. Their depopulated land is now occupied by Janjaweed coming from elsewhere.
When receiving the Sakharov prize a year ago, you said there is no peace without justice. How do you see the chances for justice in Darfur?
In Darfur we are talking about war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide...The international community said "never again" to Rwanda, but what is happening in Darfur is worse than Rwanda.
Sometimes people say to me, don't talk about justice and accountability because it will jeopardise the peace process...On the contrary, it is justice that will stop perpetrators. Without justice we establish the culture of impunity which is already there.
Justice can make a difference. Contrary to what was feared, the recent application by the prosecutor of the International Criminal Court (to bring before it members of the Sudanese government) made the situation more suitable for peace talks. For the first time the government is talking about peace initiatives and reforms to our judicial system.
Did the Sakharov prize make a difference to your work, and do you think it can help to ease the oppression of human rights defenders?
Absolutely; this prize is a great help for us human rights defenders and can actually protect us. Every recipient had the support of the citizens of the 27 countries; it will be a great support also for Hu Jia...and puts pressure on China to review its human rights record.
China has been undermining the lives of millions of people of Darfur for a long time by siding with the Sudanese government and through aerial bombardments caused by Chinese helicopter gunships. In the UN Security Council, China has blocked resolutions on Darfur.
China today has the monopoly over our resources and its economic interests are undermining basic human rights and dignity in Darfur. It has moral, legal and ethical responsibilities towards the whole international community. But instead, China turns a deaf ear and a blind eye to gross violations like genocide, war crimes and crimes against humanity in Darfur.
The people of Darfur, the survivors, are very much surprised that China is against their interests. I hope China will review its policy. The humanitarian situation in Darfur is overwhelming to the extent that everybody everywhere in the world is supportive of the case of Darfur, except China.
20081212STO44317
EN
1
PHOTO
20081217PHT45178.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
