Round-up of December Strasbourg sitting
Institutions
2008-12-22 - 04:02
The Sakharov Prize 2008 was awarded to the Chinese dissident Hu Jia In a hectic year-end session, MEPs demanded an end to national opt-outs to the 48-hour working week and backed measures to cut Europe's CO2 emissions by 2020. Also during the final sitting of the year, the parliament awarded the 20th Sakharov Prize for human rights to Chinese dissident Hu Jia in absentia.
French President Nicolas Sarkozy defended France's record during its 6-month presidency of the European Union. MEPs mainly gave Mr Sarkozy a positive response for his handling of new EU climate change legislation and the crisis in Georgia. Read more about the session below.
20081212FCS44322
Round-up of Monday's Session: working time, toy safety
Proposed EU-wide working times rules were debated Monday "The revision of this directive is worrying millions" according to Spanish Socialist Alejandro Cercas in the debate over the working time directive on Monday in Strasbourg. MEPs were divided on whether opt-outs for the 48 maximum working week should be allowed. They will vote on the issue Wednesday. MEPs also discussed new toy safety rules.
MEPs were split over the merits of protecting workers rights in the face of possible exploitation and allowing sufficiently flexibility for employers and those who wish to work long hours.
Divisions over 48-hour opt-out
Parliament's Employment Committee says the opt-out should end within 3 years. In 1993, the UK won a general opt-out clause allowing it not to apply the maximum 48-hour working week if a worker agrees to work. In other countries the opt-out applies only in some sectors.
Mr Cercas drafted Parliament's report on working time and he wants an end to the opt-out.
During the debate Portuguese José Albino Silva Peneda for the centre right EPP-ED group asked the key question: "Do we want Europe's workers to work around 8 hours per day including Saturday?"
Another issue was how to account for the time spent on getting to the workplace. Swedish Socialist Jan Andersson said: "It is not time off. We say it is working time, you've left your house and you're going to work."
Some MEPs argued that workers should be free to choose how much they want to work. British Liberal Liz Lynne said: "It is important that workers can earn overtime if they want to. On call time should be classed as working time."
Safer toys, safer kids
Chemicals and heavy metals will be kept out of toys in future. This comes after MEPs and European Ministers agreed new rules for foreign made toys.
In Monday's debate, Belgian Christian Democrat Marianne Thyssen (EPP-ED) explained the need for an update: "What is new is the measure on allergens, there will be a ban on 55 allergenic fragrances and others will only be allowed to use with the proper label."
Export rules for arms
Also on Monday MEPs debated a report on the simplification of trade with defence-related products, new regulation for the approval of cars with high emissions and EU funding for regional and social projects.
Working time directive, press release Report: Highlights of December plenary
Round-up of Tuesday: French Presidency and climate package
Sarkozy "we need a strong Europe" "I tried to move Europe, but Europe changed me," French President Sarkozy told MEPs yesterday as he wrapped up the six-month French Presidency of the Council. EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering responded by thanking Mr Sarkozy for his "display of will for a unity of Europe". The afternoon's debates focused on climate change and the energy package.
Nicolas Sarkozy said a strong Europe must be a unified Europe. Specifically commenting on the climate change agreement he said, "when we do not have unity, how will the rest of the world listen to us".
Mixed reception from MEPs
He got a mixed reception from MEPs. Socialist group leader Martin Schulz said, "Your presidency was a success because you stood up for Europe".
Liberal group leader Graham Watson said President Sarkozy's term resembled a "fairy tale" citing "riding to the rescue of our lady of Georgia" and welcoming the "Cinderella of London" to the ball".
Christian Democrat Chairman Joseph Daul paid tribute to the Presidency for the outcome of the climate change negotiations. "The EU must now lead the worldwide fight against climate change, press the worst polluters to act, and seek tangible commitments from President Obama."
Daniel Cohn Bendit, co-leader of the Greens was less enthusiastic. "The climate and economy packages are not enough," he said. "There are certain things even you cannot do."
Climate and energy package
MEPs debated the climate change and energy package in the afternoon including, renewables, greenhouse emissions, emission performance standards for new passenger cars and geological storage of carbon dioxide
MEPs adopted reports on:
Media literacy
Medals and tokens similar to euro coins
the transfer of defence-related products
Tougher limits on harmful exhaust emissions from trucks and buses.
Wednesday in Plenary: Climate change, working time, Sakharov Prize
Different reactions greet the vote on the working time directive MEPs backed new Europe-wide legislative package on climate change that fixes targets for the reduction of European greenhouse gas emissions Wednesday. They also voted to end opt-outs to EU limits on working time. At midday the Parliament's 20th Sakharov Prize was awarded to Chinese dissident Hu Jia, in absentia.
Global warming and working time
Following negotiations between EU leaders over the previous weekend, MEPs backed the climate package, which constitutes the EU's response to the challenge of global warming.
By 2020, EU countries aim to achieve a 20% reduction in greenhouse gas emissions, a 20% improvement in energy efficiency and a 20% share for renewables in the EU energy mix.
The vote on working time pitched MEPs against many EU governments, as the Parliament wants all exceptions to the 48 hours working time ended within three years. Now the issue will have to be hammered out between ministers and MEPs. Read more below.
Sakharov Prize 2008
At the award of the Parliament's annual human rights prize, President Hans-Gert Pöttering said Chinese cyber dissident Hu Jia "was nominated as the representative of the silenced voices of China and Tibet, but today we will hear that voice."
Imprisoned Hu Jia could not attend the ceremony. However, his wife Zeng Jinyan, who is under house arrest with their young daughter, gave an emotional video message to the Parliament, giving news from her husband, thanking them for their support and expressing hope for a "more open and democratic China".
Respect of fundamental rights in the EU
On Wednesday afternoon MEPs discussed human rights. A report by Italian MEP Giusto Catania's (GUE/NGL) points to many violations of fundamental rights in the world, for example serious discrimination against minorities and threats to privacy, and gives recommendations for improvement. A previous report on this issue was rejected by parliament in 2004.
Mr Catania said, "We are rightly concerned about Guantanamo, Abu Ghraib or China, but there must be consistency between our internal and external policies. We also need to pay scrutiny to human rights in the EU.".
There will be a vote on the report in January.
Thursday in plenary: Budget adopted, job mobility, human rights
MEPs agree to €1 billion in farm aid to developing countries Over €1 billion to help farmers in the developing world was officially signed off in Strasbourg on Thursday. It is part of the 2009 European Union budget agreed by MEPs. The budget also contains money for job creation and steps to alleviate climate change. MEPs also backed plans to make the EU's workforce more mobile by making it easier for people to work in other European countries.
EU budget payments less than 1% of EU income
The budget sets total spending for 2009 at €116 billion which amounts to 0.894 percent of the European Union's Gross National Income (GNI).
EU economic recovery plan
MEPs agreed to work with European governments on the €5 billion economic stimulus plan recently proposed by the European Commission.
The German Socialist who drafted Parliament's position on the 2009 budget, Jutta Haug, said, "it was particularly important to give strong financial support to the following: firstly, policies that tackle climate change, secondly, maintaining the social dimension in the context of growth for jobs, thirdly, measures shaping globalization, and finally in the support of small and medium-sized enterprises (and) the €1 billion for the Food Facility."
Job mobility
Steps to boost job mobility include efforts to build stronger links between educational systems and the labour market, proper information on mobility and improved access to more and better jobs. Problems of social and health insurance and administrative and legal obstacles to job mobility also have to be tackled.
Other issues
Parliament also adopted new rules on toy safety and European financial law and called on the Commission to improve coordination among peace-building, humanitarian aid and development activities in post-conflict situations. Debates on human rights in Zimbabwe, Nicaragua and Russia concluded the sitting.
EN
1
PHOTO
20081217PHT45182.jpg
EN
2
PHOTO
20081215PHT44502.jpg
EN
6
PHOTO
20081216PHT44767.jpg
EN
7
PHOTO
20081217PHT45176.jpg
EN
8
PHOTO
20081217PHT45180.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081215IPR44549 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A6-2008-0440 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081212IPR44327 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
