Gaza: Pöttering calls for immediate ceasefire
External relations
2009-01-08 - 09:25
Gaza grief; A women mourns a man killed by an Israeli missile strike, 5 Jan "The life of a Palestinian has the same value as the life of an Israeli" said Parliament's President Hans-Gert Pöttering as he expressed his growing concern about the conflict in Gaza. He also urged all sides to halt the violence with immediate effect.
The Palestinian Authority's top official to the EU Leila Shahid and the Israeli Ambassador to the European Union Ran Curiel will meet with Members of Parliament's Foreign Affairs Committee in Brussels on Wednesday to discuss the crisis.
"It was a big mistake that Hamas declared the end of the ceasefire. It has to be strongly criticised that Hamas recommenced rocket attacks on Israel but the massive Israeli reaction...is an escalation that is totally disproportionate" said Mr Pöttering.
He went on to say that "such military actions will not lead to a lasting peace in the region. Killing and injuring civilians in such a dimension will only strengthen Hamas and will push the people of Gaza and the Palestinians even further towards extremism".
Call for new US Administration to play a role
"I call on all parties for an immediate ceasefire, to favour dialogue and resume calm relations" said Pöttering.
He then set out what he believes to be a basis for a lasting peace. "I believe a longstanding peace solution based on a two-state-solution can only be achieved through the active involvement of all parties."
He called on the incoming US Administration and the European Union to jointly promote a comprehensive peace strategy for the Middle East.
Gaza likely to be debated by MEPs
A European Union delegation led by the Czech Republic - the current holders of the European Union - has been in the region. President Sarkozy of France and UN Middle East Peace envoy Tony Blair have also met with leading players in the crisis.
Irish Labour MEP Proinsias de Rossa is a senior member of Parliament's delegation to the Palestinian Authority. He told us that "the EU delegation should insist on a ceasefire by all sides, a withdrawal of the Israeli Defence Force from Gaza, and the lifting of the blockade on Gaza so that life for civilians can return to some kind of normality".
Polish MEP and head of the Foreign Affairs Committee Jacek Saryusz-Wolski will Chair Wednesday's meeting which brings together diplomats from both sides in Brussels.
The conflict in Gaza is almost certain to feature prominently in debates when MEPs meet in Strasbourg from 12-15 January for its first sitting of the year.
20090106STO45479 Hans-Gert Pöttering website EU statement on Middle East
EN
1
PHOTO
20090106PHT45473.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/president/defaulten.htm#press_releases
EN
3
LINK
http://www.consilium.europa.eu/ueDocs/cms_Data/docs/pressData/en/cfsp/105082.pdf
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
