Pesticides legislation: the final lap
Environment
2009-01-08 - 16:53
The EU's new legislation on pesticides could soon be in place. Next week in Strasbourg MEPs will vote on two reports endorsing the final shape of the legislation as agreed in negotiations with the Council in December. The legislation will increase the number of pesticide products available in Member States while in due course banning the use of certain dangerous chemicals in these products. Measures to ensure the safer use of pesticides in daily life will also be introduced.
Pesticides have a three-stage life-cycle: the placing on the market of new pesticide products; the day-to-day use of pesticides; and the end-of-life or "waste" stage. The legislation submitted to Parliament for approval next week, in two reports, deals only with the first two stages, as waste is covered by other EU laws.
The two pieces of legislation have attracted much media attention, partly due to the differing standpoints of various actors (pesticide manufacturers, farmers, health professionals, environmentalists), partly due to misunderstandings over the likely impact of the legislation.
20090108BKG45652
Speedier approval - but stricter standards - for new pesticides
The first report, on the placing of new plant protection products on the market, deals with a regulation revising an EU directive from 1991. Procedures for approving new pesticides will be overhauled with the aim of improving environmental and health protection, while boosting competition among manufacturers. The most dangerous pesticides will be phased out over a ten-year period, though some derogations will be allowed. Hiltrud Breyer (Greens/EFA, DE) is the MEP responsible for this report.
Substances approved at EU level, products at national level
Under the new regulation, a positive list of permitted active substances (the key ingredients of pesticides) will be drawn up at EU level, with the European Food Safety Authority playing a major role. New plant protection products (i.e. pesticides) will then be licensed at national level on the basis of this list.
A three-zone EU
In fact Member States will license pesticide products at national level or through mutual recognition. The EU will be divided into three zones (north, centre and south) with compulsory mutual recognition within each zone as the basic rule, the assumption being that agricultural, plant health and environmental conditions are comparable within each zone. This should smooth the path for manufacturers wishing to bring new products to market swiftly and increase the number of products available in Member States.
However, following pressure from MEPs, individual States will have complete flexibility to adopt additional conditions or restrictions on the use of new pesticides approved within their zone. They will even be able to refuse approval for pesticide products if they can adduce special environmental or agricultural circumstances.
The three zones are: North (Denmark, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Finland, Sweden), Centre (Belgium, Czech Republic, Germany, Ireland, Luxembourg, Hungary, Netherlands, Austria, Poland, Romania, Slovenia, Slovakia, United Kingdom) and South (Bulgaria, Greece, Spain, France, Italy, Cyprus, Malta, Portugal).
Harmful substances banned
Most active substances will receive EU approval initially for 10 years, though low-risk substances would receive a 15 year approval (in both cases renewable for 15 years).
Certain highly toxic chemicals, namely those which are carcinogenic, mutagenic or toxic to reproduction, will be banned unless exposure to them would in practice be negligible. The same applies to substances which are endocrine-disrupting, those which are persistent, bioaccumulative and toxic (PBT) and those which are very persistent and very bioaccumulative (vPvB).
For developmental neurotoxic or immunotoxic substances, higher safety standards may be required. Substances likely to be harmful to honeybees will also be outlawed.
However, if a substance is needed to combat a serious danger to plant health, it may be approved for up to five years (with five-year renewals) even if it does not meet the above safety criteria relating to human health.
Moreover, products containing certain hazardous substances ("candidates for substitution") are to be replaced if safer alternatives are shown to exist. MEPs successfully demanded a shorter deadline for their replacement, of three years rather than five.
A gradual process
Contrary to certain fears, the new legislation will only gradually supersede existing EU law. Pesticides which can be placed on the market under current legislation will remain available until their existing authorisation expires. There will thus be no sudden or large-scale withdrawal of products from the market.
Any substances already approved under the 1991 directive will remain legal until their approval period (10 years) expires. For example, substances approved in 2006 can remain on the market until 2016. Only then must they undergo the new authorisation procedure and only at that point might they be banned. There should thus be ample time for farmers to adapt by using alternatives or non-chemical methods or for the pesticides industry to devise replacements.
How many substances will be banned?
To place matters in perspective, when the existing EU directive took effect in 1991, over 800 active substances were used in pesticides. As a result of that legislation, the number has already been whittled down by around 50% without causing major problems to users. The new regulation is expected to remove only a small number of further substances from use, namely the worst remaining ones. Estimates vary as to how many this will be, but rapporteur Hiltrud Breyer believes a study by the Swedish Chemicals Agency KEMI, which was used as a basis for the compromise with the Council, gives the most realistic estimate available, with a figure of 22 existing substances likely to be outlawed eventually.
No loophole for imports
Fears have also been voiced that food imported into the EU could evade the new rules. However, food imports are already checked by the EU for pesticide residue levels. It is not in the interest of importers to risk falling foul of such inspections.
Using pesticides in forests, farms and parks: everyday practice
The second phase in the life-cycle, the way in which pesticides are used in everyday life (e.g. in farming, forestry and parks), is not yet governed by EU law. To fill this gap, a directive on the sustainable use of pesticides has been put forward with the aim of reducing the impact of pesticides used and promoting non-chemical alternatives to pesticides. The EP report on this legislation has been drafted by Christa Klaß (EPP-ED, DE).
A key feature of the directive is Integrated Pest Management: the promotion of non-chemical pest control methods such as crop rotation, to be used wherever possible as alternatives to pesticides.
In addition, Member States must adopt National Action Plans for reducing "risks and impacts" of pesticide use on human health and the environment, including timetables and targets for use reduction. MEPs dropped their demand for a specific reduction target of 50% for chemical substances of particular concern, to help secure a deal with the Council.
Aerial crop spraying will in general be banned, albeit with exceptions subject to approval by the authorities. No spraying will be allowed in close proximity to residential areas.
Member States must take measures to protect the aquatic environment and drinking water supplies from the impact of pesticides. These will include "buffer zones" around bodies of water, "safeguard zones" for any surface and groundwater used for drinking water and protected areas along roads and railways.
Parliament and Council also agreed to minimise or prohibit pesticide use in specific areas used by the general public or by vulnerable groups, such as parks, public gardens, sports and recreation grounds, school grounds and playgrounds and in the close vicinity of healthcare facilities.
New rules are also introduced on the training of pesticide users and salespeople, on handling and storage, on information and awareness-raising and on the inspection of pesticides application equipment.
The directive must be implemented by the Member States by early 2011.
Next steps
The compromise legislative texts must still be approved by an absolute majority of MEPs - i.e. 393 votes in favour - at next week's plenary vote, as they are being adopted at second reading under the co-decision procedure. If approved by the EP, they must then be endorsed by the Council, a formality since they were agreed by the Council's negotiators.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
