Moscow-Kiev gas stand off: MEPs quiz key players
Energy
2009-01-09 - 12:48
As the gas pressure drops, the political pressure on Moscow is increasing As people in 17 European countries shiver following Russia's stoppage of gas supplies running through Ukraine, MEPs on the Foreign Affairs Committee demanded a single EU energy security policy to protect supplies. The call came after meeting with senior players in the Russia-Ukraine gas crisis.
MEPs meeting Thursday also called for the EU to diversify its gas supplies and act together to deal with the crisis.
Key players, from Russia's Gazprom and Ukrainian Naftogaz, were invited to the meeting in Brussels. Oleh Dubyna, head of Naftogaz, denied that his company was siphoning off gas intended for the European market. The head of Gazprom, Alexei Miller, didn't attend the committee meeting, but had talks later with Parliament's President Hans-Gert Pöttering.
Hryhoriy Nemyria, Deputy Prime Minister of Ukraine, spoke of a "propaganda war" over the gas issue, but said "Ukraine is not willing to be part of it".
He said gas was not reaching EU countries because Gazprom cut off all the flow into Ukraine. "We want a transparent commercial solution," he said.
Call for single policy on energy security
The Polish chair of the committee Jacek Saryusz-Wolski said the EU needs a single policy for energy security, referring to Parliament's call in 2007 for this policy to avoid similar crises and to secure supply.
Of the EU countries affected by the halt to gas supplies from Russia, Bulgaria is among the hardest hit, with supplies to industrial users suspended or cut back and tens of thousands of households without central heating. About 90 schools and some companies have closed.
Romanian Socialist Adrian Severin said, "this is a political crisis with political goals. It involves the EU not only as a victim, but also as a political player."
He said that the Parliament wants to find the right solution and isn't interested in apportioning blame. MEPs warned Russia that it risks a loss of reputation if it does not live up to its commitments. Both parties were urged to reach a quick solution.
A representative for the European Commission said that a team of technical experts would be sent to Ukraine to monitor the gas situation in a matter of days. The monitors are due to arrive in Kiev on Friday.
European gas supplies will be on the agenda next week when the European Parliament meets in Strasbourg.
20090109STO45753
EN
1
PHOTO
20090107PHT45520.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
