The Week Ahead 12-18 January 2009
Institutions
2009-01-09 - 11:22
Plenary Session – Strasbourg
Gaza. President Hans-Gert Pöttering will open the session with a statement on the conflict in Gaza (Monday), ahead of a debate on the issue with Council and Commission representatives (Wednesday) . The Foreign Affairs Committee will also be discussing the situation with Commissioners Benita Ferrero-Waldner and Louis Michel (Tuesday).
Czech Presidency. The new President-in-Office of the European Council, Czech Prime Minister Mirek Topolánek, will present the programme of his country’s six-month EU presidency, in a debate with MEPs also including Commission President José Manuel Barroso. Mr Topolánek will join President Pöttering for a press conference (Wednesday).
President of Latvia. Valdis Zatlers will address a formal session of Parliament. He will also join President Pöttering for a bilateral meeting and a press conference. (Tuesday)
Ukraine/Russia gas dispute. MEPs will discuss the dispute between Ukraine and Russia over gas supplies and its impact on the EU with Commission and Council (Wednesday).
Pesticides. Parliament will discuss new rules to ensure the safety of pesticides used in Europe; an agreement with the Council is to be put to the vote at second reading (debate Monday, vote Tuesday).
Biometric passports. An update to EU laws on biometric passports will mean children must all have their own document, but those under twelve will not have their fingerprints included (debate Tuesday, vote Wednesday).
Defence procurement. Improved rules intending to create a real single market in defence products will be put to the vote (debate Tuesday, vote Wednesday) .
Euro anniversary. MEPs will mark the tenth birthday of the euro with a ceremony and debate including ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet, Eurogroup Chair Jean-Claude Juncker and Economics Commissioner Joaquín Almunia plus former French President Valery Giscard d’Estaing. There will also be a seminar with notable figures in the creation of the euro, senior financial journalists and economics students (Tuesday).
20090109IPR45772 For details of all the week's events, see "The Agenda"
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20090300AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
