Latvian President tells MEPs: "We have a common history, but our destinies have been different"
Institutions
2009-01-13 - 14:46
EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering introduced Latvian President Valdis Zatlers by saying: "For over 60 years your country awaited union with Europe. Our citizens enjoy benefits that our forefathers could only dream of. You have also felt the serious effects of the financial crisis and the gas dispute and have given your citizens cause for concern. It is during crisis that the purpose of the EU manifests.
Together we are stronger and are in a better position to defend our own stance. In June of this year we are also staging the elections.
We will move together in a democratic union and together with all our Member countries we look forward to this project of unification being brought forward by these elections. I hope your country recognises the significance of being in Europe and comes to the polling stations."
Addressing the Parliament, Latvian President Valdis Zatlers spoke of Latvia's accession into the European Union and NATO, changes he had witnessed upon entry, the financial crisis and Latvia's economy and the future of Central and Eastern European dialogue. He also made a personal thank you to the European Parliament in its official commemoration of the victims of Stalinism and Nazism.
Latvia: "there will be no room for oppression or injustice"
Mr Zatlers opened by stating what a great honour he felt, stating "I am particularly delighted to address the European Parliament in my own native language, Latvian. That is all the more true because for five years now, Latvian has been one of the official languages of the European Union."
He stressed the fact that on November 18 of last year, "Latvia celebrated the 90 th anniversary of its declaration of independence. It once again demonstrated our unbending will to live in a country that is independent, free and democratic," said Mr Zatlers.
Quoting the 1918 Latvian declaration of independence, Mr Zatlers said: “All citizens, regardless of their nationality, are asked to help, because all human rights will be guaranteed in Latvia. This will be a democratic and just country, one in which there will be no room for oppression or injustice.”
A progressive future for Latvia
Mr Zatlers recalled Latvia's Soviet past stating that "there was peace among the countries of the Eastern bloc, but it was the peace of a prison yard – peace that was achieved with tanks, repression and threats."
He paid thanks to the European Parliament in their commemoration of the victims of this turbulent chapter in history stating: "This is a declaration which reminds all of the residents of Europe of the tragic events which occurred in the history of Latvia and all of Europe."
"We have a common history, but our destinies have been different. We must look into the past so that we can better understand one another and join together in looking toward the future," said Mr Zatlers.
Latvian economic and structural gains
Mr Zatlers moved on to speak of the changes he had witnessed as a result of Latvia's entry in the EU. He spoke of strengthened democracy, improved investment opportunities, free movement of people and goods within the EU. He finished by saying the EU has given Latvia a voice. "Latvia’s voice is heard in Europe, and Europe’s voice is heard in the world. We can be proud of the fact that such a unique mechanism for co-operation is at our disposal."
Speaking today on the 10th anniversary of the Euro currency, Mr Zatlers highlighted that "(Latvia) has not been sufficiently purposeful in trying to introduce the euro. That is one of the biggest mistakes that we have made in the process of European integration. Under the conditions of a financial crisis, this becomes harshly clear," he said.
Latvian strategies- the financial crisis
Enduring a current economic slump, Mr Zatlers focussed on the financial slow-down and what was being done in his country: "The development of events toward the end of last year showed that national governments must participate more actively in economic processes. The former approach was to doze off at the steering wheel of economic development, but that was an irresponsible approach. Sadly, we woke up too late – we could see the financial mess that was an obstacle in our path, but it was too late to avoid it," said Mr Zatlers.
He continued: "The global financial crisis has affected Latvia, too. It has been said that Latvia is currently experiencing one of the most dramatic operations for the rescue of a financial system in the history of modern Europe."
Latvia as a mediator for our Eastern neighbours
Wanting to remain positive, Mr Zatlers spoke of Latvia's ability to bridge cultural divides with former satellite states on behalf of the EU: "Latvia is and will continue to be an active supporter and implementer of the European Neighbourhood Policy, helping to establish bilateral relations with the European Union’s neighbouring countries to the East.
"In making use of these advantages, Latvia maintains active political dialogue with its neighbouring countries so as to promote a better understanding of the European Union and its values, as well as to explain the goals of the European Neighbourhood Policy and Eastern Partnership."
"I am certain that Europe’s interests will be well served if the Eastern Partnership is inaugurated during the Czech presidency of the European Union."
Concerns over energy- call for a common policy
Speaking about the Czech presidency of the Council, Mr Zatlers raised the matter of energy in light of the recent gas crisis in the Ukraine.
"Let us remember what has happened in the field of energy during the last several years. Deliveries of energy supplies have been interrupted, the amount of available energy resources has declined, and prices have shifted. This has promoted a unified understanding among European Union member states of the need for a common energy policy", he said.
"The main requirement at the crossroads of energy and politics is to ensure energy supplies which are uninterrupted, sufficient, economic, sustainable and environmentally friendly. It does have to be said that the European Union’s successes in this regard have been uneven."
"We must not allow our dedication to melt away like snow in the springtime."
Visions of a unified and powerful European Union
“He who changes will survive,” the Latvian poet Rainis wrote 100 years ago, said Mr Zatlers. "The words are true today, as well. I am sure that Europe will undergo fundamental developments. It will become more powerful in its economy, welfare and mutual co-operation. It will strengthen its system of values. Each European will be proud to live in Europe whilst also belonging to his or her nation.
Unity in diversity, development, the preservation of values, and the responsibility of each citizen for his or her country and for the European community as a whole – that is the future of Europe.
20090112IPR45940 CV of Latvian President Valdis Zatlers audio, 29:01
EN
1
LINK
http://www.president.lv/pk/content/?cat_id=2192
EN
2
MULTIMEDIA
20090113MLT46050.asf
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
