UN Human Rights Council: a mixed record so far says the European Parliament
Human rights
2009-01-14 - 13:28
Parliament today approved a report welcoming the work carried out by the UN Human Rights Council in its first two years of existence but regretting that it has not yet achieved more in improving the UN's human rights record. The EU should play a more
prominent role in promoting a clear vision, political agenda and long-term strategy for the UN body, say MEPs.
The own-initiative report, drafted by Laima Andrikienė (EPP-ED, LT) and adopted today by 629 votes to 26 with 10 abstentions, sees strengths and weaknesses in the UNHRC, which superseded the UN Commission on Human Rights in 2006.
Among the difficulties, the USA's absence from the UNHRC has left the EU with a greater burden of responsibility but the EU Member States are often outvoted by the African and Asian regional groups.
Another concern is that “the principle of the universality of human rights is being increasingly put at risk” as some countries seek to restrict rights such as freedom of expression, or to “interpret human rights against a cultural, ideological or traditional background”.
Credibility of UNHRC rests on Special Procedures
Special Procedures is the name given to a mechanism for monitoring human rights violations in specific countries or examining a global human rights issue. The Andrikiene report argues that "the credibility and effectiveness of the UNHRC in the protection of human rights rests on cooperation with Special Procedures and their full implementation" and it condemns “the efforts made by several UNHRC Members to limit the independence and efficiency" of such procedures.
The report also recognises the value of the Universal Periodic Review mechanism, which in principle assesses the human rights performances of all UN states, but "denounces the use of political alliances to shield certain States from scrutiny". The case of Tunisia is highlighted.
In addition, the report highlights the importance of civil society organisations in the work of the UNHRC and calls on EU Member States and other donors to support them. And MEPs voice strong backing for the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights.
EU must take a stronger lead
Some EU achievements at the UNHRC are highlighted, such as its call for special sessions on Darfur, Myanmar and the East of the Democratic Republic of Congo, but overall the report regrets "the rather defensive attitude adopted by the EU in the UNHRC, in particular its reluctance to put forward resolutions on country situations". The EU and its Member States are urged to make better use of their potential influence as the leader of a group of democratic countries with solid human rights records.
According to rapporteur Laima Andrikienė, "the EU has been a strong supporter and advocate of the establishment of the UNHRC, which is a testing ground of the EU's commitment to effective multilateralism." However, she highlighted the report's conclusion that "the EU must have a clear vision, political agenda and long-term strategy as regards the functioning of the UNHRC as well as the activities of EU Member States within that body, especially as regards the review of the UNHRC to be undertaken in 2011".
20090113IPR46058 Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 14 January)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
