MEPs debate the Czech Presidency with PM Topolánek
European Council
2009-01-14 - 11:23
The European Parliament held a wide ranging debate in Strasbourg with the incoming Czech Presidency. MEPs debated the priorities of the presidency with Czech Prime Minister Mirek Topolánek: Economy, Energy and the European Union in the World and more specifically the Russia/Ukraine-EU gas crisis and the situation in Gaza. The economic crisis and progress on the Lisbon Treaty also featured prominently in the debate.
EP President Hans-Gert PÖTTERING introducing Prime Minister TOPOLÁNEK recalled the Czech Republic's transformation from communism to membership of the EU. He also pointed out that the Czech Republic was the second Member State (after Slovenia) from the 2004 enlargement to hold the EU Council Presidency offering the Czech Presidency the full support of the European Parliament.
Czech Prime Minister - Presidency of the Council
Czech Prime Minister and President in-Office of the EU Council , Mirek TOPOLÁNEK emphasised "the Czech question is a European question " and his belief in the Europe of freedom, rights, ideas and rules.
2009 will be a year of various significant celebrations: five years since the largest expansion in 2004 reunifying a previously divided continent, 20 years since the fall of the Iron Curtain, 30 years since the first direct elections to the European Parliament - the only directly-elected body in the EU. 2009 will also mark 60 years of NATO.
The Czech Presidency Priorities are the three "E"s: Economy, Energy and European Union in the world. Current events also immediately prioritise the two "G"s - Gas and Gaza . "Our motto is a Europe without Barriers but also a Europe of Rules."
On the economy, the Presidency will press for the full implementation of the conclusions of the Declaration of the G20 Summit in November 2008 and the conclusions of the European Council from December 2008. There will be a review of directives on capital adequacy, the completion of talks on the directive regulating insurance, a regulation on the activities of rating agencies and a directive on electronic money institutions. We will press for a review of the regulation on payments in Euros, and for the timely and thorough implementation of the road map of the Economic and Financial Affairs Council passed in response to the crisis on the financial markets. In relation to the European Economic Recovery Plan, the Presidency will place emphasis on its insertion in the framework of the Lisbon Strategy : "After short-term tools for strengthening economies, it will be time for tools of medium- and long-term structural reform" . An example of these important structural reforms is the Common Agricultural Policy.
We will press for full assertion and exercise of the four basic freedoms on which the EU is founded. "To these I would add a " fifth freedom" – the free movement of knowledge " something which has always characterised the best of Europe since the Middle Ages, a form of universalism.
The Czech presidency will continue with efforts to provide secure, competitive and sustainable energy for Europe with an additional interest in diversifying supply and transport routes including serious consideration of the development of safe nuclear energy . This Energy priority is "inseparably tied to climate protection policy ". In this area, the Presidency will try to achieve a globally acceptable agreement on the setting of reduction commitments after 2012, "which especially means getting the USA, India and China on board."
In relation to Europe in the world , the new escalation of tension between Israel and Hamas requires not only an active approach from the EU itself, but also coordination with important global and regional players.
The eastern partnership, Transatlantic relations, partnership with Russia, enlargement covering the countries of the Western Balkans and Turkey, the southern dimension of the European neighbourhood policy and also internal security of the EU including further progress on Schengen are all important ongoing priorities.
There are further key issues facing the EU in next six months: Elections 09, the start of discussions about the new form of the European Commission, the Irish position on the Lisbon Treaty. "I am convinced that it is necessary to carry out these talks sensitively and with respect to the sovereignty of Irish citizens. If a referendum on the Lisbon Treaty were to take place in the Czech Republic, according to all indications, it would also not pass. It is necessary to find a solution that a majority of the Irish will be able to accept."
Mr Topolánek concluded that the Czechs are in the deepest part of the continent of Europe, where influences from all its parts converge. "We are at the crossroads of spiritual currents, and it follows that it is our mission to mediate, and mainly to mediate between the east and west. These words are also inspirational at the beginning of 2009, when the task standing before the Czech Republic is to moderate the debate in the European Union for half a year."
European Commission
Speaking of two issues that had faced the incoming Czech presidency, the gas supply crisis and Gaza, Commission President José Manuel BARROSO said "we must show that the EU can face up to these things" and, referring to the European elections in June 2009, "we need to show Europeans why they should play a role in electing the next Parliament".
In 2008, Europe had demonstrated it could take difficult decisions, on climate change and in response to the financial crisis. It had contributed to resolving the conflict between Russia and Georgia and dealt with many other issues. "We must not lose momentum in 2009", he continued. "Europe must show leadership" at the forthcoming G20 meeting. Other issues on the agenda included justice and civil liberties, climate change, a budget review, measures on the financial crisis, the internal energy market, telecoms and road transport. "These are areas where the EU can make a real difference", he stressed.
Returning to the gas supply problem with Russia and Ukraine, he described the situation as "unacceptable and incredible", as supplies had not resumed a day after an agreement to do so was signed. He added "The Commission wishes to send a clear message to Moscow and Kiev. If the agreement is not honoured, the Commission will advise companies to take the suppliers to court. And it will advise Member States to look for alternative supplies. We will soon see if there is just a technical hitch or a lack of political will". At issue was whether Russia and Ukraine could be regarded as "reliable partners". The Commission would in any case bring forward measures to boost the internal energy supply market.
The economic situation was worsening but we must not be fatalistic, said the Commission president. The top priority must be the recovery plan agreed by the Commission and Council. Deploying 1.5% of the EU's GDP would be "significant, if it is well spent". The plan would have a "particular focus on energy supply connections".
Political group speakers
The leader of the EPP-ED group, French MEP Joseph DAUL , believed that the big issues faced by the incoming Czech presidency - the economic downturn, the gas supply crisis and the Middle East - showed that "a united front is the only attitude we can adopt".
On the gas supply issue, he said "we cannot accept that the EU Member States are hostage to this dispute", adding "we need a European energy policy to reduce our dependence".
Turning to the Israel-Palestine crisis, Mr Daul argued that Europe needs "a strategic commitment" to this part of the world. "Are we ready to deploy military means - for peace, not war - as well as financial resources?" he wondered.
Lastly, regarding the economic crisis, he called on the Czech presidency, with the Commission, "to define rules for economic operators" and stressed the need for "a world supervisory system for markets". "We are counting on you to be decisive in this period", he said.
On behalf of the PES group, Martin SCHULZ (DE) argued "what we do in the next six months will be decisive for the European elections". He had been doubtful about some statements made by the Czech presidency in its opening weeks, for example, stressing that "Israel has a right to defend itself" and, on the gas dispute, that "we cannot be the intermediaries", but fortunately those errors had been corrected.
While acknowledging that the economic crisis was "not a defeat for capitalism", Mr Schulz believed "it is a defeat for capitalists". "There were those who in the past said there was no need for rules and regulations" but fortunately the Czech prime minister had now "seen the light" on this matter.
Concluding, the Socialist leader said "we are only strong if we are not divided" and he regretted that differing views had been expressed by EU leaders on the Israel-Palestine crisis and on the gas dispute. "We need a united front" and the Lisbon Treaty would provide a basis for this.
Graham WATSON (ALDE, UK wished the Czech Presidency every success and stated that the experience of the Czech Republic proves the power of markets to lift people out of recession. Referring to the Presidency's work programme, he pointed out that "these are hard times for Europe's citizens ..[..].. your recipe will be contested." He called for an end to the EU's 'umbilical energy dependence' and referred to the implications of the blame game between Russia and the Ukraine. Mr Watson commented that moves to reopen nuclear reactors in Eastern Europe were like the "plot of a Marx brothers film."
He asked the Czech Prime Minister why his country had "delayed yet again ratification of the Lisbon Treaty? ...[and].. why [the Czech Republic is] building a ballistic missile system on European soil?" On the subject of Gaza, Mr Watson pointed out that the European Parliament will never unite around a common position if we seek to apportion blame. In conclusion, he quoted the Czech proverb, 'protect yourself not by fences but by your friends' and reminded the Prime Minister that "this is a union of friends ..[..], equals and partners."
Brian CROWLEY (UEN, IE) began by saying that better political relations need to be created between the EU and the US and the he hoped that the Czech Presidency would deal with this in the six months ahead. He referred to the "major challenges facing us all" and to the "very crucial time" at which the Czech Presidency takes over leadership of the EU. He asked the Presidency to guarantee that the EU has "a clear and stronger voice." Mr Crowley paid tribute to both the Czech Presidency and Commissioner Barroso for the 'decisive' action taken on the gas dispute. He pointed to the importance of expanding this idea of an Eastern partnership on the basis of our interdependence on energy and on the economy.
In conclusion, Mr Crowley stated that "we now look to you to give us the next step to where the EU must move" and he quoted John F. Kennedy, who said that "we stand today on the edge of a new frontier but the new frontier of which I speak is not a set of promises, it's a set of challenges."
On the subject of Gaza, Monica FRASSONI (Greens/EFA, IT) pointed out that the EU institutions "should be trying to stop those bombs from falling." She criticised the Czech Presidency's programme as "strongly marked by a rather old-fashioned vision." She used terms like 'old hat' and stated that "I think that you're not really interested in policies, laws or social instruments to respond to the real needs of the citizens of Europe." Ms Frassoni went on to say that "you're out of kilter as far as climate change is concerned" and that the Presidency's approach to the Barcelona process is 'slightly macho', as it seems to be telling women to go back home.
On the subject of immigrants, Ms Frassoni said that "you seem to see them purely from a security point of view." She criticised the Presidency for "not focusing on the consistency and cohesion of our Union" and for not mentioning anti-discrimination. Ms Frassoni said that "it boils down to a programme which sees a world full of danger." She went on to say that energy security and solidarity need to be achieved through 'powerful and concerted action. She asked the Presidency to try and win over the colleagues at the Spring European Council on "the need to make the energy goal binding." Ms Frassoni concluded on the subject of the Treaty of Lisbon, pointing out that is "far from perfect, but very strange that [the Czech Republic hasn't] ratified it yet." She asked the Prime Minister to comment on this.
Miloslav RANSDORF (GUE/NGL, CZ) said we must stop with dogma and prejudice. The Czech Presidency instead should aim for a social economy focussing on innovation which would enable the EU to find a way out of the economic crisis. We need the capacity to change and to be creative, he said. The future belongs to those who are capable of change. He said it was important that we build a Europe that will no longer suffer from an inferiority complex vis-à-vis the USA and welcomed the ambitious goals of the Czech Presidency.
Speaking on behalf of IND/DEM, Vladimír ŽELEZNÝ (CZ) said that an "unfavourable, gloomy picture" has been painted, in particular by the French press, of the Czech presidential term. Yet, against this "bleak" backdrop, the Czech presidency has "reasonable aims and priorities and it will be successful", he said, adding that the Czechs "have a popular and competent President who opposes the Lisbon Treaty". The presidency will prove that a small country can be competent, "and can organise a presidency without being egotistic or using hysterical PR," he concluded.
A non-attached MEP, Jana BOBOŠÍKOVÁ (CZ) said she is proud of the Czech Presidency's dealing of the gas crisis, and hopes that the presidency can demonstrate the same determination when negotiating on the Lisbon Treaty. "You can write history," she said. "You have the chance and power to declare that the Lisbon Treaty is dead after the Irish referendum. You have the opportunity to propose a new visionary document that includes a real common denominator of the Member States interests." This will not prove popular among heads of states, she said, but "you will gain the respect of citizens, who are ignored too often".
British and Irish speakers
Congratulating the Czech President, Timothy KIRKHOPE (EPP-ED, UK). said it is vital that the Russian Government understands that holding nations to ransom is no way to conduct business in the modern world. In relation to the economic crisis, he said that any regulatory changes should be proportionate and sensible. On the future of the transatlantic alliance, he said, it is vital to our security and our prosperity.
Kathy SINNOTT (IND/DEM, IE) said that the Czech Presidency had spelled out an ambitious programme. Such a programme, she said, requires respect between Member States. It also requires respect for the peoples of those Member States to have any hope of success.
Andrew DUFF (ALDE, UK) put four questions to the President-in-Office. "If, as you said, you find the Treaty of Lisbon worse than the Treaty of Nice, why did you sign it? Secondly, will you please confirm that the Czech Republic will not be tempted to follow the Irish example and seek to pull apart the Lisbon package? Thirdly, do you not see a contradiction in coming here and praising the legitimacy of the Parliament but declining to support the Treaty which so greatly increases its powers? Fourthly, can the Czech presidency really have authority unless and until the Czech Republic ratifies the Treaty?"
Noting that the Czech Presidency states that it is doing all it can to enlarge the EU and to admit Croatia, Gary TITLEY (PES, UK) questioned why then can it not ratify the Lisbon Treaty? "After all, the Czech presidency agreed to it and, therefore, should fulfil its obligations." What we need at the moment, Mr Titley said, is leadership, and "what I have seen so far has taught me that the sooner we get a full-time president of the Council the better, because it is only coherent European action that will deliver security to Europe, will deliver world influence and deliver economic recovery. "
Proinsias DE ROSSA (PES, IE) said he was appalled by the comments made earlier by the President-in-Office, that the Lisbon (Treaty) is worse than (the Treaty of) Nice. That is not only untrue, it is divisive and it is a breach of trust. Ireland, he said, will probably have a referendum on a clarified Lisbon Treaty in the autumn of this year. Mr De Rossa said he will work hard to ensure a positive outcome for Ireland and Europe. "Your comments here today have made that task much harder. If the referendum fails, Sir, you will not be thanked by the vast majority of Europeans".
John BOWIS (EPP-ED, UK) hoped that the President in-Office will have a particular insight into the struggle in Gaza and understand the pain and the frustration of the people of Gaza and the people of Israel. He hoped that a stop would be put to the slaughter that is going on there. Other items for the agenda include climate change, cross-border health, free movement of knowledge, especially in the area of medical science and mental health.. With regard to the mental health pact for the EU, he hoped that the President-in-Office would ensure it is on the agenda as an item to be furthered because it is to benefit those people who are vulnerable and need support.
20090113IPR46091 Czech Presidency of the EU audio, 28:44 - Czech PM Mirek Topolanek - EN audio, 12:28 - Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso - EN audio, 33:00 - Political groups - EN
EN
1
LINK
http://www.eu2009.cz/en/default.htm
EN
2
MULTIMEDIA
20090114MLT46180.asf
EN
3
MULTIMEDIA
20090114MLT46178.asf
EN
4
MULTIMEDIA
20090114MLT46188.asf
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
