Czech PM Topolánek on his new European role
Institutions
2009-01-15 - 13:31
Czech PM Mirek Topolánek surveys the European scene in Strasbourg Czech PM Mirek Topolánek is going to have a busy 6 months. He takes over the rotating EU Presidency in the midst of an international crisis in the Middle East and an economic slump in Europe. On Wednesday 14 January he told MEPs economics and energy would be his focus. After Members gave him the traditional "grilling", we interviewed him before he left Strasbourg.
The 52-year old former engineer has led the centre-right ODS government in Prague since September 2006.
He faces the tough task of taking over the EU Presidency after the energetic efforts of France's Nicolas Sarkozy during what was seen as an effective 6 months.
We put a few questions to Mr Topolánek - which means "small Poplar tree" in English.
Mr Topolánek, how does it feel to hold the EU Presidency?
To paraphrase Czech playwright Karel Čapek, "It is a whole plethora of feelings" but primarily one of responsibility. Especially because we will be representing for six months half a billion people, we will have to weigh up every word and balance the opinions of individual nations and interest groups.
However, this search for balance must not become like jogging on the same spot. The European Union cannot afford that in the present situation. I hope that we have already demonstrated with the solution of the gas crisis that this is not a cliché, but a definition of our approach.
How do you perceive the role of the Czech Republic as a global player?
For six months our country is the centre point of European political power and its role as a global actor stems from this. It does not emanate from any ambition to push through national interests, or from a desire to move the world.
From my point of view we should be primarily a team player, who is ready to be always where they are needed and who reminds everyone at the same time of the rules of our common game.
You have had to deal with the Russia-Ukraine gas dispute. Does the EU understand Russia ?
I believe that many Europeans have not understood Russia up to now. In this respect, the role of those countries of the former Eastern bloc is relatively unique, because we have experience with Russia and we also know the Russian mentality. Therefore we can be useful when dealing with Russia. This is also because with the Russians themselves we do not have a preconceived negative relationship.
20090115STO46394 MEPs debate the Czech Presidency with PM Topolánek CZ Presidency Topolanek.cz
EN
1
PHOTO
20090113PHT46087.jpg
EN
3
LINK
http://www.eu2009.cz
EN
4
LINK
http://www.topolanek.cz
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20090113IPR46091 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
