Restoring stability in the Horn of Africa: MEPs debate a boost to peacekeeping mission
External relations
2009-01-15 - 12:52
In a resolution that seeks to restore peace and stability in the Horn of Africa, MEPs demand the reinforcement of the peacekeeping mission in Somalia and the deployment of a UN stabilisation force in Darfur to join forces with the African Union troops already deployed in the region. MEPs also highlight the unresolved border conflict between Ethiopia and Eritrea and between Eritrea and Djibouti, and demand that human rights and freedom of the press be observed in these countries.
The unsolved border conflicts between Ethiopia and Eritrea and between Eritrea and Djibouti are negatively affecting peace and security in the Horn of Africa, says Parliament. The situation in Somalia has deteriorated into "one of the world's worst humanitarian and security crises", and the situation in Sudan is a major risk factor for security in the region.
MEPs call on the government of Ethiopia to formally endorse the Boundary Commission's demarcation by map coordinates between Eritrea and Ethiopia as final and binding, in accordance with the internationally brokered 'Algiers Agreements'. They believe that projects of common interest, such as energy supply, cross border trade and ports, could trigger functional cooperation between the two countries.
Reinforcement of peacekeeping operations
Parliament also urges the reinforcement of the African Union Mission to Somalia (AMISOM) and the deployment of the UN stabilisation force in a timely manner as soon as political and security conditions allow. Since November 2008, Ethiopia has been progressively withdrawing its troops from Mogadishu and all other locations in Somalia where they are still present.
Turning to the situation in Darfur, MEPs call on the Council and the international community to step up their support for implementation of the north-south Comprehensive Peace Agreement in Sudan and to secure the full deployment of UNAMID, the United Nations-African Union Mission in Darfur.
An EU Special Representative/Envoy to the Horn of Africa region should also be nominated by the Council, Parliament says.
Deterioration of humanitarian situation in Somalia
The resolution condemns the "ever more frequent attacks on humanitarian workers over the last few months, which have gravely constrained aid operations and have helped worsen the humanitarian situation in Somalia".
The Ethiopian government is urged to grant full access for humanitarian organisations to the Ogaden region of Somalia, and to provide all necessary conditions to enable aid to reach its beneficiaries throughout the region.
Violations of human rights in Somalia include the kidnapping of two Italian Catholic nuns, Maria Teresa Olivero and Caterina Giraudo. The EP calls on the Somali Transitional Federal Government to condemn the kidnapping of the two nuns and to take action to speed up their release and prevent further kidnappings.
Political and press freedoms must be guaranteed
Pointing to the lack of guaranteed freedom of the press, Parliament expresses its deep concern at the continuing imprisonment in Eritrea of the Swedish-Eritrean journalist Dawit Isaak, who has been held in jail since his arrest in September 2001 without having been tried by a court. The EP demands the immediate release of Dawit Isaak and other imprisoned journalists. 17 Similarly, MEPs call on the Eritrean government to make a public declaration as to the whereabouts of the prisoners and their state of health and to either charge and immediately bring before a court of law all political detainees and imprisoned journalists, or release them immediately and without conditions.
MEPs also express their outrage at the imprisonment of the leader of the opposition party Unity for Democracy Justice (UDJ), Birtukan Midekssa, demanding her immediate and unconditional release.
The resolution was adopted by 570 votes to 11 with 27 abstentions.
20090114IPR46205 Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 15 January)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
