Q&A with Latvia’s President Valdis Zatlers
Institutions
2009-01-19 - 13:44
Recession and Latvia's 100% dependence on Russian gas are causing concern in Riga When we interviewed Latvia’s President Valdis Zatlers on 13 January two key issues were on his mind: The importance of Latvia joining the euro to weather the financial storm and a common European energy policy. He had earlier told MEPs that all of Europe shared "a common history but our destinies have been different".
Mr Zatlers was invited to Strasbourg to speak to MEPs about national and European issues. Elected in 2007 by Latvia’s Parliament, the former orthopaedic doctor has a term of four years.
His visit comes at a difficult time for Latvia’s 2.2 million people. Years of economic growth have given way to recession, inflation and rising employment. Last week there were riots in the capital Riga due to the growing crisis.
Q. W hat difference EU membership had played in dealing with the present economic crisis ?
VZ : Being in the EU has played an important role during the financial crisis – it is essential that Latvia is not left alone in this situation.
In the current circumstances the euro has become one of the major strategic objectives to promote the long-term stability of the Latvian economy and financial system. The introduction of the euro in 2012 is set as medium-term priority.
What are your feelings on the current Russia-Ukraine gas dispute? (Latvia is 100% dependent on imports of Russia gas) VZ: The recent events show that the importance of energy security issues is increasing every day and they cannot be disconnected from the situation in the world. Energy policy is no longer just a national level issue, a common EU policy and the development of a truly integrated and diversified European energy market is necessary.
Polls put support for Latvia’s EU membership at just 27%. Why is this?
VZ: The support for the European Union and support for the government has always had a strong correlation. If people are not satisfied with their economic situation, they are also dissatisfied with the political direction and with the EU more generally. In addition, Latvian’s think that the amount of available information about the EU is not sufficient.
Here I see a major role for the European Parliament, as it is a direct link between the European public and the European Union. MEPs are the ones who can explain Europe's role best.
What are your expectations from the June 2009 European elections?
VZ: I am optimistic. I believe that the European Parliament's elections will give an impulse to MEPs to work more with their voters. It will also allow people to be more active in understanding the European Union's role in their lives.
I believe that the MEPs of the next parliamentary term will have an even greater responsibility than now as the European Parliament's role and functions will expand if the Lisbon treaty is adopted.
20090113STO46005 Latvian President tells MEPs: "We have a common history, but our destinies have been different" Website of the Latvian President
EN
1
PHOTO
20090113PHT46081.jpg
EN
3
LINK
http://www.president.lv/?lng=en
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20090112IPR45940 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
