Eyewitnesses in Gaza
External relations
2009-01-21 - 17:14
During a ceasefire on 11 January a group of MEPs visited Gaza (Photo: Véronique De Keyser MEP) After 3 weeks of fighting and over 1,300 dead, Gaza is once again open to journalists and visitors. In the midst of the fighting on 11 January, the UN helped a group of MEPs enter Gaza at the Rafah crossing to see for themselves what was happening. They share some of their experiences below. On 15 January the European Parliament adopted a resolution calling for an immediate ceasefire.
Spanish Green David Hammerstein said, "we were struck by the destruction of all public buildings, a total breakdown of daily services and clear signs of humanitarian crisis. I can still see the big eyes of dozens of beautiful children crowded around us at the UN schools where they had taken refuge from the bombs that exploded nearby, Also the desperation of young mothers crying out for help with babies in their arms."
UN staff praised
He praised "the incredibly heroic work of the UN staff, both foreign and locals, who tirelessly work to help people in midst of very dangerous circumstances. Everyone seemed very happy to see us as we were the only European representatives to visit Gaza during the conflict. When the first explosion went off a few hundred meters away our instinct was to look for cover but we were told not run or panic. In any case, there was no safe place to go to."
On what we the wider international community could do he was clear: "Europe should condition its future relations with Israel to the regular opening of its crossings with Gaza. The present situation of blockade is an illegal exercise of collective punishment as affirmed by the European Parliament resolution adopted last week."
"Suddenly there was a huge bang..."
British Liberal Democrat Chris Davies, in his blog, described being driven into Gaza in a UN convoy during the lull in the fighting and visiting the compound of a UN distribution centre. "Suddenly there was a huge bang; the ground shook and so did my stomach. An Israeli blast during a ceasefire. It may have been 600-700 metres away but it felt bloody close! What must this be like for people who really are close? Allegedly, we learnt later, it was a response to Hamas rocket attacks." Later he spoke about leaving a primary school used as a shelter: "We walked out of the building into the throng of excited kids, mostly 7-11 year olds. I was struck by how many made 'V for Victory' gestures with their fingers. Do the Israelis really believe that bombing urban communities and terrorising their populations is going to bring them security?"
MEPs describe "carnage"
Speaking to the press, Italian MEP Luisa Morgantini of the GUE/NGL group said: We saw houses burned to the ground, cars on fire and rubble everywhere, also near to the UNRWA school that had been seriously damaged."
We asked Belgian Socialist Véronique De Keyser for her impressions of Gaza. "Schools, hospitals and mosques had been bombarded. What happened in Gaza is carnage. The hardest thing was to leave people trapped there, subject to incessant bombardment."
Parliament calls for ceasefire and dialogue
In a Parliamentary Resolution adopted on 15 January MEPs reiterated their support for UN resolution which calls for: "the withdrawal of the Israeli troops, the sustained re-opening of the crossing points, the lifting of the blockade and the prevention of smuggling and of illicit trafficking in arms and ammunition".
As the fighting raged, MEPs called "in the strongest terms on the Israeli authorities to allow unimpeded access to humanitarian assistance and aid to the Gaza Strip."
The Resolution called on Israel "to fulfil its obligations under international law and international humanitarian law; on Hamas to end rocket attacks and to assume its own responsibilities by committing itself to a political process aimed at restoring inter-Palestinian dialogue and contributing to the ongoing process of negotiation".
Finally it urged the EU to step up cooperation with the US Administration to bring about a negotiated truce.
20090115STO46441 Chris Davies Véronique De Keyser David Hammerstein European Parliament calls for an immediate and permanent ceasefire and a negotiated truce Luisa Morgantini Resolution: Situation in the Gaza Strip
EN
1
PHOTO
20090120PHT46682.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.chrisdaviesmep.blogspot.com/
EN
3
LINK
http://www.vdekeyser.be/
EN
4
LINK
http://www.davidhammerstein.com/
EN
6
LINK
/members/expert/alphaOrder/view.do?language=EN&id=4453
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20090113IPR46099 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2009-0025 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
