Improving EU labour market access for the Roma
Social policy
2009-01-22 - 11:08
Educating young people should be a priority in combating poverty and social exclusion of the Roma, said EP Employment and Social Committee MEPs in an own-initiative report calling for an overall strategy to integrate the Roma community into the European Union.
The Roma are the European Union's largest minority. They suffer many forms of discrimination, a higher rate of poverty and a lower standard of living than the EU average, stresses the report by Magda Kósáne Kovács (PES, HU) on "the social situation of the Roma and improving their access to the labour market in the EU".
"Whereas the improvement of the social and economic situation of the Roma was a significant consideration in the enlargement process, progress has generally been limited", MEPs observe.
Education: a priority
Young Roma people tend to leave school relatively early, "which damages their personal education, integration on the labour market", and compromises their education, integration and opportunities on the labour market" and " although the proportion of Roma young people in secondary and higher education has increased in certain Member States, their level of qualifications still remains far below the European average", note MEPs .
Moreover, the unequal access to services and socio-economic disadvantages facing Roma children in practice put quality education out of their reach and so affect their chances on the labour market and their integration. The committee therefore stresses the need for targeted education policies which address Roma families and encourage active participation.
Furthermore, to help long-term unemployed people to return to work, MEPs call on the EU and Member States to put in place an integrated approach that addresses all aspects of their deprivation. Special attention should be paid to women, who are often actors in the hidden economy and have a very low employment rate.
Combating discrimation and stigmatisation
A majority of committee MEPs welcomed a proposal for a comprehensive new directive to combat discrimination and considered that the Commission should draw up programmes to eliminate discrimination and stigmatisation of the Roma.
MEPs also ask the Commission to assess the impact of existing policy instruments on the Roma and to develop a coherent EU political strategy.
They recommend that Member States create an EU level expert group including Roma representatives to co-ordinate Member States' Roma strategy and the use of EU funds for its promotion.
Procedure: own-initiative - Committee vote: 42 in favour, 3 against and 0 abstentions - Plenary vote: February II - Brussels 2009-01-19 Commission de l'emploi et des affaires sociales Présidence Jan ANDERSSON PSE SE
20090120IPR46698 Employment and Social Affairs Committee web site
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=EMPL
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
