Highlights of the February Strasbourg plenary session 2-5 February 2009 / Change to the agenda case of Cesare Battisti added
Institutions
2009-02-02 - 17:21
The highlights of the plenary session are set out below. At the opening, MEPs voted in favour of UEN proposal to replace the debate on the Philippines, (Thursday), with a debate on Brazil's refusal to deport Cesare Battisti to Italy, where he has been convicted of murder and sentenced to life in prison. Brazil has given Battisti political asylum, whereas the Italian foreign minister has said it is not acceptable for Brazil to treat Italy as a country which does not respect human rights.
Selected highlights of the Strasbourg plenary session 2-5 February 2009
President of Palestinian Authority to address MEPs
Crackdown on employers of illegal immigrants
Energy security blueprint for the EU's future energy strategy
Future policy goals on climate change
Resettlement of Guantanamo prisoners
Aid to the automobile sector
The use of PCB waste oils in an Irish food recycling plant
President of Palestinian Authority to address MEPs The President of the Palestinian National Authority, Mahmoud ABBAS , will address a formal sitting of the House on Wednesday 4 February, at a time when the world's eyes are on the events in Gaza. Mahmoud Abbas, also known as Abu Mazen, was elected President of the Palestinian National Authority (PNA) on 15 January 2005, having been named chairman of the Palestinian Liberation Organization (PLO) in November 2004 following the death of Yasser Arafat. A founder member of the Fatah movement, Mr Abbas was widely regarded as the architect of the Oslo peace process. Crackdown on employers of illegal immigrants The House will vote on a first reading agreement reached with the Council on the "sanctions directive", under which employers of illegal immigrants would be penalised while the immigrants themselves would be granted legal conditions of employment. MEPs are calling for criminal law sanctions in the most serious cases and want to make companies responsible for the actions of their subcontractors. Energy security blueprint for the EU's future energy strategy A joint debate on energy policy will take place on Monday, 2 February on a report drafted by Anne LAPERROUZE (ALDE, FR) on 2nd Strategic Energy Review and an Oral Question on the challenge of energy efficiency through information and communication technologies. Drawing on lessons from the recent gas supply crisis, the committee's own-initiative report sets out wide-ranging recommendations for the EU's future energy policy. It advocates emergency action plans, more grid interconnections among Member States and new climate targets to be achieved by 2050, including raising the share of renewables to 60% of total consumption. Resettlement of Guantanamo prisoners The Council and Commission will make statements on the resettlement of Guantanamo prisoners. The Council Presidency has warmly welcomed the decision of the President of the United States, Barack OBAMA to sign executive orders leading to the closure of the Guantanamo detention camp. During this legislative period, MEPs repeatedly called on the US Administration to close the Guantánamo Bay detention facility. The House will also vote on a resolution on this topic. Situation in Kosovo MEPs will debate the situation in Kosovo after hearing statements from the Council and Commission. A resolution to be voted on in Strasbourg and drafted by Joost Lagendijk (Greens/EFA, NL) welcomes the Serbian government's agreement to the deployment throughout the territory of Kosovo of the European Union Rule of Law (EULEX) mission in Kosovo, one of the largest civilian missions ever launched under the European Security and Defence Policy (ESDP). Climate Change Committee sets out future policy goals MEPs will be debating and voting on Parliament's Temporary Committee on Climate Change final recommendations for the EU's future integrated policy on climate change. MEPs in the committee take as a basis the EU objective to keep the global average temperature increase below 2°C and call for a target of a 25-40% reduction in greenhouse gas emissions to be achieved by 2020. They recommend detailed measures to be taken in the key economic sectors. MEPs in the committee are concerned that "climate change is both more rapid and more serious in terms of its adverse effects than was previously thought". The effects of the financial crisis on the automobile industry On Wednesday afternoon, MEPs will debate the effects of the financial crisis on the automobile industry after hearing statements from the Council and Commission. Ministers have expressed deep concern about the serious situation that the sector is facing at present, putting at risk a very significant number of jobs. In 2008 there were about 8% fewer cars sold in the EU than in 2007. MEPs want to strengthen Natura 2000 network The Environment Committee calls the Commission to set wilderness conservation as a priority in its strategy to address climate change and defends an EU wilderness strategy, complementary to other existing instruments. In addition, MEPs underline the importance of strengthening the Natura 2000 network, stressing the need for more coherent policies among different sectors, such as agriculture and energy, in order not to undermine the conservation objectives of Natura 2000. The use of PCB waste oils in an Irish food recycling plant Late on Wednesday evening, Mairead McGUINNESS (EPP-ED, IE) will be asking the to the Commission questions on the use of PCB waste oils in an Irish food recycling plant. Animal feed: MEPs to vote on deal with Council "Animal feed has been the source of many food scandals, such as BSE and dioxin. We don't want to see that any more and have built up systems of prevention and control. The regulation for feed labelling is an important piece in the system to prevent feed and food scandals", according to Friedrich Wilhelm GRAEFE ZU BARINGDORF (Greens/EFA, DE), who drafted the Agriculture Committee's report on the matter. Parliament will be voting on a first-reading compromise reached with Council on plans to redraft existing EU rules on the authorising and labelling of animal feed. The aims are to preserve the customer's right to information while safeguarding the industry's intellectual property rights. Member States to have more of a free hand to promote farm produce Parliament will vote on proposals for Member States to be given greater flexibility to conduct promotion campaigns for European agricultural produce inside and outside the EU. However, the EP Agriculture Committee, which is tabling the report, wants to see greater involvement of trade associations, more opportunities to promote quality wines and an increase in Community funding for the promotion programmes. Child pornography: stepping up the fight on the Internet "Grooming" and paedophile chat rooms on the Internet should be criminalised and sex crimes be subject to extraterritorial legislation, says an own-initiative report by the Civil Liberties Committee which is on the Strasbourg plenary agenda. It adds that the EU should fund national programmes for dealing with this problem. The report, drafted by Roberta ANGELILLI (UEN, IT) calls for the criminalisation of "all types of sexual abuse of children" including "grooming" (the action of soliciting children for sexual purposes). Alleged use of European countries by the CIA for the transport and illegal detention of prisoners The Council and Commission will make statements on the alleged use of European countries by the CIA for the transport and illegal detention of prisoners. In February 2007, MEPs adopted a report saying that over one thousand CIA-operated flights used European airspace from 2001 to 2005 and temporary secret detention facilities "may have been located at US military bases" in Europe. MEPs will vote on a resolution on this topic during the 18-19 February plenary in Brussels . Protection of traditional national, ethnic and immigrant minorities in Europe Protecting traditional national and ethnic minorities, addressing inter-ethnic relations, and integrating immigrant minorities are crucially important challenges for the European Union, for its stability, security, prosperity, good neighbourhood relations, internal and external legitimacy and credibility. Various Members on behalf of the PES Group will be asking the Commission questions on the protection of traditional national, ethnic and immigrant minorities in Europe. Consular protection of EU citizens in third countries Article 20 of the EC Treaty entitles all Community nationals to diplomatic and consular protection from a Member State of which they are not nationals if their Member State of origin does not have a Representation in the third country in question. The European Commission wishes to improve the information available to citizens, examine the scope of diplomatic and consular protection, set up Member State "common offices", and develop links with third-country authorities. MEPs will debate consular protection of EU citizens in third countries after hearing statements from Council and Commission. Value of informal and invisible work should be recognised says Committee on Women’s Rights The Committee's own-initiative report, drafted by Anna Záborská (EPP-ED, SK), highlights the value of "intergenerational solidarity", a term which relates to childcare and taking responsibility for the elderly and dependent. According to the report, there is a generation of middle-aged women in the Europe who "often combine the role of mothers acting as daughters and hence responsible for elderly and dependent family members". Transport Committee calls for proportionate regulation in general and business aviation In answer to the Commission Communication on General and Business Aviation, the Transport Committee calls for proportionate regulation, increased airport and airspace capacity, and measures to further environmental sustainability for all civil aircraft operations which do not fall under the commercial air transport sector. The fastest growing sector in civil aviation in Europe, general and business aviation comprises high value activities, ranging from specialised aerial works (aerial cartography, agricultural flights, firefighting, air traffic surveillance) to aerial training and recreational flying. Internationalisation of small and medium-sized businesses a priority of the European Parliament SMEs account for 99% of the total number of businesses in the European Union, and create 75 million jobs, yet their international performance is "structurally weak". So says the International Trade Committee in a report which urges the Commission and Member States to enable EU SMEs to develop in a harmonious manner, gain access to new markets and to expand their export activities and internationalisation. SMEs are defined as enterprises with fewer than 250 employees and a have a turnover of less than €50 million. Non-agricultural market access: MEPs to quiz Commission At the Doha Development Round negotiations in Geneva in July 2008 a compromise was found in the area of non-agricultural goods and services. This result is said to be the starting point for any final conclusion of the Doha round. It is therefore essential to know about the possible effects on the European economy. Security and safety of Internet transactions need to be strengthened, says International Trade Committee The International Trade Committee, in a report drafted by Giorgos Papastamkos (EPP-ED, EL), believes that lack of trust in the security and safety of transactions and payments "constitutes the most important danger for the future of e-commerce". MEPs call on the Commission to investigate the causes and to redouble its efforts to "create mechanisms for strengthening businesses' and individuals' trust in international electronic payment systems, as well as establishing suitable means for resolving disputes related to illegal commercial practices". Europe and China - More co-operation, not protectionism The EU and China are becoming more interdependent, says the International Trade Committee, which means that EU-China relations require greater co-ordination among the Member States and with the Commission. Noting an imbalance in bilateral trade between the two partners - notably through China's inobservance of sustainable development, environmental limits and WTO rules - MEPs call on China to meet its obligations and on the EU to provide assistance and promote co-operation. Economic partnership agreements: ensuring a real impact on development Whether or not they sign economic partnership agreements (EPAs) with the EU, the countries of Africa, the Caribbean and the Pacific (ACP) should not be worse off than under the current system of preferences, says a report proposed by Parliament’s Development Committee. Flanking measures in the form of aid for trade should be used to help the ACP countries, for example to offset any loss of customs revenue. Pre-commercial procurement an under-exploited driver of innovation Pre-commercial procurement has significant potential to achieve high-quality and readily accessible public services, says Malcolm HARBOUR (EPP-ED, UK) on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection, yet it constitutes an under-exploited driver of innovation-led growth for the EU. Pre-commercial procurement would benefit the healthcare and transport industries and would address "the social challenges of climate change, sustainable energy and an ageing population". Yet many public authorities are not aware of the potential of pre-commercial procurement and do not yet act as “intelligent customers”, the report says. Human rights in the world As usual the session ends with three debates and votes on human rights issues in the world, on this occasion the topics are: Sri Lanka, the situation of Burmese refugees in Thailand and Brazil - case of Cesare Battisti.
20090129IPR47482 Final draft agenda - 2-5 February 2009 Briefing - 2-5 Febraury 2007 EP Live EuroparlTV
EN
1
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?reference=2009-02&language=EN
EN
3
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/frd/live/live-video?language=en
EN
4
LINK
http://www.europarltv.europa.eu/parliamentlive.aspx
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20090123BRI47059 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
