Energy security: EP adopts blueprint for the EU's future energy strategy
Energy
2009-02-03 - 13:26
The European Parliament set out wide-ranging recommendations for the EU's future energy policy. MEPs call for mandatory emergency action plans in case of gas supply shortages, more grid interconnections among Member States, a specific road map for investments in nuclear energy, and new climate targets to be achieved by 2050, including cutting greenhouse gas emissions by at least 80%. The report was adopted by 406 votes in favour, with 168 votes against and 87 abstentions.
The European Parliament adopted by a large majority a report drawn up by Anne Laperrouze (ALDE, FR) on the "Second Strategic Energy Review", which will be on the agenda for the 19-20 March European Council debate on the EU's future energy strategy. MEPs call on the Commission and the Czech Presidency to present "a new ambitious and far-sighted diversification plan" to this meeting of the EU's Heads of State.
Lessons learned: national and EU emergency action plans
In the aftermath of the recent gas supply crisis between Ukraine and Russia, which left many EU citizens without heating this winter, MEPs call on the Commission to propose revising the 2004 Security of gas supply directive before the end of this year. Parliament wants this revision to include "mandatory and effective national and EU emergency action plans" providing for:
a common declaration of an emergency situation,
the allocation of available supplies and infrastructure capacity among the affected countries,
co-ordinated dispatching, and
the activation of emergency measures in unaffected or less affected states in order to increase the amount of gas available to the affected markets.
MEPs also stress that the EU should develop gas storage with fast-release capacity and that a single European gas grid should be established linking up all EU Member States. "Gas and electricity interconnections through Central and South-eastern Europe along a north-south axis" should be developed and especially the Baltic Sea region needed to be integrated into the Western European network, says the report.
Trilateral agreement between EU, Russia and Ukraine to secure gas transit
Even with the help of ambitious energy saving plans, the EU is likely to still be dependent on third countries for supplies of fossil energy in the medium term, say MEPs. The EU currently imports 50% of the energy it consumes - a proportion which could rise to 70% by 2030.
The EU, Russia and Ukraine should conclude a trilateral agreement to secure gas supply from Russia via Ukraine to the EU in the coming years, say MEPs. They also advocate including an "energy security clause" in future trade, association, partnership and cooperation agreements with producer and transit countries which would prohibit any supply disruption due to commercial disputes.
Besides, Parliament supports negotiations for a wide-ranging new agreement replacing the 1997 Partnership and Co-operation Agreement with Russia,
More pipelines and liquefied natural gas terminals
Parliament supports projects to diversify supply routes and sources, such as the Nabucco, Turkey-Greece-Italy (TGI), and South Stream pipelines. "In the longer term, when political conditions permit, supplies from other countries in the Caspian region, such as Uzbekistan and Iran, should represent a further significant supply source for the EU", say MEPs.
MEPs stress that sufficient liquefied natural gas (LNG) capacity is needed - meaning that liquefaction facilities in the producing countries and LNG terminals and ship-based re-gasification in the EU should be available to all Member States.
2050 climate targets: 80% less greenhouse gases, 60% renewables, 35% energy efficiency
MEPs call on the EU's heads of states to adopt new climate targets to be achieved by 2050: a cut of at least 80% in greenhouse gas emissions, a 35% improvement in energy efficiency, and a 60% share of renewable energy in the EU's total energy consumption.
Saving energy is "the most effective and cost-efficient way of improving energy security", say MEPs, calling on the Commission and Member States immediately to adopt a legally binding energy efficiency improvement target of at least 20% by 2020. The two other "2020" targets - reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 20% and increasing the share of renewable energy to 20% - are already fixed by the EU's climate change legislation, adopted in December 2008.
Offshore wind installations in the North Sea
The House welcomes the proposal to submit a plan for an offshore network in the North Sea in order to exploit the enormous wind energy potential and also welcome in this connection the creation of a European supergrid by linking the network infrastructures of the North Sea, Mediterranean and Baltic regions.
MEPs call on the Commission and Member States to ensure appropriate regulation and to allow for non-discriminatory access to new infrastructure, for example. to the North Sea offshore grid.
Nuclear power "at the highest technologically possible level of safety"
Parliament considers it important to maintain nuclear energy in the EU's energy mix and calls on the Commission to draw up a "specific road map for nuclear investments". MEPs rejected by a broad majority an amendment which called on Member States to set up a phase-out plan.
MEPs stress that nuclear energy is to be used "at the highest technologically possible level of safety"; adding that the EU's neighbouring countries, too, should adopt European nuclear safety standards every time a new nuclear plant is planned or an old one is upgraded.
Furthermore, MEPs say the Commission and Council should develop joint models and procedures together with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) to prevent the peaceful use of nuclear energy from leading to the proliferation of nuclear weapons.
20090203IPR48106 Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 3 February) Second Strategic Energy Review - more information
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
2
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5682622
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
