Pre-commercial procurement an under-exploited driver of innovation
Free movement of services
2009-02-03 - 12:16
Pre-commercial procurement has significant potential to achieve high-quality and readily accessible public services, says the European Parliament in adopting a report by Malcolm HARBOUR (EPP-ED, UK). The House says that pre-commercial procurement constitutes an under-exploited driver of innovation-led growth for the EU. The report was adopted with 587 votes in favour, 12 against and 6 abstentions.
Pre-commercial procurement would benefit the healthcare and transport industries and would address "the social challenges of climate change, sustainable energy and an ageing population". Yet many public authorities are not aware of the potential of pre-commercial procurement and do not yet act as “intelligent customers”, the report says.
"In spite of the numerous European research programmes, the results thereof have not yet been exploited by public authorities through public procurement," the report adds.
Gaps in the Commission communication
The European Parliament welcomes the Commission communication, which gives guidance on how EU rules can be used to stimulate public procurement innovation in Europe with the research and development (R&D) sector, but considers that there are some gaps regarding the manner of giving effect to the procedure proposed, especially at local and regional level.
It urges the Commission and Member States to work together to ensure that contracting authorities in local, regional, and other authorities removed from central administration develop the required expertise to implement innovative procurement.
It also urges Member States to screen national legislation to ensure that public authorities are not limited in pre-commercial procurement through inexistent, incorrect, or unnecessarily complex transposition of the relevant exemptions and unnecessarily elaborate national tendering requirements and procurement models.
Good practices and training to be funded
Contracting authorities should be supplied with training guidelines and tools showing how pre-commercial procurement might be used in research and development, says the report. MEPs therefore welcome the Commission initiative to fund exchange of good practices and training on pre-commercial procurement in the 2009 work programme of the Seventh Framework Programme.
Financial incentives
Financial incentives are extremely important in the uptake of pre-commercial procurement. MEPs note that such incentives already exist in certain Member States, where a substantial proportion of the costs of the first pre-commercial procurement can be matched by a central authority.
Therefore, financial incentives for public authorities across the EU to jointly undertake pre-commercial procurement of innovative technology in lead markets and other areas of common European interest should be considered, the report concludes.
20090202IPR48076 Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 3 February)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
