Climate Change: 2050 - the future begins today: MEPs adopt key report
2009 elections
Environment
2009-02-04 - 13:42
The European Parliament recommends detailed measures to be taken in key economic sectors to achieve a future EU integrated policy on climate change. MEPs take as basis the EU objective to keep the global average temperature increase below 2°C and call for a reduction in greenhouse gas emissions of 25 - 40 % to be achieved by 2020 and a reduction of at least 80 % to be achieved by 2050. The resolution was adopted with 570 votes in favour 78 against and 24 abstentions.
MEPs are concerned that "climate change is both more rapid and more serious in terms of its adverse effects than was previously thought". Therefore the Commission should monitor, "whether the EU 2°C target would still achieve the aim of avoiding dangerous climate change". Furthermore, the EU and the other industrialised countries should set as a group, a medium-term target of a 25-40% reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 2020, as well as a long-term reduction target of at least 80% by 2050, compared to 1990.
A visionary desire to make a difference
According to MEPs we are at a turning point in energy and climate policy, reflected in a growing scarcity of raw materials but MEPs stress it is important "not to capitulate in face of the complexity of the problem but to show a visionary desire to make a difference". MEPs call for global warming and ensuing climate change issues be incorporated in all spheres and policies. Political and educational measures on the basis of a long term perspective are necessary and the citizens need to be engaged in the process of tackling climate change.
Detailed recommendations for tackling climate change
The report sets out in detail a broad range of measures, which, according to MEPs, should be taken in the following fields: energy, biofuels, energy efficiency, mobility, logistics, tourism, carbon capture and storage, agriculture, livestock rearing, forests, soil protection, water management, fisheries, waste and resource management, adaptation measures, health, promotion of technologies of the future, intelligent computer systems, education, training and awareness raising.
Measures proposed in the report include :
• a binding goal of 20% improvement in energy efficiency by 2020 should be proposed by the Commission as well as specific interim reduction targets;
• the creation, as building blocks of a European external energy policy, of solar energy partnerships with third countries in the Mediterranean region
• long term target in the building sector should be net zero-energy performance in new residential buildings by 2015 and in new commercial and public buildings by 2020
• EU should create a European renewable energy community
• Member States and EU institutions (the EU and the Member States) shall give support to research and development in respect of technologies as hydrogen, electric, fuel cells, hybrids or advanced biofuels.
• the Commission should consider setting reduction targets for GHG emissions from the agricultural sector;
• a European Climate Fund and/or corresponding funds in the Member States should be established;
• an EU-wide "supergrid" accessible to all forms of electricity providers should be developed;
• incentives should be made available for citizens to reduce emissions in an affordable way, e.g. by developing information on the carbon content of products and services.
• Member States should provide free energy audits to enable citizens to reduce their energy consumption and their emissions
• Commission and Member States shall support the UN's call for a "Green New Deal"
Highest priority in EU spending should be climate change
MEPs think that in the next EU financial framework, the highest priority must be given to climate change and measures to combat it. They also see the need to increase funding to combat climate change in developing countries and want to incorporate emission reduction requirements and adaptation to climate change in development aid programmes.
Nuclear power
MEPs acknowledge the different approaches of the Member States with regard to nuclear energy and therefore urge the Commission to pay special attention to radioactive waste and its full cycle, with a view of improving safety.
Work-program of the CLIM committee since April 07
Parliament set up its Temporary Committee on Climate Change on 25 April 2007. The report represents the findings of the committee after completing its work.
20090204IPR48324 Adopted text will be available here (click on 4 February) EP temporary committee on climate change audio 04:30 - Rapporteur Karl-Heinz Florenz audio, 19:25 - Council and Commission statements audio, 19:55 - Political group speakers
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
2
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=CLIM
EN
3
MULTIMEDIA
20090204MLT48262.asf
EN
4
MULTIMEDIA
20090204MLT48260.asf
EN
5
MULTIMEDIA
20090204MLT48270.asf
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
