EU and China: more co-operation, not protectionism say MEPs
External/international trade
2009-02-05 - 12:39
The EU and China are becoming more interdependent, says European Parliament in a report adopted by MEPs, which means that EU-China relations require greater co-ordination among the Member States and with the Commission. Noting an imbalance in bilateral trade between the two partners - notably through China's inobservance of sustainable development, environmental limits and WTO rules - MEPs call on China to meet its obligations and on the EU to provide assistance and promote co-operation.
In recent years, China has emerged as Europe's second largest trading partner. In 2007, Chinese exports to the EU - worth some €231bn - grew by 18.7%. The EU's trade deficit with China currently stands at €160bn and is continuing to rise. The report was adopted with 491 votes in favour, to 76 against and 12 abstentions.
Taiwan
MEPs w elcome the rapprochement between China and Taiwan; considers Taiwan as an economic and commercial entity, which is the EU’s 4th largest trade partner in Asia and support Taiwan’s participation as observer in relevant international organisations where this does not require statehood, i.e. in ILO.
Undervalued currency, counterfeiting and excessive bureaucracy
China's protectionist practices, excessive bureaucracy, the undervaluing of the Renminbi, subsidies in various forms, and the lack of a proper and agreed level of enforcement of intellectual property rights (IPRs) is hindering full market access for many EU companies, says the European Parliament in an own-initiative report drafted by Corien Wortmann-Kool (EPP-ED, NL). It is estimated that China’s non-tariff barriers towards the EU are annually worth more than €21bn in terms of lost business opportunities to EU companies.
MEPs call on the Commission to insist on the removal of all existing export restrictions in all bilateral negotiations with China. They also urge China to join the Government Procurement Agreement (GPA) as committed in 2001 and to engage constructively in negotiations on opening its public procurement markets.
While MEPs welcome a certain rise in the value of the Renminbi that has taken place this year, they urge that the Renminbi continues to rise in value, so that its worth on international financial markets reflects China's true economic position. They also ask that the Chinese hold more of its foreign exchange reserves in Euros.
A policy of engagement and dialogue
Given the current economic climate, the House emphasises that Europe should not resort to protectionism in response to the growth in EU-China trade relations. Rather, the development of trade relations with China must go hand in hand with the development of a genuine, fruitful and effective political dialogue, it says.
Welcoming the trade-related technical assistance provided to China by the Commission, which MEPs say supports China in implementing its obligations and commitments in the WTO, the report calls on the Commission to continue the policy of engagement and dialogue with China.
MEPs therefore regret China's postponement of the EU-China summit which was to be held on 1 December in Lyon.
Up to the West to help tackle pollution and ensure workers' rights in China
The high levels of pollution caused by China's industry and its growing consumption of natural resources is of "serious concern". Noting that a high share of Chinese industrial production is owned by European firms or ordered by European firms and retailers for consumption in Europe, the report calls for enhanced cooperation between the EU and China to promote the transfer of low-carbon technology. "China cannot be expected to ask its population to carry the burden of limiting greenhouse gas emissions without action by the West", it says.
MEPs also call on European businesses operating in China to apply the highest international standards and best practices in corporate social responsibility with regard to workers and the environment, and to agree to mandatory monitoring by independent agencies.
Co-operation on all fronts
Another concern is the scale of production of counterfeit and pirated goods inside China, "which remains at an alarmingly high level", despite considerable progress made in China in terms of legislation on IPR. The Commission is called on to co-operate with the Chinese authorities at national and regional level in this regard and to continue the fight against counterfeiting.
Co-operation between the two partners is also needed on the regulation, evaluation and authorisation of chemicals (REACH), and on climate-friendly standards for cars, trucks, heavy vehicles, aviation and shipping.
Welcoming the continued development of EU-China cooperation on space science, applications and technology, MEPs believe increased cooperation between European and Chinese universities and increased mobility for scientists, researchers and students between the EU and China, would also be beneficial.
20090204IPR48483 Adopted text will be available here (click on 5 February)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
