The Week Ahead 9-15 February 2009
Institutions
2009-02-06 - 12:47
Committee week - Brussels
Recovery plan. The Economics Committee votes on a report that will form the centrepiece of Parliament’s political assessment of the Commission's plans aimed at boosting the European economy (Wednesday) .
EU/Turkey. MEPs in the Foreign Affairs Committee will vote on their latest report on Turkey's progress in EU membership negotiations (Wednesday) .
Heavy goods vehicles. A proposed new ‘Eurovignette’ law which would allow Member States to charge lorries for road use partly on the basis of the congestion and the air and noise pollution they cause will be put to the vote in the Transport Committee (Wednesday) .
EP/Gaza. The Parliament's delegation for relations with the Palestinian Legislative Council will visit Gaza and the West Bank for meetings with their Palestinian counterparts (Tuesday-Saturday).
EU-Russia. The Foreign Affairs Committee will hold a hearing on prospects for EU-Russia relations, with a range of experts and a representative of the Russian Duma (Thursday).
Copyright extension. The Legal Affairs Committee votes on proposals to extend to 95 years the current 50-year copyright protection for music recordings and performers (Thursday).
Video game safety. The Internal Market Committee will set out a series of recommendations to improve the protection of children from potentially harmful video games (Wednesday).
Genital mutilation. The Women's Rights Committee will give its views on how best to prevent female genital mutilation from taking place in the EU (Tuesday).
Tajikistan and Afghanistan. The President of Tajikistan, Emomali Rahmon, will take part in a meeting of the Foreign Affairs Committee (Tuesday). MEPs will also be holding an interparliamentary meeting with Afghan MPs (Tuesday-Thursday).
EP/Finland. EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering makes and official visit to Finland. His schedule includes meetings with Prime Minister Matti Vanhanen and Foreign Minister Alexander Stubb (Tuesday).
20090206IPR48680 For details of all the week's events, see "The Agenda"
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20090700AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
