Maghreb delegation: "Modernisation is taking place in Morocco"
Delegations
2009-02-11 - 09:37
Morocco: "less than a member but more than a partner" The Parliament's delegation for relations with countries in the Maghreb has recently returned from a visit to Morocco. Being just 14 kilometres away from Europe, Morocco has many similarities with its northern neighbours. During the visit from 25 to 29 January, MEPs also visited the disputed Western Sahara region.
The President of delegation to Maghreb, Mr Carlos Iturgaiz talked to us about the visit.
What is your overall opinion after visiting Morocco and part of the Western Sahara?
In both places we have been given all kinds of facilities to talk to the people. This meeting has been above all, a historical one, because other political and parliamentary groups that tried to have access to Laayoun (main city in Western Sahara) before were not given green light. So our visit shows that some things are changing in Morocco.
Do you perceive a political and social evolution in the country?
In my opinion, no one could deny that bit by bit, a political evolution or modernisation is taking place in Morocco. It is also true that they still have to do some homework, but we have seen a country that wants to have a "tête à tête" relation with the EU. After being granted an advanced status, they want to have their own delegation with the EP, independent of the Maghreb one.
That advanced status recognises the country as "less than a member but more than a partner". Why should this special status be given to Morocco?
First, it is related to geography. Morocco is 14 kilometres away from Europe. We have many issues in common with this country: immigration, fisheries, terrorism, agriculture... so it is necessary an exchange of ideas between the EP, European institutions in general, and Morocco.
Morocco is, together with Algeria, one of the biggest Maghreb countries. They have worked their external policy at a diplomatic level and in the end they are being rewarded for that. But of course this does not mean it cannot be given to other countries, but now it is Morocco's moment.
What can the EU and the EP bring to the Maghreb countries?
In this trip to the Western Sahara that our delegation to Maghreb made together with the ad hoc Sahara delegation, we have focused on human rights issues, not on political ones.
We have always defended human rights wherever they could be threatened, be it in our continent or outside of it. The EP is recognised as a defender of Human rights, it is a well respected voice all around the world, and I think the defence of human rights by the European Parliament anywhere in the world can help to alleviate the situation of those who are suffering on one or the other side.
This trip has raised a lot of expectations both in Europe and in Morocco. It can open a new way, a path. When we spoke to both sides in the conflict and they all say the same: that above autonomy, auto determination or independency, the most important thing is to regroup Saharawi families, so that they can be together again.
Fact Box
The Western Sahara conflict is more than 30 years old
Morocco wants the territory to become an autonomous region of the country
The Independent Polisary Front wants a referendum to be held
From June 2007, Morocco and the Polisary Front have met in 4 rounds of negotiations, on the initiative of the UN
20090205STO48541 Maghreb delegation Carlos Iturgaiz - profile External relations - The Kingdom of Morocco EU in the world - Morocco
EN
1
PHOTO
20090210PHT48987.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/activities/delegations/homeDel.do?body=DMAG
EN
3
LINK
/members/expert/delegations/view.do?id=28398
EN
4
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/external_relations/morocco/index_en.htm
EN
5
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/world/where/morocco/index_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
