Turkey: MEPs concerned at lack of progress in talks with EU
Enlargement
2009-02-11 - 19:59
The "continuous slowdown of the reform process" in Turkey, for the third consecutive year, is noted with concern by the Foreign Affairs Committee, which calls on the Turkish government "to prove its political will to continue the reform process" to which it committed itself in 2005.
Turkey has so far started only 10 of the 35 negotiating chapters with the EU. In 2008 only four new chapters were begun, of which two were under the French presidency (free movement of capital and information society and media). Only one chapter (science and research) has been concluded since talks began in October 2005. Members of the Foreign Affairs Committee adopted on Wednesday the draft for Parliament's annual resolution on Turkey's progress towards accession, which was drawn up by Ria Oomen-Ruijten (EPP-ED, NL).
Democratic reforms do not go far enough
MEPs regret that freedom of expression and freedom of the press are still not fully protected in Turkey. They also believe that the amendment to Article 301 of the Penal Code, adopted in April 2008, does not go far enough as people continue to be prosecuted for expressing non-violent opinions, one such case being Leyla Zana, former winner of the European Parliament's Sakharov Prize in 1995.
The calls to ban two parliamentary parties, made in 2008, particularly the case against the Kurdish party DTP (Demokratik Toplum Partisi), worry MEPs, who urge that the law on political parties be amended.
The draft resolution also calls on the Turkish government to resume work on a new civilian constitution and to take action to reduce the number of "honour killings" of women.
Need for a global settlement of the Cyprus issue
The resolution stresses the need to reach "a comprehensive settlement" of the Cyprus question based on UN Security Council resolutions. MEPs back the direct negotiations currently under way between leaders of the Greek and Turkish Cypriot communities and urge Turkey to facilitate a suitable climate for negotiations by withdrawing Turkish forces.
MEPs deplore the fact that the EC-Turkey customs union and its additional protocol has not yet been implemented fully by the Turkish government. They also point out that the non-fulfilment of Turkey's commitments by December 2009 will further seriously affect the process of negotiations.
The non-recognition of Cyprus is blocking the start of talks on eight economic chapters. In addition, Turkey is refusing to allow access to its ports and airports to Cypriot ships and plans.
A lasting settlement of the Kurdish issue
Ankara must commit itself to a lasting settlement of the Kurdish issue, say MEPs. This will require better economic and social integration of citizens of Kurdish origin, including offering them real opportunities to learn Kurdish in the public and private schooling system and to use it in broadcasting, in daily life and in access to public services. MEPs welcome the launch of a Kurdish language television channel on 1 January 2009.
Nabucco, a "European priority project"
MEPs have been calling for the opening of negotiations on the energy chapter since October 2007. They are disappointed that no agreement on this has been reached within the Council.
Cyprus, which is currently prospecting for gas and oil off its coast, has reservations about the energy chapter. MEPs call on Turkey to support this "European priority project".
The Nabucco project has taken on greater importance since the gas crisis between Ukraine and Russia, which highlighted the EU's extreme dependence on Gazprom. The Nabucco pipeline would supply the EU with gas from the Caspian Sea which would transit via Turkey, thereby avoiding Russian territory.
Middle East and Caucasus
The committee welcomes Turkey's mediation efforts in the Middle East and the south Caucasus, notably following the conflict between Russia and Georgia.
Procedure: Resolution by the Foreign Affairs Committee (Rule 103) -- Committee vote: 65 for, 4 against, one abstention -- Plenary vote: March I, Strasbourg 2009-02-11 Committee on Foreign Affairs Chair Jacek Saryusz-Wolski EPP-ED PL
20090209IPR48761 Website of EP Foreign Affairs Committee
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=AFET
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
