Economic crisis spurs post-2013 regional policy debate
Regional policy
2009-02-12 - 09:37
The shape of regional policy after 2013 - and how it can meanwhile foster economic recovery, growth and jobs - were debated by the EP Regional Development Committee and its national parliamentary counterparts in Brussels on 11 February.
The economic crisis is already shaping the regional policy debate, noted EP Regional Development Committee Vice-Chairman Jan Olbrycht (EPP-ED, PL) and Mr Emil Horcicka of the Czech Regional Development Ministry, both of whom cited European Parliament work on structural fund rule changes to help regions to invest their way out of the crisis. "Anything that we change now will herald what comes post-2013", predicted Mr Olbrycht.
"This crisis is a challenge - and an opportunity to redirect cohesion policy", agreed Wladyslaw Ortyl of the Polish Senate, adding that "we should also consider breaking down barriers between funds, for instance to integrate rural development spending into regional policy".
Jobs first
Beyond 2013, "we shall see mass unemployment on an unprecedented scale" warned Ewald Stadler, of the Austrian Parliament. So "regional policy should aim to help unemployed young people, women and over-50s to get back into the labour market", he said, adding that "if they've no job, they won't be worrying about the climate".
"Future cohesion policy must be built upon human capital" agreed Polish MP Danuta Jazlowiecka, pointing out that the technical and social infrastructure needed to improve employability "can cost as much as a motorway".
Equal access to services
"Why not write to EU citizens saying how cohesion money has been spent?" asked Mieczysław Edmund Janowski (UEN, PL), adding that "it's extraordinary how far a Euro can be made to go". Mr Janowski suggested that the real measure of cohesion policy is success in achieving equality of access for all EU citizens to public services such as education and health.
Modernising funding
The need to modernise grant-based funding, by widening the use of "revolving funds" that invest the revenue generated by some regional development projects into further, similar projects, was stressed by MEP Oldřich Vlasak and European Commission Regional Development Director General Dirk Ahner.
Competitiveness and/or cohesion?
"Bolstering economic and social cohesion boosts competitiveness, said Ivo Barek, of the Czech Senate, stressing that regional policy must complement the "Lisbon" (growth and jobs) strategy and national structural reforms. Ensuring that cohesion complements the Lisbon strategy should be a key aim, agreed Vytautas Kurpuvesas of the Lithuanian Parliament, pointing out that Lithuania allocates 50% of its cohesion funding to Lisbon goals. And "Italians might view cohesion as a lab test of whether Lisbon is working", added Luigi Lusi of the Italian Senate.
EU, national, or somewhere in between?
"Member States must ultimately be in charge of cohesion policy", said Marie Weibull Kornias, of the Swedish Parliament Trade and Industry Committee, adding that "cohesion policy should continue", but be slimmed down and reformed for greater effectiveness, inter alia by cutting red tape for firms.
"We need true (EU) cohesion policies, not renationalisation" replied MEP Ambroise Guellec (EPP-ED, FR), who doubted whether national plans for dealing with crises would necessarily fit in with an EU-wide approach. "Talk about cutting red tape to boost competitiveness is outdated - we need a new discourse", he added.
"Renationalisation would be backsliding, and would not help us to achieve collective success" agreed Meritxell Batet, of the Spanish Parliament, adding that "all regions must participate in designing cohesion policy, and make sure that it fits in with other policies". Success depends on better co-ordinating national and EU cohesion policies, agreed her fellow MP Eugenio Nasarre, pointing out that "EU funds are not a bottomless pit".
Cohesion policy for all, or just the poorest?
"Some Member States want to do away with Objective 2" (i.e. regions that are just above 75% of EU average GDP, but still arguably needing help to overcome structural difficulties), observed Mr Olbrycht. But there should be "no sudden cuts in funding", urged Dr Klaus Zeh, of the German Parliament, stressing the need for a "workable transition period" for such countries. "Cohesion policy has helped to integrate "new" Member States into the Union, but older (EU -15) ones should not be left out", agreed Gaspare Giudice of the Italian Parliament - a view also echoed by MEP Rolf Berend (EPP-ED, DE).
Beware protectionism
Economic crisis prompts protectionism, which, if it wins the day, could "put an end to cohesion as a coherent policy", warned Mr Nasarre. "The EU has always been about liberalizing trade - it must resist the temptation of protectionism", agreed Lord Haskins (UK).
2009-02-12 In the chair Jan OLBRYCHT, EPP-ED PL Gerardo GALEOTE EPP-ED ES
20090209IPR48789 Regional Development Committee web site Conclusions and background documents
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=REGI
EN
2
LINK
/webnp/cms/lang/en/pid/1087
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
