The Week Ahead – 16 - 22 February 2009
Institutions
2009-02-13 - 12:16
Plenary session and committee meetings – Brussels
Vaclav Klaus. The President of the Czech Republic will address a formal session of Parliament after a bilateral meeting with EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering (Thursday).
Reduced VAT. Parliament votes on plans to widen the scope for Member States to apply reduced VAT rates to certain services, including restaurants (debate and vote Thursday).
Foreign Policy. The EU’s High Representative for foreign policy, Javier Solana, will take part in debates on the Middle East and on the EU’s wider foreign policy activity (debates Wednesday, votes Thursday).
Economic new deal? The European Parliament and the Czech Presidency welcome national parliamentarians from EU Member States and candidate countries to a Joint Parliamentary Meeting on the EU economy. President Pöttering, European Council President Mirek Topolánek, Commission President José Manuel Barroso and ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet are among those taking part (Monday and Tuesday).
Ecodesign and labelling. The Environment Committee votes on a series of proposals to improve the environmental design and labelling of a range of products. The committee will also decide whether to propose blocking a move to phase out incandescent light bulbs (Tuesday).
Combating illegal logging. MEPs in the Environment Committee will also be deciding on legislation requiring those selling timber in the EU to take steps to minimise the risk that it is from illegal harvested sources (Tuesday).
Pollution from ships. The Transport Committee votes on legislation to ensure all Member States apply criminal sanctions to those causing ship-sourced pollution (Tuesday).
Access to documents. The Civil Liberties Committee will vote on an update of the rules governing public access to EU documents (Tuesday).
Euro-Med Gaza visit. President Pöttering will lead a Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly delegation on a fact-finding mission to Gaza and the Middle East (from Sunday). He will hold a press conference ahead of the visit (Thursday, 1230).
20090213IPR49426 For details of all the week's events, see "The Agenda"
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20090800AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
