A new deal for European economic recovery? – Joint Parliamentary Meeting
Economic and monetary affairs
2009-02-13 - 12:16
The economic crisis and ways to encourage a return to growth and job creation are the subject of a Joint Parliamentary Meeting organised by the European Parliament and the Czech Parliament (Chamber of Deputies and Senate) between MEPs and national MPs from the 27 EU Member States and also from candidate countries.
The meeting, entitled "A New Deal for European Economic Recovery?". will be co-chaired by Hans-Gert Pöttering, EP President and by. Přemysl Sobotka, President of the Senate and Miloslav Vlček, Speaker of the Chamber of Deputies.
Monday 16 February 2009 1500-1900
The co-chairs will open the first plenary session of the event, with speakers including Joaquín Almunia, Commissioner for Economic and Monetary Affairs, Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank, and Miroslav Kalousek, Finance Minister of the Czech Republic. Parliament’s rapporteurs on the Lisbon Strategy, Klaus Heine Lehne (EPP-ED, DE) and Edit Herzog (PES, HU) will also take the floor.
Participants will then divide into three working groups focussing respectively on:
Competitive Europe: promoting investment, entrepreneurship and SMEs
Social Europe: creating jobs, fighting poverty, ensuring free movement
Sustainable Europe: economic development and climate challenge.
Tuesday 17 February 2009 0930-1230
The second day of the conference begins with reports from the three working groups, to be presented by José Manuel Garcia-Margallo (EPP-ED, ES), Lubomir Zaorálek (Czech Chamber of Deputies) and Carina Adolfsson Elgestam (Swedish Riksdag).
Allan Larsson, Chair of Lund University, will address the MEPs and MPs, after which Pierre Lequiller (French National Assembly) and Lars Elinderson (Swedish Riksdag) will speak on the national economic recovery plans.
President-in-office of the European Council and Czech Prime Minister Mirek Topolánek and Commission President José Manuel Barroso will then speak to the meeting before the debate is once again opened to the floor.
Participants from the UK and Ireland
United Kingdom - House of Commons
Mr Michael CONNARTY Chairman of the European Scrutiny Committee
Mr Alan WHITEHEAD Member of the Energy and Climate Change Committee
United Kingdom - House of Lords
Lord SEWEL Member of the EU Select Committee
Lord DYKES Member of the EU Select Committee
Houses of the Oireachtas
Ms Déirdre DEBÚRCA Member
Mr Dan BOYLE Member
Mr Thomas BYRNE Member
Mr Joe COSTELLO Member
The session ends with concluding remarks from the co-chairs.
20090213IPR49380 Full programme of the Joint Parliamentary Meeting
EN
1
LINK
/webnp/cms/lang/en/pid/1071
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
