EU-NATO relations: MEPs call for strengthened cooperation
Security and defence
2009-02-19 - 14:26
MEPs say that the EU and NATO could strengthen each other by avoiding competition and developing greater cooperation in crisis management operations. The report supports the establishment of a permanent EU Operational Headquarters. The first report of the European Parliament on NATO comes a few months ahead of the Alliance's 60th anniversary Summit to be held in Strasbourg and Kehl in April 2009. The report was adopted by 293 votes in favour, 283 against and 60 abstentions.
The report recognises the important role of NATO in the security architecture of the Europe and takes the view that the future collective defence of the EU should as far as possible be organised in cooperation with NATO.
Following the election of the new President of the United States, there is a growing consensus on both sides of the Atlantic about the decreasing usefulness of nuclear weapons in the face of current threats and a new sense of urgency about the need to decrease the size of nuclear arsenals .
New security risks such as international terrorism, the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMD), failed States, intractable conflicts, organised crime, cyberthreats and environmental deterioration require closer partnership and concentration on strengthening the core capabilities of the EU and NATO, and closer coordination in the areas of planning, technology, equipment and training.
MEPs are of the view that the EU and NATO could strengthen each other by avoiding competition and developing greater cooperation in crisis management operations. MEPs support the proposal of the French government for the establishment of systematic contact between the secretaries-general of NATO and the EU Council, in particular so as to avoid confusion where the EU and NATO operate side by side, as in Kosovo and Afghanistan.
The resolution notes that the “Berlin plus” arrangements, which allow the EU to have recourse to NATO assets and capabilities, need to be improved in order to allow the two organisations to intervene and effectively deliver relief in current crises
MEPs believe in the further need for the EU and NATO to develop a comprehensive approach to crisis management. The resolution calls on the EU to continue deploying missions while ensuring greater sustainability of European Security and Defence Policy so as to prevent conflicts and promote stability.
The report supports the establishment of a permanent EU Operational Headquarters, under the authority of the Vice-President of the Commission/High Representative. The mandate of this Headquarter would be to plan and conduct ESDP military operations.
Compatibility between NATO and EU Memberships
Out of the 27 EU Member States, 6 are not members of the Alliance (Austria, Cyprus, Finland, Ireland, Malta and Sweden). MEPs insist that all the EU Member States must be present at the joint EU-NATO meetings without discrimination. The resolution also proposes that candidate countries that are NATO Allies should be more involved in the work of the ESDP and the European Defence Agency.
The resolution deplores the fact that the Turkish-Cypriot dispute continues to badly impair the development of EU-NATO cooperation, given that, on the one hand, Turkey refuses to allow Cyprus to participate in ESDP missions involving NATO intelligence and resources and that, on the other hand, in response, Cyprus refuses to allow Turkey to engage in the overall development of ESDP to an extent commensurate with Turkey's military weight and strategic importance to Europe and transatlantic alliance.
MEPs encourage Cyprus to review its political position on its membership of the Partnership for Peace and also calls on NATO member states to refrain from using their veto to prevent EU Member States from becoming members of NATO.
Relations with Russia
On relations with Russia, MEPs consider that the EU and NATO must maintain a realistic and frank dialogue with this country Russia, including the prospect of Russia's membership in all Euro-Atlantic structures if and when Russia becomes a genuine democracy and refuses military threat as political pressure on its neighbours.
Burden sharing
Parliament is of the view that, in addition to the need for the much more efficient use of military resources, a better and more efficient coordination of investments in defence, in the interest of synergy, by EU Member States is essential in the interests of European security. The House calls for a significant increase in the proportion of common costs in every NATO and EU military operation; notes the significant difference in scale as well as effectiveness between the defence spending of European members of NATO, on the one hand, and the USA, on the other and calls on the EU to commit itself to fairer global burden-sharing. Parliament also calls on the USA to show a greater willingness to consult its European allies on issues related to peace and security.
20090218IPR49763 Text adopted (click on 19 February)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
