Awareness of mental health in the EU
Public health
2009-02-19 - 11:57
One in four people experience mental health problems at least once in their lives, and many more are indirectly affected. The Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety is calling on Member States to develop awareness-raising campaigns, to combat stigma and social exclusion and to improve mental health legislation. The report was adopted with 616 votes in favour, 24 against and 12 votes abstentions.
In its report, drafted by Evangelia TZAMPAZI (PES, GR), Member States are called on to draw up "up-to-date mental health legislation, which is in line with international obligations as regards human rights … and which codifies and enshrines the basic principles, values and objectives of mental health policy".
It also calls on Member States to develop an awareness of the importance of good mental health, particularly among healthcare professionals and target groups such as parents, teachers, those providing social and legal services, employers, carers and, particularly, the public at large.
The media, the Internet, schools and workplaces, all have an important role to play in the organisation of public information and awareness campaigns, the report says, their role being to "promote mental health, increase knowledge about the most common symptoms of depression and suicidal tendencies, de-stigmatise mental disorders, encourage people to seek the best and most effective assistance and promote the active integration of people experiencing mental health problems".
Funding available
The financial cost of mental ill-health to society is estimated at between 3% and 4% of the Member States' GDP, and in 2006 the cost to the EU of mental illness was €436 billion.
The EU should use the funding facilities available under the Seventh Framework Programme, the report says. This would be for more research in the field of mental health and well-being and the interaction between mental and physical health problems. Moreover, Member States should explore the funding facilities for mental health initiatives under the European Social Fund and the European Regional Development Fund.
Mental health and the workplace
In recognition of the important role the workplace plays in the social integration of people with mental health problems, the report calls on employers to promote a healthy working climate, paying attention to work-related stress, the underlying causes of mental disorder at the workplace, and tackling those causes.
It also calls on the Commission to "require businesses and public bodies to publish annually a report on their policy and work for the mental health of their employees on the same basis as they report on physical health and safety at work".
While Member States are asked to ensure that people who are entitled to sickness or disability benefits because of mental health problems are not deprived of their right of access to employment and that they will not lose the benefits related to their disability/sickness as soon as they find a new job.
EU emergency number is 112
Finally, the report calls for more information to be made available on the EU emergency number 112. While it does not replace existing national emergency numbers, it offers European citizens in distress access to emergency services in nearly all Member States.
20090218IPR49800 Text as adopted by the EP (click on 19 February)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
