Round-up of the Brussels plenary session 18-19 February
Institutions
2009-02-20 - 12:46
INTRO FOCUS: Javier Solana in the EP hemicycle, he is worried for the humanitarian crisis in Gaza As talks continue about the situation in the Middle East, MEPs in Brussels discussed the issue with Europe's foreign policy chief Javier Solana. MEP agreed that peace is the only solution. During their plenary session, MEPs approved sanctions against employers of illegal workers and heard a controversial address from Czech President Václav Klaus.
The two-day sitting in Brussels also raised important questions concerning the role of NATO within the European Union. The deportation and imprisonment of rendition suspects from EU member states by the CIA was on the agenda and MEPs voted on new measures to put a stop to whaling.
Find out more about the Brussels plenary and hear President Klaus's speech below.
20090216FCS49466
Wednesday in plenary: EU role in the Middle East, cooperation with NATO
Palestinian Ibrahim Fudah, 40, poses next to what is left of his belongings in the heavily damaged al-Atatra district of the northern Gaza Strip refugee camp of Beit Lahia on February 17, 2009. ©BELGA_AFP PHOTO_MARCO LONGARI MEPs discussed foreign policy and the EU's relationship with NATO Wednesday afternoon in Brussels. Europe's foreign policy chief Javier Solana told MEPs about the problems in the Middle East and the EU's search for peace in the region. The House discussed the strengthening of EU-NATO relations following a subtle convergence of certain military projects.
The EU and the Middle East
Mr Solana talked about the need for a "durable and fully respected ceasefire which could allow the delivery of humanitarian aid" to the Middle East.
He sees the new US Administration as an excellent opportunity. "Conditions for cooperation between the EU and US are now better than ever; strong commitment on the part of the current American administration is a reality".
MEPs urge dialogue and peace
Christian Democrat Joseph Daul supported Mr Solana's call for dialogue. "It's not time to keep silent. Our message should be clear: we cannot tolerate aid and humanitarian assistance be taken hostage in this conflict
Martin Schulz of the Socialist group said "violence would only breed more violence".
Graham Watson of the Liberal ALDE group said it is the EU's "moral duty to assist in the reconstruction of Gaza". However, he said EU assistance through aid would not prevent a future conflict. "We need a new approach," he said.
Parliament's President Hans-Gert Pöttering will lead a Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary delegation on a fact-finding mission to Gaza and the Middle East from Sunday.
EU-NATO relations
Mr Solana also spoke of the relationship between the EU and NATO. Many see this as a way of strengthening the EU's foreign policy through military means, as NATO is seen as the military backbone of Europe.
Many MEPs emphasised the growing role of the EU in military and security matters, while some minority voices deplored a possible "militarisation" of the Union.
See our special report on this issue.
Other debates
Also Wednesday, MEPs discussed the problem of mental health in Europe. One in four adults suffer from mental health problems once in their lives and MEPs want strategies to treat the mentally infirmed.
The Social Economy plan was also discussed, stressing that businesses which place more of an emphasis on people rather than capital could flourish and help stimulate the economy again.
Gaza: increased humanitarian aid, end of the blockade and damage assessment needed EU-NATO relations Our interview with Evangelia Tzampazi Children should have special place in EU
Thursday in plenary: Václav Klaus, CIA flights, illegal worker sanctions
Some moments from the Plenary Chamber on Thursday 19 of February: MEPs cheering the start of the speech of Klaus; President of the Czech Republic, Vaclav Klaus, during the speech to the House. The plenary on Thursday saw a controversial speech by Czech President Václav Klaus and a rejoinder from EP President Pöttering. The EP adopted a resolution on the alleged use of European countries by the CIA for the transport and illegal detention of prisoners and backed sanctions for employers of illegal immigrants.
Czech President Václav Klaus addresses the House
Mr Klaus, who is well known for his opposition to the Lisbon Treaty, and who has frequently expressed sceptical views about the direction of the EU, criticized the decision-making system of the EU as "different from classic parliamentary democracy". He pleaded for a greater shift of competencies to EU countries. "Are you really convinced that everything you decide in this hall must be decided here and not on the level of the member states?" he asked.
Mr Klaus said the Lisbon Treaty would worsen the EU's democratic deficit, and questioned the role of the EP.
During his speech a number of MEPs demonstratively walked out of the plenary chamber. At the same time, his views were vociferously supported by some members of political groups opposing the Lisbon Treaty.
Responding, EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering described Mr Klaus's views as "an expression of the diversity in Europe" but pointed out that "in a democracy it's the view of the majority that counts". Without the EP, he warned, Europe would be in the hands of bureaucrats. Mr Pöttering reminded Mr Klaus that, for all his criticism, he owed his freedom to speak this way to the fact that "we live in European democracy where everyone can express his or her own opinion," – something which had not always been the case in the parliaments of the European continent.
"Sanctions directive" adopted
MEPs adopted the report by Italian Socialist Claudio Fava on sanctions for employers of illegal immigrants by a big majority. The sanctions directive will be a further weapon in the struggle to combat illegal immigration. Employers could now be fined, banned or criminally charged if seen to be employing, exploiting or trafficking illegal workers.
Illegal movement and detention of prisoners
MEPs also called for EU member states to "bear a particular share of political, moral and legal responsibility for transportation and detention" in Guantanamo. When they adopted a resolution on the alleged use of European countries by the CIA for the transportation and illegal detention of prisoners. Several EU countries have been involved in extraordinary renditions.
Other key votes
MEPs backed proposals on stricter global controls on whaling , called for a reduction in value added tax on restaurants, audio books and local services among other items and backed a stronger relationship between the EU and NATO .
Results of votes on Thursday 19 February 2009 The EP Press Service Transportation and illegal detention of prisoners- Report Czech President Václav Klaus addresses the House
EN
1
PHOTO
20090219PHT50032.jpg
EN
2
PHOTO
20090217PHT49712.jpg
EN
7
PHOTO
20090219PHT50034.jpg
EN
8
LINK
/news/expert/tous_les_epvotes/default/default_en.htm
EN
9
LINK
/news/expert/default_en.htm
EN
11
MULTIMEDIA
20090219MLT49975.asf
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20090218IPR49756 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20090213STO49398 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20090206STO48710 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20090213STO49403 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0032 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
