Opening of the Strasbourg session: condemnation of killings in Northern Ireland
Institutions
2009-03-09 - 18:22
At the start of this week's plenary session, EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering made a statement condemning the murder of two British soldiers in Northern Ireland at the weekend. In a separate statement on International Women's Day, the President called for more women to take part in the political process and condemned the use of rape as a weapon of war.
Killings in Northern Ireland
Commenting on last weekend's attack in which two soldiers were murdered and four civilians injured, Mr Pöttering said "This murderous attack on the security forces in Northern Ireland is an utterly despicable act which I condemn in the strongest possible terms. Our sympathies go immediately to the families and loved ones of the murdered soldiers who gave their lives in the service of their community." He added "The murderers who carried out this attack are seeking to sweep away democracy and normal life from the streets of Northern Ireland. (…) Our full solidarity is with the people there, and with the security forces in their efforts to bring these murderers to justice."
Lastly, he said "These murderers will not succeed in destroying the carefully-constructed peace process in Northern Ireland - a peace process which the European Parliament has always strongly supported both morally and materially. The people of Northern Ireland have chosen a different future, one of peace and of mutual respect for the dignity of each and every person. We support them in this choice for peace, democracy and the rule of law, and stand with them in solidarity at this time." The House then observed a brief silence in honour of the victims.
Women's Day
On International Women's Day, Mr Pöttering spoke of the European Parliament's steadfast support for women's rights and said that more must be done to ensure they could take part in decision-making processes and in politics at national and international level. Looking ahead to the European elections in June this year, he stressed that "the participation of women in the elections and their appropriate representation in the European Parliament is crucial for the democratic development of the European Union and for our society as a whole". The President also voiced solidarity, in the name of the EP, with the victims of female genital mutilation and condemned the use of rape as a weapon of war.
Changes to this week's agenda
The votes on the Kovacs report on the social situation of the Roma people and the Reul report on facing oil challenges will be held on Wednesday, not Thursday.
Tuesday afternoon's debates will be extended by half an hour. Question time with Commission will therefore begin at 6.30pm.
The oral question on the Schengen Information System (SIS II) will now be the first item for debate on Wednesday afternoon.
On Thursday, the oral question on the fiftieth anniversary of the Tibetan uprising will now be followed up with a vote on a resolution. The urgency debate (Rule 115) on Sierra Leone is replaced by a debate on the expulsion of aid organisations from Darfur.
20090306IPR51101 Briefing - 9-12 March 2009 Final draft agenda EuroparlTV - watch the plenary live Hans-Gert Pöttering condemns terrorist killing of two soldiers in Northern Ireland 08/03/2009 - Brussels
EN
2
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?reference=2009-03&language=EN
EN
3
LINK
http://www.europarltv.europa.eu/StartPage.aspx
EN
4
LINK
/president/defaulten.htm?press_releases
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20090219BRI50012 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
