MEPs say EU must take the lead and speak with one voice on climate change policy
Environment
2009-03-11 - 12:50
In adopting a resolution on the EU strategy for a comprehensive climate change agreement in Copenhagen and the adequate provision of financing for climate change policy, MEPs underline that the EU must maintain a leading role in international climate policy. The House stresses the importance of the EU speaking with one voice in order to maintain its credibility in this role.
Parliament calls for the EU to actively pursue a Copenhagen agreement which takes into account the most recent scientific reports on climate change, commits to stabilisation levels and temperature targets that provide strong probability of avoiding dangerous climate change, and allows for regular reviews to ensure that targets are in line with the latest science.
Developing countries
MEPs recall that in order to limit the global average temperature increase to not more than 2°C above pre-industrial levels, it is necessary not only that developed countries significantly reduce their emissions, but also that developing countries should contribute to reaching this objective.
The House underlines that, in order to allow the necessary mitigation action in developing countries, significantly increased financial resources are needed.
Green New Deal
MEPs emphasise that in the current financial and economic crisis, the EU's objective of fighting climate change can be combined with major new economic opportunities to develop new technologies, to create jobs and to enhance energy security. The House underlines that an agreement in Copenhagen could provide the necessary stimulus for such a 'Green New Deal' boosting economic growth, promoting green technologies and securing these new jobs in the EU and in developing countries.
Financial mitigation
Parliament considers that the collective contribution towards developing country mitigation efforts and adaptation needs from the EU should not be below EUR 30 000 million/year by 2020, a figure that may increase along with new knowledge on the severity of climate change and the scale of its costs.
Kyoto targets
Parliament acknowledges the fact that the EU as a whole is on track to meet the Kyoto target but points out that some Member States are far away from their Kyoto target, which could undermine the credibility of the EU in the Copenhagen process. Parliament insists, therefore, that those Member States that are not already on track to meet the Kyoto target should intensify their activities.
20090311IPR51466 Motion for a resolution - combating climate change Adopted text (click on 11 March)
EN
2
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//TEXT MOTION B6-2009-0134 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
