2008 progress reports on Croatia, Turkey, and FYROM: EP sets out its views
2009 elections
Enlargement
2009-03-12 - 13:51
A photo of Europe from the space. ©BELGA/SCIENCE The EP adopted three resolutions on the candidate countries for accession and their progress in 2008, namely, Croatia, Turkey and the FYROM. On Croatia, MEPs regret that accession negotiations have been blocked because of the border dispute with Slovenia. The "continuous slowdown of the reform process" in Turkey, for the third consecutive year, is noted with concern by the European Parliament. MEPs ask the Council to decide on a date for the beginning of accession negotiations with FYROM.
Parliament confident about negotiations with Croatia
The European Parliament compliments Croatia on the progress made in 2008 on the road to EU membership. Croatia has especially improved in key areas such as anti-discrimination and women’s rights, says the resolution. But MEPs regret that accession negotiations have been blocked because of the border dispute with Slovenia.
MEPs welcome the readiness of Croatia and Slovenia to accept the mediation offer made by the Commission. This mediation should be based on international law and jurisprudence. In this context, Parliament looks forward to a rapid advancement of the accession negotiations.
Parliament regrets that, in the past, issues between Croatia and its neighbouring countries -most importantly Slovenia- have put the accession negotiations on hold. This should not be an obstacle to progress in accession negotiations, provided these negotiations are not used to pre-empt the final settlement of such issues.
Croatia should work even harder on fighting organized crime and corruption, two of the most controversial issues in the report drafted by Hannes Swoboda (PES, AT). In all, the Parliament is confident that negotiations with Croatia can be concluded in 2009.
The official opening in four different courts of departments dealing specifically with the fight against corruption and organised crime, with sixty judges is underlined by Parliament.
The resolution urges Croatia to make the missing documents of the Ante Gotovina case available to the International Criminal Tribunal immediately. Moreover, it believes that Croatia should put more effort into modernizing the judicial sector. Even though Parliament compliments Croatia on its work in the areas of corruption and crime, it believes that it is necessary for Croatia to take an even more aggressive stance. In this context, the Croatian government needs to grant the judiciary the proper mandate to fight corruption and organized crime.
Although Parliament is satisfied with the freedom of press in Croatia, it is worried by the intimidation (and sometimes killings) of several journalists who covered corruption and organized crime. Therefore, the Parliament calls on both police and judiciary to take resolute action.
Policy on Minorities
The Parliament welcomes Croatia's achievements in the area of policy on minorities. It emphasizes the need to concentrate on economic and social rights of minorities. Parliament is worried about the current structures maintain segregation rather than aiming at integration of different ethnic groups.
Economic reforms
According to Parliament, Croatia needs to accelerate the pace of its reforms, so that it is able to catch up with other EU Member States. In the process, Croatia also has to decrease its current deficits and debts.
MEPs are satisfied with the privatization processes in the steel and telecommunications industries. In the near future, Croatia should also work toward privatizing shipyards. In judging Croatia’s reform progress, the Parliament asks both the Commission and the Council to consider the current financial and economic problems.
*******
Turkey: MEPs concerned at lack of progress in talks with EU
The "continuous slowdown of the reform process" in Turkey, for the third consecutive year, is noted with concern by the European Parliament, which calls on the Turkish government "to prove its political will to continue the reform process" to which it committed itself in 2005.
Turkey has so far started only 10 of the 35 negotiating chapters with the EU. In 2008 only four new chapters were begun, of which two were under the French presidency (free movement of capital and information society and media). Only one chapter (science and research) has been concluded since talks began in October 2005. Members adopted the draft for Parliament's annual resolution on Turkey's progress towards accession, which was drawn up by Ria Oomen-Ruijten (EPP-ED, NL).
Democratic reforms do not go far enough
MEPs regret that freedom of expression and freedom of the press are still not fully protected in Turkey. They also believe that the amendment to Article 301 of the Penal Code, adopted in April 2008, does not go far enough as people continue to be prosecuted for expressing non-violent opinions, one such case being Leyla Zana, former winner of the European Parliament's Sakharov Prize in 1995.
The ongoing polarisation within Turkish society and between the main political parties, which has deepened in the course of 2008, is pointed out by the resolution. MEPs also regret that the initial effort to reform the constitution resulted in dispute over the headscarf issue and generated further polarisation of society.
The calls to ban two parliamentary parties, made in 2008, particularly the case against the Kurdish party DTP (Demokratik Toplum Partisi), worry MEPs, who urge that the law on political parties be amended.
The draft resolution also calls on the Turkish government to resume work on a new civilian constitution and to take action to reduce the number of "honour killings" of women.
MEPs welcome the approval of the National Programme for the Adoption of the so-called "Acquis communautaire" and the establishment of the ‘Women-Men Equal Opportunities Commission’ in the Turkish Parliament.
Need for a global settlement of the Cyprus issue
The resolution stresses the need to reach "a comprehensive settlement" of the Cyprus question based on UN Security Council resolutions. MEPs back the direct negotiations currently under way between leaders of the Greek and Turkish Cypriot communities and urge Turkey to facilitate a suitable climate for negotiations by withdrawing Turkish forces.
MEPs deplore the fact that the EC-Turkey customs union and its additional protocol has not yet been implemented fully by the Turkish government. They also point out that the non-fulfilment of Turkey's commitments by December 2009 will further seriously affect the process of negotiations.
The non-recognition of Cyprus is blocking the start of talks on eight economic chapters. In addition, Turkey is refusing to allow access to its ports and airports to Cypriot ships and plans.
MEPs also Calls on Turkey to comply with its obligations under international law and the ruling of the European Court of Human Rights on the Fourth Interstate Application by Cyprus against Turkey regarding investigations into the fate of missing persons. Member States are asked to urge Turkey to take action on this humanitarian issue.
A lasting settlement of the Kurdish issue
Ankara must commit itself to a lasting settlement of the Kurdish issue, say MEPs. This will require better economic and social integration of citizens of Kurdish origin, including offering them real opportunities to learn Kurdish in the public and private schooling system and to use it in broadcasting, in daily life and in access to public services. MEPs welcome the launch of a Kurdish language television channel on 1 January 2009.
Nabucco, a "European priority project"
MEPs have been calling for the opening of negotiations on the energy chapter since October 2007. They are disappointed that no agreement on this has been reached within the Council.
Cyprus, which is currently prospecting for gas and oil off its coast, has reservations about the energy chapter. MEPs call on Turkey to support this "European priority project".
The Nabucco project has taken on greater importance since the gas crisis between Ukraine and Russia, which highlighted the EU's extreme dependence on Gazprom. The Nabucco pipeline would supply the EU with gas from the Caspian Sea which would transit via Turkey, thereby avoiding Russian territory.
Middle East and Caucasus
Parliament welcomes Turkey's mediation efforts in the Middle East and the south Caucasus, notably following the conflict between Russia and Georgia.
MEPs call on the Council to involve Turkey, as one of the biggest suppliers of troops, in the planning and decision-making stages of the European Security and Defence Policy.
*******
Former Yugolsav Republic of Macedonia: MEPs reiterate their support for future membership
MEPs reaffirm their support for the European perspective of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (FYROM) but regret that negotiations have not yet started, three years after it was granted candidate status. MEPs ask the Council to decide on a date for the beginning of accession negotiations, during the current year. They call on Skopje to resolve issues with its neighbours, including the name issue.
Although FYROM has been candidate for EU membership since 2005, negotiations have not begun yet or have been stalled by outstanding issues. MEPs adopted a resolution drafted by Hannes Swoboda (PES, AT) by an overwhelming majority.
Name dispute
MEPs underline the need for FYROM and Greece to find a mutually acceptable solution on the name issue while reiterating their support for the UN-brokered mediation process. Parliament states that if the two countries don't reach an agreement soon that may lead to a long delay of FYROM´s accession to EU. MEPs hope that negotiations between Greece and FYROM would continue despite the proceedings that Skopje started in the International Court of Justice accusing Greece for not complying with the Interim Accord.
Accession negotiations with FYROM should start as soon as possible
MEPs reiterate their support for FYROM's EU aspirations which they deem vital for the stability in the Western Balkans region. MEPs express regret that accession negotiations with FYROM have not started yet and urge the Council to accelerate the process and set a date for the beginning of the negotiations. Parliament states that a Serbian candidacy application shouldn't slow the progress of FYROM's accession process.
Progress in visa and economic areas
Parliament welcomes the progress made by the country in a number of areas, including visa issues, fight against human trafficking and illegal migration. With regards to that, MEPs propose to the Commission to ease the visa regime for citizens of FYROM. Parliament also states the progress that the country made in its way towards a functional market economy.
The adopted resolution underlines the successful conduct of the parliamentary elections in FYROM. MEPs also welcome the progress in the area of management of the Instrument for pre-accession assistance. Parliament calls FYROM for solidarity with its neighbours with regards to the culture and history and warns against the resurgence of "hate speech". MEPs also ask the authorities in FYROM to ensure the freedom of the press.
Parliament deplores the disadvantaged position of the Roma minority in the country and asks the Government of FYROM to act in order to improve the situation of this minority. MEPs ask the Government of FYROM to improve the waste facilities of the country and preserve the quality and level of the water in the border water basins. Parliament encourages FYROM to accelerate production of energy from renewable sources, especially solar and wind power, ahead of the conference.
20090310IPR51427 Texts adopted (click on 12 March 2009)
EN
1
PHOTO
20090311PHT51497.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
