Biometric visas: children under twelve won't have to give fingerprints
Immigration
2009-03-17 - 10:41
Biometric visas, like biometric passports, should improve security provided the fingerprints they include are reliable. Children under twelve will be exempted from the requirement to provide fingerprints, as MEPs wished, following an agreement with the Council approved by the EP Civil Liberties Committee on Monday.
The European Visa Information System (VIS) is intended to facilitate the procedure for issuing visas while preventing "visa shopping", that is simultaneous applications for visas in more than one EU country. For the system to work well, common consular instructions are needed to ensure that all Member States issue visas on the same basis and that the visas contain the same features.
The Civil Liberties Committee approved a second-reading agreement negotiated between the rapporteur and the Council of Ministers on the inclusion of biometric data in the VIS when it adopted a report by Sarah Ludford (ALDE, UK).
The purpose of biometric features - a photograph and ten fingerprints, as recommended by the International Civil Aviation Organization - is to enable the identity of visa applicants to be verified and to establish a reliable link between visa holders and their passports so as to prevent the use of false identities.
Exemption for children under twelve
During negotiations with the Council, MEPs successfully argued for children under twelve to be exempted from the requirement to give their fingerprints. Studies on the reliability of fingerprints suggest that they can undergo change before that age and might therefore no longer match those on the visa. On 14 January this year, the European Parliament voted for a similar exemption for biometric passports.
Sharing of equipment for collecting biometric data
MEPs would like to see new methods of organisation to ease the registration of visa applicants and reduce costs to Member States. A special type of representation, purely to receive applications and collect biometric data, would be set up alongside diplomatic and consular representations. In this way Member States would not need to equip every one of their consulates with biometric collection equipment. These joint centres would also help strengthen consular co-operation locally. However, Member States would remain free to provide their diplomatic and consular offices with such equipment if they wished.
Subcontracting only as a last resort
In exceptional circumstances, Member State may co-operate with an external service provider if, because of a very high number of visa applications, it is impossible to organise the collection of biometric identifiers in appropriate conditions or to ensure sufficient geographical cover in the country concerned in another way.
Committee vote: 28 in favour, 6 against and one abstention -- Procedure: co-decision, second reading -- Plenary vote: 23-26 March session (Strasbourg) 2009-03-16 Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs Chair Gérard Deprez ALDE BE
20090316IPR51925 Civil Liberties Committee web site Legislative Observatory file: the adopted text will appear here in due course
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=LIBE
EN
2
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5350262&noticeType=null&language=en
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
