Stop female genital mutilation
Women's rights/Equal opportunities
2009-03-24 - 12:44
A clear strategy for banning female genital mutilation on EU territory and the need to acknowledge the problem in EU immigration law and cooperation agreements are among the key points of a report adopted by the European Parliament aimed at stamping out this practice. An alternative resolution was broadly backed by Parliament with 647 votes in favour, 10 against and 24 abstentions.
Every year approximately 180 000 female emigrants in Europe undergo, or are in danger of undergoing, FGM, says the own-initiative report drafted by Cristiana Muscardini (UEN, IT).
Parliament wants the Commission and Member States to draw up a clear strategy and action plans with the aim of banishing female genital mutilation from the EU.
Although female genital mutilation (FGM) is a violation of women's rights under various international conventions and is prohibited under the criminal law of the Member States, it is difficult to monitor on EU territory as it is carried out clandestinely.
MEPs also call for EU directives on immigration to treat the act of committing genital mutilation as an offence and lay down appropriate penalties for those guilty of it. The report urges the Commission to include a clause aimed at eliminating female genital mutilation in cooperation negotiations and agreements with the countries concerned.
Asylum request
MEPs insist on the necessity to examine on a case by case basis each asylum request made by parents on the grounds that they are threatened in their home country for having refused to consent to their child undergoing female genital mutilation and to ensure that such requests are supported by a thorough body of evidence which takes into account the quality of the request, the personality and the credibility of the asylum seeker, and whether the motives behind the request are genuine.
The House points out that Article 10 of Council Directive 2004/83/EC on minimum standards for the qualification and status of third country nationals or stateless persons as refugees or as persons who otherwise need international protection, specifies that gender aspects can be taken into account, but that these alone do not lead to the application of Article 10.
Sounding the alarm
It should be compulsory for general practitioners, doctors and health clinic teams to report female genital mutilation to the health authorities or the police, say MEPs. Anyone who performs such operations should be prosecuted.
20090323IPR52352 Adopted text on Combating female genital mutilation in the EU
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
