The Week Ahead 30 March - 5 April 2009
Institutions
2009-03-27 - 13:08
Plenary session and committee meetings - Brussels
EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering takes part in the EU/US Summit in Prague (Sunday).
Equal treatment. MEPs vote in plenary on plans to prevent discrimination, outside the field of employment which is already covered, on the grounds of faith, disability, age or sexual orientation (debate Wednesday, vote Thursday).
Eco-labelling. Parliament votes on legislation updating the EU eco-labelling scheme for "environment-friendly" products (debate and vote Thursday).
EU-Russia. Parliament looks set to call for the renewed negotiations on an EU-Russia partnership agreement to improve respect for human rights and ensure the security of gas supplies (debate Wednesday, vote Thursday).
Cross-border patients' rights. The Environment and Public Health Committee votes on the plans to give patients more clearly defined rights to seek treatment in other EU Member States (Tuesday).
Trichet/Juncker. ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet joins the Economics Committee for the regular monetary dialogue (Monday). Eurogroup chair Jean-Claude Juncker will also have a discussion with the committee (Tuesday).
Protection of research animals. New rules to protect the welfare of animals used in scientific research will be put to the vote by the Agriculture Committee (Tuesday).
Energy. The Industry Committee votes on legislation on the energy efficiency of both buildings and tyres, and also adopts its position on the energy projects within the Commission's economic recovery plan (Tuesday).
Fisheries control. Plans aiming for a more effective and systematic approach to monitoring and enforcing fishing quotas will be put to the vote in the Fisheries Committee (Tuesday).
Self-employment/equal opportunities. Legislation to help ensure equal treatment of men and women in the workplace, which also takes account of self-employed workers and their assisting spouses, gets its first-reading vote in the Women's Rights Committee (Tuesday).
EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering meets Nobel Prize winners Luc Montagnier (medicine) and Martti Ahtisaari (Peace) (Wednesday).
20090327IPR52748 For details of all the week's events, see "The Agenda"
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20091400AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
