30 March - 5 April in the European Parliament
Institutions
2009-03-30 - 11:59
A young lady looking at the Europarl website on her laptop computer Eco-labelling rules for products and plans to outlaw discrimination outside work are on the parliament's two-day plenary agenda this week in Brussels on Wednesday and Thursday. MEPs will also debate relations with Russia with greater human rights guarantees from Moscow likely to be a key demand. Have your say about the merits of EU trade agreements with developing countries in our online debate this week.
Check out the new look europarltv for programmes on patients rights, roaming charges and climate change among others.
Key issues on the plenary agenda:
A report on whether it is safe to place telephone masts, which emit electromagnetic rays near schools and hospitals.
Better education for the children of migrants
Equal treatment: MEPs will vote on plans to outlaw discrimination outside the field of employment (which is already covered) on the grounds of faith, disability, age or sexual orientation.
Eco-labelling: Parliament will votes on legislation updating the EU eco-labelling scheme for "environment-friendly" products. EU-Russia: Parliament looks set to call for renewed negotiations on an EU-Russia partnership agreement to improve respect for human rights and ensure the security of gas supplies.
Also taking place in Parliament this week:
Cross-border patients' rights: The Environment and Public Health Committee votes Tuesday on plans to give patients more clearly defined rights to seek treatment in other EU Member States. Trichet/Juncker: ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet joins the Economics Committee for the regular monetary dialogue on Monday. Eurogroup chair Jean-Claude Juncker will talk to the committee Tuesday. Protection of research animals: New rules to protect the welfare of animals used in scientific research will be put to the vote by the Agriculture Committee on Tuesday. Energy: The Industry Committee votes on legislation on the energy efficiency of buildings and tyres and will adopt its position on the energy projects within the Commission's economic recovery plan on Tuesday. Fisheries control: Plans for a more effective and systematic approach to monitoring and enforcing fishing quotas will be put to the vote in the Fisheries Committee on Tuesday. Self-employment/equal opportunities: Legislation to help ensure equal treatment of men and women in the workplace, which also takes account of self-employed workers and their assisting spouses, is before the Women's Rights Committee on Tuesday. EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering meets Nobel Prize winners Luc Montagnier (medicine) and Martti Ahtisaari (Peace) on Wednesday. He will take part in the EU/US Summit in Prague on Sunday.
20090326STO52715 Parliament's press service New look Europarltv Wednesday and Thursday plenary agenda 2009 elections
EN
1
PHOTO
20090226PHT50454.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/news/expert/default_en.htm
EN
3
LINK
http://www.europarltv.europa.eu/LandingPage.aspx
EN
4
LINK
/activities/plenary.do?language=EN
EN
5
LINK
/elections2009/default.htm?language=en
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
