Irish national winner of Charlemagne Youth Prize announced
Youth
Ireland
2009-03-31 - 11:31
Irish national winner of Charlemagne Youth Prize announced In June 2008, a group of 10 young people from a disadvantaged area in Blanchardstown in West Dublin paid a visit to Lieto in Finland as part of a project organised by Foróige, an Irish youth organisation which has as its catchphrase 'empowering youth, enriching communities'. The aim of the project was for the young people to exchange experiences with young people in another country, and to learn about each others countries, cultures, identities and common problems.
A number of preparatory events took place in Ireland before the young people left for Finland - an examination of the problems associated with drug use in the area for example and a European citizenship workshop.
While in Finland , each Irish participant was allocated a Finnish peer, with whom they compared similarities and differences between their respective communities and explored issues such as drug use affecting teenagers, etc. They also designed a lesson plan, to teach each other their own language. When the participants returned from Finland, they took part in an evaluation session and an integration workshop, in order to look, with new eyes, at some of the problems facing non-Irish people living in Ireland.
This is the second year in which the European Parliament has co-organised the International Charlemagne Prize with the prize's Foundation, based in Aachen in Germany. The prize is aimed at projects which Have you organised or participated in a project which helped to promote a European and international understanding, foster the development of a shared sense of European identity and integration, serve as a role model for young people living in Europe and offer practical examples of Europeans living together as one community.
The best national projects have now been selected in each of the 27 EU Member States and representatives from each winning project will be invited to attend the award ceremony in Aachen in Germany on 19 May 2009, when an overall winner will be chosen. The overall winners will receive funding of between €2,000 and €5,000 for projects that are underway.
Last year a Hungarian youth project "Students without Boundaries" was the overall winner of the first Charlemagne Youth Prize. Thanks to this project, more than one hundred students from Romania, Slovakia, Hungary, Ukraine and other countries gather each year for leadership workshops on European issues. The second and third prize went to projects from the United Kingdom and Greece respectively.
20090316IPR51945 http://www.europarl.ie/ European Charlemagne Youth Prize Foróige
EN
1
PHOTO
20090331PHT52982.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://The European Parliament Office in Ireland
EN
3
LINK
http://cyp.adagio4.eu/
EN
4
LINK
http://www.foroige.ie/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
