Tyre labels to show fuel efficiency, safety and noise
Energy
2009-04-01 - 12:49
Tyre buyers will be better informed about their fuel-efficiency, safety and noise performance thanks to a mandatory tyre label proposal backed by the Industry Committee on Tuesday.
Like the European energy label, the tyre label will use fuel-efficiency classes ranging from best-performance (green “A” class) to worst (red “G” class). It will also show the tyre's wet grip and noise performance.
Fuel efficiency, wet grip and noise label
Suppliers must show fuel efficiency, wet grip and external rolling noise classes in any technical promotional literature for C1, C2 and C3 tyres (fitted to passenger cars, light and heavy duty vehicles), says the report drafted by Ivo Belet (EPP-ED, BE). Distributors must also include these values in their bills, says the amended draft legislation.
The label will also have to be attached, e.g. as a sticker, to C1 and C2 tyres, says the committee. Tyre manufacturers must also mould into each sidewall the rolling resistance, wet grip and noise emission values as measured in the type approval test, says another amendment adopted by the committee.
Low noise mark for very quiet tyres
To promote low-noise tyres, the committee inserted a provision in the text for a new "low noise mark", showing a tyre with earmuffs if the noise level is below 68 decibels (C1), 69 decibels (C2 tyres) or 70 decibels (C3 tyres).
Snow tyres
The Commission will set specific requirements for snow or Nordic winter tyres under the regulatory procedure with scrutiny, say MEPs.
Incentives for fuel-saving and safe tyres
The new law also states that Member States may provide incentives only for tyres ranked at least "class C" on fuel efficiency and wet grip.
EU tyre labelling website
Industry Committee MEPs also want the Commission to create by September 2010 an "EU tyre labelling website" as a "central online source of explanatory information for each component of the label".
Provide fuel savings calculator on websites
Suppliers will have to provide a "fuel savings calculator" on their websites, says the Industry Committee, adding that this tool should allow consumers to assess the "potential average savings of fuel, CO2 and costs, for C1, C2 and C3 tyres".
MEPs think that a regulation (directly applicable in all Member States) would be the better format for the new legislation. The Commission had proposed a directive, which would need to be transposed into national law.
The report was adopted by 49 votes in favour and one abstention. -- Procedure: co-decision -- Rapporteur: Ivo Belet (EPP-ED, BE) -- First reading in plenary: 4-7 May 2009-03-30 Committee on Industry, Research and Energy In the chair Angelika NIEBLER EPP-ED DE
20090330IPR52898 Industry, Research and Energy Committee web site Fuel efficiency: labelling of tyres
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=ITRE
EN
2
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5715442
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
