Migration and mobility: challenges and opportunities for European education systems
Education
2009-04-02 - 13:14
Migration has a significant impact on education, as children can struggle with linguistic and cultural barriers, according to a report adopted by the European Parliament Therefore the European Parliament supports the Commission in facing the challenges presented by internal migration and immigration from outside the Union, and calls for national and regional policies to be devised and implemented. The report was adopted with 431 votes in favour, 55 against and 94 abstentions.
Migration can be greatly beneficial to schools as it can enrich them both culturally and educationally, but at the same time it can present significant problems if cultural differences hamper understanding between pupils or between pupils and teachers. The report, drafted by Hannu Takkula (ALDE, FI) wants to encourage a more effective means of incorporating migrant children in national education systems, as he believes that workers within the Union will be less likely to move abroad "if there is a risk that their children will suffer educationally."
Improved teacher training
Parliament believes that there is a need for special training for teachers which explicitly deals with the unique situation of children of migrants, and means of helping them to successfully integrate into mainstream schools. This kind of training is especially crucial in schools with a high proportion of immigrant children, and the report calls for these schools to receive the necessary staff and facilities to cope with the challenge of diverse classes.
Mobility for teachers is also emphasised, as giving teachers the opportunity to spend one or two semesters at a host university or school will allow them to develop their cultural knowledge and empathy with the situation of migrant children. Furthermore, the recruitment of immigrant teachers is encouraged, as it will facilitate contact with other cultures and will provide a role model for children who are struggling to adjust to a new country.
Host country languages, and lifelong learning
An important means of integration is a good knowledge of the language of the new host country, and as such, the House believes that both parents and children should be involved in programmes for learning the official state languages. At the same time, the report also emphasises the importance of preserving links with their own cultures, and encourages children to maintain their own language, which can be helped by schools offering classes in the native languages of migrant children.
Promoting multilingualism should also be a key part of every school curriculum as it will promote the inclusion of migrant children, and will encourage inter-cultural understanding between different groups.
Integration not segregation
It is crucial that Member States avoid the creation of "ghetto-type schools or special classes for migrant children", and that instead, children are allocated to classes depending on their individual educational need. This should be supported by the development of educational programmes based on an awareness of human rights, which will help to prevent the spread of xenophobia and segregation.
Finally, the report calls for integration to be encourage through sports and other extra-curricular activities, as this can also help to combat social exclusion of those from less privileged backgrounds. The earlier and more successfully that migrant children are integrated into schools, the better they will perform through school, further education and eventually in the labour market.
20090401IPR53229 Adopted text (click on 2 April)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
