Euro-Lat Assembly in Madrid ends
External relations
2009-04-08 - 18:29
The third plenary session of the Euro-Latin American Parliamentary Assembly (EuroLat) ended today at the Spanish Congress of Deputies in Madrid after three days of work in which three resolutions were adopted on water, on trade and climate change and on the financial crisis. A Euro-Latin American Charter for Peace and Security was also adopted.
The final day was attended by the Spanish secretary of state for European affairs, Diego López Garrido, the Director General of External Relations at the European Commission, Eneko Landaburu, Ambassador Edita Hrdá, representing the Czech presidency of the EU, the Secretary General of the Iberoamerican General Secretariat, Enrique V. Iglesias, and the co-presidents of the Euro-Lat Assembly, José Ignacio Salafranca and Luis Fernando Duque.
Eneko Landaburu highlighted the fact that in the next budgets of the European Union an effort will be made to provide funding for Latin America. He saw regional integration as a feature of Europe and argued for overcoming difficulties through political dialogue and bilateral relations between the two continents.
Next, Ambassador Edita Hrdá said that the priorities of the Czech presidency of the EU in relation to Latin America and the Caribbean included combating drugs, developing association agreements with the subregions and expanding political dialogue with Cuba.
Following these two statements, members of the Assembly chose three new vice-presidents and approved the nomination of Luis Fernando Duque as co-president to replace Jorge Pizarro.
They also gave the green light to three resolutions tabled by the three committees of Euro-Lat, on the economic crisis, climate change and water, as well as a Euro-Latin American Charter for Peace and Security.
In the closing session the vice-president of Guatemala, Rafael Espada, said he was returning to his country "optimistic and content, with a vision of global unity" after these three days in Madrid. However, he pointed out that he was also returning with "a sense of urgency" at the challenges that the two regions faced in the present situation.
The Spanish secretary of state for European affairs, Diego López Garrido, speaking on behalf of the Spanish government, called on Latin America to turn and face the outside world, as Europe was now doing. He highlighted the upcoming European Union - Latin American/Caribbean summit (EU-LAC) which will be held during Spain's presidency of the EU (January-June 2010). "The Spanish presidency of the EU will be a Latin American presidency", he promised.
Enrique V. Iglesias, Iberoamerican Secretary General, also underlined the opportunity provided by Spain's EU presidency for relations between the two regions and referred to the need for recognition of the emerging countries as part of the solution to the current crisis in the world.
The new co-president of Euro-Lat, Luis Fernando Duque, later spoke in what was his first speech in office. He was glad to have been appointed and said he arrived with "high hopes". He undertook to work "with enthusiasm and be open to dialogue" and said he believed in "integration as the best path for understanding".
Working party on LAC migration
During the third session of the Assembly, a working party was set up on LAC migration, following a decision taken in Antigua, Guatemala. The Assembly also spoke of the need to accompany resolutions with concrete recommendations and it was suggested that the directive on the return of illegal immigrants, approved by the European Parliament, should be applied more flexibly to Latin American immigrants.
20090402IPR53346 Euro-Latin American Parliamentary Assembly
EN
1
LINK
/intcoop/eurolat/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
