The Week Ahead 20-26 April 2009
Institutions
2009-04-17 - 11:16
Plenary Session – Strasbourg (Tuesday to Friday)
Financial supervision . A draft law on the supervision of the insurance sector and another on credit rating agencies are to be put to the vote (debate Wednesday, votes Wednesday and Thursday). There will also be a debate on the outcome of the G20 summit (Thursday).
Energy market liberalisation . Plans to further liberalise the European gas and electricity supply markets will be put to the vote following an agreement between MEPs and the Council presidency (debate Tuesday, vote Wednesday).
Mobile roaming . New rules on charge-caps for calling, texting and internet browsing via mobile phone networks when travelling in the EU will be put to the vote after an agreement with the Council presidency (debate Tuesday, vote Wednesday).
Discharge 2007 . MEPs will decide whether to give their approval to the financial management of the EU institutions in 2007 – a dispute regarding the Council’s budget is unresolved (main debate Tuesday, debate on Council discharge Wednesday, votes Thursday).
Cross-border patients’ rights . MEPs will vote at first reading on plans to extend and clarify citizens’ rights to reimbursement for medical treatment in another EU country (debate and vote Thursday)
Transport legislation . Parliament is set to enact new rules on road transport, and also votes on bus, coach, boat and ship passengers’ rights along the lines of existing rights for air travel (debates Wednesday, votes Thursday).
Timber supply rules . Obligations for suppliers of timber to make checks that their wood is not from illegal logging will be put to the vote (debate Tuesday, vote Friday).
Copyright. There will be a first-reading vote on plans to extend copyright on music recordings from 50 to 95 years (debate Wednesday, vote Thursday).
Moldova . MEPs will debate the crisis in Moldova after disputed elections (Thursday). The Foreign Affairs Committee will meet the Moldovan ambassador to the Council of Europe and opposition figures (Wednesday).
Telecom package . The Industry Committee will hold its second reading vote on the regulatory framework for telecom networks (Tuesday).
20090417IPR53840 For details of all the week's events, see "The Agenda"
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20091700AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
