The Week Ahead 27 April - 3 May 2009
Institutions
2009-04-24 - 13:09
Committee meetings and political groups week - Brussels
Preparing for the plenary. Parliament's political groups will devote most of the week to preparations for the final plenary session of 2004-2009 parliamentary term. The main items on the agenda include legislation on telecom networks, a package of measures on asylum systems, a new set of rules for the supervision of banks and legislation concerning maternity leave. There will be a debate with the Czech Council presidency on plans for the June EU summit. In addition, Hans-Gert Pöttering will make an address marking his final session as EP President.
EP/Lithuania + Poland. President Pöttering makes official visits to both Lithuania and Poland. In each country, he will meet the Presidents and Prime Minister among others (Monday - Wednesday).
Working time. Parliament and Council representatives meet for a final time in the Conciliation Committee to try to reach agreement on changes to EU rules on working time (Monday). If they succeed, this too will be put to the vote at the May plenary session.
Recovery plan. Budgetary changes needed to bring into effect the Commission's proposals for spending on energy projects as part of the effort to counteract the economic downturn will be put to the vote in the Budgets Committee (Monday).
Turkey/Women. The Women's Rights committee holds a hearing on the role of women in Turkey's social, economic and political life (Thursday).
Asylum. The Civil Liberties Committee votes on a range of measures concerning asylum provisions (Monday).
Moldova + Ecuador. A delegation of MEPs visits Chişinău to assess the situation follow Moldova's disputed elections (Monday-Tuesday). Another delegation will be in Ecuador to observe presidential elections (Monday-Tuesday).
Pre-plenary press briefing. As Friday is a public holiday, the regular pre-session press briefing with the EP press service and political group spokespeople will take place on Monday in Strasbourg, just before the opening of the session.
20090424IPR54416 For details of all the week's events, see "The Agenda"
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20091800AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
