MEPs adopt a written declaration on support for Special Olympics in the European Union
Sport
2009-04-27 - 15:30
The European Parliament passed a written declaration in support of the organisation, which enables half a million people with intellectual disabilities to take part in sports training and major events across Europe. The declaration acknowledges the wide benefits of Special Olympics for athletes, families and the wider community and calls on the European Commission to support the 2011 World Special Olympics in Athens and the 2010 European Special Olympics in Warsaw.
436 MEPs have signed the declaration. In order for a written declaration more than half of the 785 MEPs must sign it. The declaration was declared adopted on 23 April in Strasbourg.
The declaration was proposed by Katerina Batzeli (PES), Michael Cramer (Greens/EFA), Silvana Koch-Mehrin (ALDE), Janusz Lewandowski (EPP-ED) and Janusz Wojciechowski (UEN) and was supported by 436 MEPs.
Co-Sponsor, Janusz Lewandowski MEP (EPP-ED -PL) said: "I strongly believe that the European Parliament must now ensure that Special Olympics receives the necessary financial support”.
Co-Sponsor, Katerina Batzeli MEP (PES, GR) said: "The European Parliament has shown real leadership, as supporting Special Olympics makes sense for the European Union, as Special Olympics is EU policy in action”.
Co-Sponsor, Silvana Koch-Mehrin (ALDE, DE) said: "The European Parliament can be proud of today’s decision to back Special Olympics, which on a daily basis promotes social inclusion, active citizenship and volunteerism.”
Co-sponsor, Janusz Wojciechowski (UEN, PL) said: "The European Parliament’s support for Special Olympics is great news for people with an intellectual disability not only in Poland and Greece but also in the rest of Europe”.
Co-sponsor, Michael Cramer (Greens/EFA, DE) said: “Special Olympics has an extremely positive impact on society. We now need to make sure that more people experience the benefits”.
About Special Olympics Europe Eurasia
Special Olympics Europe/Eurasia (SOEE) works with half a million athletes in 58 countries across Europe and Easter Europe and Central Asia, providing year-round sports training and athletic competition in a variety of Olympic-type sports for children and adults with intellectual disabilities, giving them continuing opportunities to develop physical fitness, demonstrate courage, experience joy and participate in sharing of gifts, skills and friendship with their families, other Special Olympics athletes and the community.
SOEE undertakes a number of key additional roles, which include serving as an advocate for people with intellectual disabilities, taking responsibility for European level competitions and establishing European level partnerships.
SOEE is part of the Special Olympics family that works with 2.5 million people across the world supported by 1.5 million volunteers and 3 million family members.
20090427IPR54488 WRITTEN DECLARATION on support for Special Olympics in the European Union Special Olympics
EN
2
LINK
http://www.specialolympics.org/
-//EP//TEXT WDECL P6-DCL-2009-0001 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
