New rules for banks to avoid future financial crises
Economic and monetary affairs
2009-04-30 - 10:30
Parliament is to vote on legislation aiming to improve risk management in banks and avoid a repetition in future of the current banking crisis, which reached a peak when bank failures ended up putting pressure on other banks, leaving the whole financial system at risk.
MEPs will debate and vote on a report by Othmar Karas (EPP-ED, AT) for the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee including amendments to the Capital Requirements Directives to improve the transparency and the supervision of the financial system and aiming to ensure proper risk management in the banking sector.
The main points of the proposed legislation are:
Enhancing both efficiency and effectiveness of supervision and crisis management
Revisions of rules from previous directives, particularly on the large exposures regime and securitisation;
The European Parliament and the Council of Ministers representatives have agreed on a common text in informal "trialogue" discussions. This agreement will now have to be approved by the whole Parliament. This background note reflects the content of the agreement.
20090429BKG54742
Supervision: colleges of supervisors to be established
To strengthen the crisis management framework over EU banking sector, MEPs in the committee supported the Commission proposal and agreed with the Council to establish colleges of national banking supervisors to facilitate cooperation among the authorities dealing with cross-border financial institutions.
According to MEPs, the colleges of supervisors are a further step forward in streamlining EU supervisory cooperation. They also believe that, in case of a conflict between members of a college, an independent advice and a mediation mechanism at Community level should also be available. Therefore, they ask the Commission to put forward a legislative proposal to achieve further supervisory integration by 31 December 2009, with a view to establish an EU level supervisory system by 31 December 2011.
Large exposure regime
What's at stake?
Banks usually spread their exposures over several clients, in order not to be dependent on one single client and to avoid the risk of unsustainable losses due to the non-payment of a loan.
As the current turmoil showed, in cases where financial institutions are widely exposed to a single client, a bank or insurer could incur large losses as a result of the failure of an individual client or a group of connected clients. The same can happen when banks trade their exposures between them: the failure of one institution can cause the failure of others.
There is therefore a need to reinforce the existing rules on large exposures, including inter bank exposures.
The aim of the new provisions on large exposure, agreed by all the three institutions, will apply to the whole banking system, from major institutions to small players.
Stricter rules on large exposure
According to the agreed text, a bank would not be able to expose more than 25% of its own funds to a client or a group of clients. Exceeding this threshold will only be possible for exposure between credit institutions and for not more than €150 million.
A review clause was also agreed, as requested by the MEPs, on the large exposure regime by end of 2011, again to seek further harmonisation of national provisions.
Securitisation: 5% retention and rapid review clause
The current crisis has shown that risks are not always correctly assessed by the institutions proposing an investment, such as when mortgages are packaged into investment products and sold on by the original lender.
The EP representatives agreed with the Commission's proposal to insist that an institution issuing an investment retains a material interest in the performance of the proposed investment. The retention rate is, as agreed between the negotiating delegations, at least 5% of the total value of the securitised exposures.
In addition, the EP delegation sought and obtained a strong review clause, mandating the Commission to come up with a possible proposal to increase the retention rate, by 31 December 2009, after consulting the Committee of European Banking Supervisors and taking into account international developments.
Credit Default Swaps: call for an EU clearing house
Credit Default Swaps (CDS), the most traded derivative in recent years, as well as all over the counter (OTC) products, also need to be regulated, according to the MEPs.
The agreed text therefore calls on the Commission to put forward, by the end of 2009, legislative proposals to enhance transparency in the OTC market and set up a central counterpart (CCP) or clearing house, supervised by the EU, to reduce the risks of these instruments. At present these are often traded privately between institutions, which leads to great opacity as to the extent of institutions' exposures.
Entry into force and other review clauses
The three institutions agreed that national governments will have to transpose the proposed legislation by 31 October 2010 and apply the new provisions from the end of 2010.
Finally, MEPs sought and obtained a review of rules regarding pro-cyclicality and leverage by the end of the current year.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
