Moldova: MEPs condemn grave violations of human rights following parliamentary elections
External relations
2009-05-07 - 13:20
MEPs strongly condemn the massive campaign of harassment, grave violations of human rights and all other illegal actions carried out by the Moldovan Government in the aftermath of the parliamentary elections. MEPs call for a special investigation to be conducted into the cases of those who died during the demonstrations and urge the Council to consider sending a Rule of Law Mission. The resolution was adopted with 467 votes in favour, 27 against and 18 abstentions.
Parliament reaffirms its commitment to continuing a "meaningful and goal-oriented dialogue" with the Republic of Moldova, but attaches great importance to the introduction of strong provisions regarding the rule of law and respect for human rights.
The Commission, the Council and the Member States must make full use of the ENP and, of the Eastern Partnership to establish greater stability, better governance and economic development in the Republic of Moldova and in the other countries at the Union's eastern borders. A goal set for June 2009 is to launch the negotiations on the new Agreement between the Republic of Moldova and the EU at the EU-Moldova Cooperation Council.
MEPs believe that, in order to preserve its credibility for the people of the Republic of Moldova, the EU should become involved in the management of the current situation in a proactive, profound and comprehensive way. Parliament urges the Council to consider sending a Rule of Law Mission to the Republic of Moldova, in order to assist the law enforcement authorities in their reform process, especially in the police and justice areas.
MEPs call for a special investigation to be conducted into the cases of those who died during the events following the elections as well as into all allegations of rape and ill-treatment during detention and politically-motivated arrests, such as those of Anatol Matasaru and Gabriel Stati. They urge the authorities to immediately cease all illegal arrests.
The European Parliament is concerned about the illegal and arbitrary arrests and the widespread violations of the human rights of arrested persons, in particular the right to life, the right not to be subjected to physical abuse, torture or inhumane or degrading treatment or punishment, the right to freedom and safety, the right to a fair trial and the right to freedom of assembly, association and expression, and about the fact that these abuses are still continuing. At least 310 people were arrested and detained.
The resolution condemns the campaign of harassment launched against journalists, civil society representatives and opposition parties, involving in particular arrests and expulsions of journalists, interruption of access to websites and TV stations, broadcasting of propaganda on public channels and denial to opposition representatives of access to the public media.
Involvement of EU country unfounded
No serious indications or evidence have come to light on the basis of which any EU Member State could be accused of being responsible for the violent events of recent weeks. MEPs request immediate and substantial proof in support of any allegation by the Moldovan Government concerning the supposedly criminal actions of the protesters and the involvement of foreign governments.
Parliament deplores the decision to expel the Romanian Ambassador and to introduce a visa obligation for citizens of that European Union Member State. MEPs call on the authorities to restore the visa-free regime for Romanian citizens. The Council and the Commission should review of the EU's visa system and relax the conditions for granting visas to Moldovan citizens, especially the financial conditions, says the resolution.
Voting by Moldovan citizens living abroad
The resolution deplores the fact that the Moldovan Government made no efforts to facilitate voting by Moldovan citizens living abroad, in line with the suggestions of the Venice Commission. Between 500 000 and 1 million Moldovans live abroad and were able to take part in the ballot. The breakaway region of Transnistria prevented the participation of a large number of Moldovan citizens in the elections
More EU involvement needed
The EU must do everything in its power to offer Moldovans a truly European future. Political forces in Moldova and Moldova's partners should not to take advantage of the current instability to divert Moldova from its European course.
The EP calls on the Commission to submit to it a detailed report on the use of all European funds in the Republic of Moldova, with special focus on the funds allocated to good governance and democratic development.
MEPs also call on the Council and the Commission to strengthen the mission of the EU Special Representative to the Republic of Moldova.
20090506IPR55246 Adopted text (click on 7 May)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
