Parliament's election night on Facebook
2009 elections
Institutions
2009-06-10 - 15:04
At present over 52,000 people have become fans of the EP on Facebook. On election night, they made their voice heard. The European Parliament’s page on Facebook - with a community of more than 50,000 users interested in Europe’s Parliament - attracted a great number of visits during Sunday’s election night. Hundreds of fans called on others to vote while others expressed their thoughts and feelings and about the outcome of the election.
Calling on friends
Before polling stations closed at 22:00 several hundred comments were sent by people to other Facebook friends, letting them know “I have voted and you all should do the same”. For example:
Xavier: Vote please, these European elections are more important than people thinks!
Jana: voting feels great
Monika: Voting is chic!
Turn-out
As the first estimate for the EU-wide turn-out (43.01%) was published on the site at 20:50, many expressed their disappointment…
Philip: so low :(
Cindy: way too low :(
Tania: but it's beautiful that my little little little italian city near the sea has 65%!
Jordi: Abstention has won. Politics, you have to learn how distant you are from people!
Bas: why not stopping the whole Europe thing? People seem not to be bothered at all
Natalie: I think it's really embarrassing for Europe, now that we have the right to elect our politicians more than half of a country's votes aren't used. In many countries people fought for a democratic system and free elections 20 years ago.
Eva: Yes, it's low, but not that bad, think about the USA's Parliament... the usual turnout for the elections there is 20-30% and nobody doubts of its legitimacy...
Why?
Many people also posted comments on possible reasons and remedies for the low turn-out.
Simone: (...) almost all the election campaign was about national issues. I wish I had the possibility to vote for people from other European countries. Why can't we vote directly for European parties?
Elisabeth: Here in Austria the main reason for not voting was, that the people didn't like the candidates…
Luca: I too think that there has been a big lack of communication - and that none of the European institutions did enough to let people know more about it in recent years.
Anne-Sophie: An issue is certainly to bring the work of the EP to the people, there are still too many people that do not know what the EU does... It's so sad!
Mixed reactions to the results pie chart
Between 22:00 and 23:00 fans became impatient to see results. When the first estimate for the whole EU finally was published just before 23:00 the reactions were, naturally, very mixed.
Mark Filipe: YEAH! GO EUROPE! DEMOCRACYYY!! PPEEE!!!
Carla: It's a nightmare! I can't believe it!
Ivaylo: Great! Blue majority :)
Saerah: I was kinda hoping for a more reddish outcome…sad for the PES, yes...
Eva: Congratulations to the EPP.
Marta: I do not understand why in a context of economical recession, the right parties become more voted.
Frank: So good to be German this time. The liberals (ELDR) won! ;-))
Max: Pirates got 7.1% in Sweden which is 1 seat of 18 available so we're gonna have at least one pirate in Brussels :D
Robert : what a shameful day for entire Europe... first the results and then the turnout? what is wrong with Europe???
Bryan: France is Green ♥ proud to be French
But however differently fans may feel about the outcome, we hope that there is more agreement on one sentiment expressed by another fan
Marcos: Nice! I hope you continue updating this channel, informing the Europeans about new laws, events and changes in the Parliament and in the EU :)
Wish I could vote!
Others said that they wished they could vote, such as a fan from Switzerland or several ones under 18:
Anne-Sophie: it's such a pity that I'm only 17 and not allowed to vote, but I support the European Union! :)
Reacting to a Youtube election video posted on Facebook, many fans let the community know how they got to the polling station:
Marcell: Hah, I also drove by bike to the polling station this morning! :)
Marie: just walked across the street and voted!
20090608STO56951 Facebook EP on YouTube
EN
1
PHOTO
20090608PHT56962.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.facebook.com/europeanparliament
EN
3
LINK
http://www.youtube.com/europeanparliament
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
