MEPs gear up to join political groups and elect new President
Hearings
Institutions
2009-06-17 - 12:51
Who will be elected the 27th President of the European Parliament? On 14 July MEPs' first act will be to elect a new President. The holder of this key post is Parliament's most public face and represents it internationally. Political groups still have formally to decide on their candidates, but possible names are already circulating. Their number is set to grow ahead of the July sitting. Meanwhile political groups are being formed as parties from across Europe unite under ideological umbrellas. We look at what's at stake in the battle for influence.
EP President
The parliament's president is elected for a two-and-a-half-year term. Negotiations take place between Parliament's political groups on the basis of their relative strength after the election to determine what candidate can achieve the necessary majority, with agreements in the past often spanning the two presidential mandates during the full legislative term. Ultimately though, it is a secret ballot of all Parliament's members which determines who will occupy the chair.
What does the EP President do?
Internally the President chairs the plenary sittings of Parliament in Brussels and Strasbourg. This means they call the votes, call speakers and are also responsible for ensuring the debates run smoothly. As well as officially opening every session they can also make a statement at the beginning of the session.
They also chair the meeting of the leaders of the political groups, which sets Parliament's political agenda, as well as the Parliament's Bureau, which essentially runs decides on organisational and practical aspects of the Institution's work.
A crucial aspect of the role is also representing the Parliament at the 4 times a year European Council where leaders of all 27 States meet. Parliament's President customarily addresses EU leaders at the start and let them know the view of MEPs on current issues.
Externally the President represents the Parliament in all legal matters, for instance signing of EU treaties. He or she also represents Parliament in its international relations and undertakes official visits within and outside the EU. Therefore Presidents have an excellent platform to promote institutional priorities. Finally the President is also responsible for signing the EU budget.
Tell us what you think, what qualities should the new EP President have?
Why MEPs generally prefer to be in groups
In the last parliament there were 7 political groups and following the election, there is great speculation about whether there will be new groups in the new Chamber or whether existing ones will disband.
At present the centre-right EPP have the upper hand with 264 predicted seats - comfortably ahead of the Socialist PES bloc on 161 and the Liberals on 80 Members. These numbers are however likely to change as currently non-attached members negotiate membership of existing groups, as well as seeking to form new ones.
One reason for joining a group is to gain a platform . As speaking time is divided in the House according to the size of a group the more "air time" they have. Groups also determine to a large degree the committees on which members will sit and who will be appointed "rapporteurs" to steer this or that legislation through the house.
Political groups are thus at the heart of Parliament's political life. At present though, their attention is focused on the attribution of leading positions within Parliament as the necessary pre-requisite of fulfilling their political agendas. This requires not only seeking agreement with other groups, but also balancing interests within groups.
At the end of the process, and subject to the votes which will follow to elect office holders: Parliament will have its President, 14 Vice-Presidents, 6 Quaestors, as well as chairpersons for its parliamentary committees and its delegations responsible for interparliamentary relations with non-EU countries.
The relative power of groups is clearly illustrated by the near impossibility of Parliament's non-attached members achieving positions of formal influence in parliamentary life.
Much attention will therefore focus in coming weeks on the anticipated formation of new groups from among the still relatively large number of formally non-attached members, a number which includes some substantial national party contingents. It is known, for example, that the British Conservatives, who have broken from the EPP group are endeavouring to find partners with whom to constitute a new political group. Under Parliament's rules, at least 25 Members from at least 7 countries are needed to form a group.
What's in a name?
The process of allying different political parties from different countries can either be relatively straightforward or can happen after long and careful negotiations. The platform of each political group must somehow take into account the views of the various national parties.
These differences and similarities manifest themselves in the name that the group on Parliament adopts. For example the European People's Party has now shorn its "European Democrats" tag with the departure of the British Conservative party.
Equally, the Liberal group - founded in 1953 - became the Liberal and Democratic Groups in 1976, the Liberal, Democrat and Reformist Group in 1986 and the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe in 2004. The changing name reflects the different political make up of the groups and its priorities.
A 'day in the life' of a President
Sign EU legislation into law with Council counterparts
Meeting with a visiting Prime Minister
Open the Parliamentary session
Chair meeting with political group leaders
Meet student groups
20090612STO57094 FAQ: Election of the President of the European Parliament Current EP President Current political groups EuroparlTV
EN
1
EUROPARL-TV
http://www.europarltv.europa.eu/swf/EmbedPlayer.swf?vid=307d903f-b2a7-4f24-88b2-9ec2d8965778&cid=845a9964-bb23-4116-90f3-87a64976b498&lang=en&bitrate=512&loop=off&autoplay=off&startVolume=medium&showTitle=on&showBottom=on
EN
3
LINK
/president/defaulten.htm
EN
4
LINK
/groups/default_en.htm
EN
5
LINK
http://www.europarltv.europa.eu/elections2009.aspx?action=viewVideo&packageId=307d903f-b2a7-4f24-88b2-9ec2d8965778
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20090616BKG57210 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
