Iran: "We cannot leave the people alone" says MEP
2009 elections
Institutions
2009-06-23 - 12:44
Tehran, 10 June: Protestors fight running battles with riot police in the stand-off over the results of the Iranian election. ©Belga/EPA/Demotix Events in Tehran over the last 10 days have captured the world's attention. As hundreds of thousands have taken to the streets to protest at the election results the regime has been shaken by the worst protests since fall of the Shah in 1979. The West has condemned the use of violence against protestors and restrictions on the media. Parliament's President Hans-Gert Pöttering has warned that "we have a moral obligation not to shut our eyes to what is happening".
The death-toll from the protests is unclear although the shooting of student Neda Salehi Agha-Soltan, filmed and distributed via the internet, has become a cause celebre and a rallying point for opposition to President Ahmadinejad.
Media crackdown condemned by EU leaders
At a meeting last week EU leaders condemned "the use of violence against protesters resulting in the loss of lives".
In remarks at the start of that summit Mr Pöttering also expressed deep concerns about the increasing violence in Iran: "This is further proof of the inadequate rule of law, particularly the restrictions on freedom of expression and freedom of demonstration in Iran" he said.
The summit agreed a declaration on Iran condemning "the crackdown against journalists, media outlets, communications and protester" which it said "are in contrast to the relatively open and encouraging period in the run up to the election".
For the head of the Parliament's delegation to Iran, German Green MEP Angelika Beer, the declaration of the Council "falls far short" and, personally believes the EP and the EU should support new elections in Iran, saying "the opposition and also the people demand new elections".
Austrian Socialist Christa Prets is the Vice-Chair of the Parliament's delegation to Iran. She told us: "I hope the protesters will remain persistent. After what has happened, it cannot remain the way it used to be. The government won't be able to bear the pressure of the population which is reinforced by international pressure."
She went on to describe the situation as "an impasse". She went on to stress that Supreme Leader Khamenei should realise that a solution could be two new candidates in a new election.
"Iran at a crossroads"
In further remarks Mr Pöttering said the protestors had popular support: "The EU can not ignore the impressive mobilisation of civil society which has taken to the streets of Teheran and other Iranian cities in recent days. The refuting of the official election results is not limited to small elite. This movement is being directed by reformers and has broad popular support."
In Mrs Beer's opinion Iran is now standing at the decisive crossroads: either there will be a bloodshed or a new Iran will open to the world: "What I am mostly concerned about is that the people who are demonstrating for their freedom will be murdered and that it will come to a massacre" she said.
Speaking about the bloodshed Ms Prets said that there should be "international consequences" if the Iranian Government fires on its own people.
"Therefore, we can not leave the people alone" she said and called on the international community to support civil society in Iran.
Iran - the key players
Ayatollah Ali Khamenei: Supreme Leader for life since 1989. Appoints judges, heads armed forces
Mahmoud Ahmadinejad: President since 2005, popular in rural areas
Hossein Mousavi: Former PM in 1980's, defeated Presidential candidate
Iran's population: About half its 71m people are under 25; nearly two-thirds under 30
20090619STO57314 EU Declaration on Iran (see Annex 8) Speech by Mr Pöttering at the European Council EP/Iran Delegation
EN
1
PHOTO
20090611PHT57040.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.consilium.europa.eu/uedocs/cms_data/docs/pressdata/en/ec/108622.pdf
EN
3
LINK
/president/defaulten.htm#speeche
EN
4
LINK
/activities/delegations/homeDel.do?body=D-IR&language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
