EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering's End of Term Review
Institutions
2009-07-10 - 18:38
The programme of action outlined by Hans-Gert Pöttering at the beginning of his term of office as President of the European Parliament was part of a common agenda designed to adapt the European institutions to an enlarged European Union and to enable them to meet increased responsibilities and challenges. At the end of his term, we can observe significant progress in achieving these priorities.
Key points contained in the End of Term Review:
Legislative successes
It was the European Parliament who moved the urgent task of fighting climate change to the very top of the political agenda. It was the European Parliament that pushed for a fast-track adoption of the 'energy and climate' package, which was adopted in a historic first-reading agreement with the Council in December 2008. The fact that the EP achieved this result, much earlier than originally expected, has given the European Union a high degree of credibility for the negotiations at the Copenhagen Conference in December 2009.
Many of the current reforms in the regulation of financial markets at European level have in many respects been brought about at the initiative of the European Parliament and under pressure from it.
Likewise, in recent years, the European Parliament has revived the debate on institutional reform and driven forward the process leading to the conclusion of the Lisbon Treaty . In so doing, it succeeded in preserving in the new treaty the fundamental principles which the European Parliament has always fought for.
Reinforcing Parliament's position in the EU's institutional balance
The European Parliament has intensified its co-operation with the national parliaments and held regular meetings with them in order to establish a common line on vital topical issues. At the same time, the development of relations with the parliaments of the partner countries has been a prime concern.
Since September 2007, the European Parliament has been involved in the G-8 process and its President attends the annual meetings of the Speakers of the G8 Parliaments. Likewise, the European Parliament increasingly takes part in EU summits with third countries.
Another achievement of this parliamentary term has been that the role of the European Parliament in European Council meetings is no longer confined to the President of the European Parliament delivering an address at the beginning of each meeting. The European Parliament, represented by its President, now also participates in institutional and constitutional consultations at EU summits.
Reform of the European Parliament
Reforming the working methods and procedures of the European Parliament has been an important project. Thanks to the commitment of the Working Party on Parliamentary Reform, this major project of President Pöttering has been successfully completed. Thus, the working methods of the European Parliament have been updated and modernised to reflect new political circumstances, not least the increase in size and diversity of the European Parliament following enlargement. This included the revamping of plenary debates, reform of the legislative procedure, improvement of work in committee with increased cooperation between committees and the possibility of own-initiative legislative reports or deviating decisions.
Parliament's administration
To complement the Parliament's internal reform, the Bureau has also sought to improve the administration of the institution, to facilitate the everyday work of Members and to modernise methods of communication with citizens, by establishing the EuroparlTV, or launching new prizes for youth, citizens and journalists.
From the beginning of the new parliamentary term the Statute for Members will be in force. Similarly, the establishment of a clear and transparent legal status for assistants constitutes important progress and success.
Future challenges
Hans-Gert Pöttering, who was re-elected to the European Parliament at the June 2009 elections, will be the only remaining MEP who has continuously serve since the first direct elections in 1979. During the next legislature he aims to continue the work he initiated in two areas that he was very engaged with during his term as President: intercultural dialogue and the establishment of the House of European History.
Lasting impetus has been derived from the 2008 European Year of Intercultural Dialogue , in the form for example of the dialogue in the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly, the meetings of young people from different faith communities, including from Israel and the Palestinian Territories, or the Arab and African weeks which have been held at the European Parliament.
With the creation of the EP Working Group on the Middle East , as well as through its role and work in the EMPA, the European Parliament has shown that its members can offer an additional perspective in relations with the Middle East, as they can think and act outside the traditional diplomatic channels. The Working Group has done important work and is now well established; in that framework the new European Parliament should persevere in resolutely promoting a two-State solution.
Hans-Gert Pöttering also will devote himself to the task of ensuring that the House of European History becomes a reality by the end of the next parliamentary term in 2014. The House of European History should serve as a place in which to remember and renew the European sense of identity and give life to the principles on which the European Union is founded.
20090710IPR58058 The full text of President Pöttering's End of Term Review is available via this link French and German editions will be available soon on the President's website - click here
EN
1
LINK
/president/mid_term_review/en/090707-Endterm-Review-Email-EN.pdf
EN
2
LINK
/president
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
