Irish Socialist MEP Joe Higgins and Swedish Pirate Christian Engström
2009 elections
Institutions
2009-07-09 - 13:04
On an overcast July day in Brussels, Christian Engström and Joe Higgins arrive at the Place de Luxembourg entrance of the Parliament in Brussels. As newly elected MEPs, they take time to take in their new surroundings. Irish MEP Joe Higgins was given a Socialist mandate by Dublin's voters whilst a backlash against internet laws prompted the election of Christian Engström for the Pirate party. By joining the Greens/EFA Christian Engström is hoping his views will be reflected on a European level whilst the same applies for Joe Higgins and the leftist GUE group. Mr Engström gets his photo taken for his official badge and internet page whilst Joe Higgins walks the corridors "I don't even have an office yet!" Higgins says he will oppose the "right wing economic and political agenda which is dominant in Europe" whilst Engström is interested in safeguarding internet privacy. Logged in to new political trends sweeping across Europe or going against the prevailing winds as mavericks? Workers' rights and privacy for internet users are issues that Irish Socialist MEP Joe Higgins and Swedish "Pirate" Christian Engström intend to push in Brussels in Strasbourg. Speaking to us in the last of our series on new MEPs they told us of their impressions of Brussels and the Parliament and the policies they intended to pursue after being newly elected in June.
Irish Socialist MEP Joe Higgins was born in County Kerry in Ireland in 1949. He made his name in politics by championing local issues and working closely with people at grass roots level as an Irish TD (Member of Parliament). He sees his latest post as "just a continuum of what I have been doing all my life".
He will forgo most of his salary as an MEP and just accept the average wage in Ireland whilst the rest goes to help the movement. In Brussels and Strasbourg he will sit with the leftist GUE group.
For Swedish "Pirate" Christian Engström election to the European Parliament came on the back of the huge backlash in his homeland against copyright and patent law regarding the internet. His vow is to strengthen the right to privacy on the internet. "Democracy and transparency" are the key words for him. The 48 year old has a degree in mathematics and computer science and will sit with the Greens/EFA bloc in Parliament.
Joe Higgins
Christian Engström
First impressions?
Disorientating.
First time in Brussels?
I have been here for a few weeks but this is not my first time as I have previously been part of other socialist meetings with comrades and had meetings with the left for Workers' International in Belgium. So it's a question of getting used to the physical surroundings which are very big but most importantly it is getting used to the political surroundings to see how to advance from a left perspective generally in Europe.
What was your previous role?
I was in the Irish Parliament for 10 years from 1997- 2007. I narrowly lost my seat in 2007 and continued as a full-time activist and now here I am. In this the EP is just a continuum of what I have been doing all my life. It is just another platform. W hich areas would you like to put your efforts most into?
To put opposition to the right-wing economic and political agenda which is dominant in Europe, involving the drive for privatisation of enterprises, tax on workers' rights, pensions, wages. I will concentrate on defending working people against those attacks and fighting for a socialist alternative in opposition to the capitalist market and neo-liberalism which is part and parcel of that.
What picture will you hang first in your new office?
I don't even have an office yet! But usually we would put up portraits of Socialist leaders and comrades Jim Connolly, Karl Marx, Trotsky, Rosa Luxemburg, Karl Liebknecht. I'll have to consult with my colleagues who will be working there more than me, most probably.
Your favourite qualities in a politician?
I judge politicians strictly by their political and economical ideas. I do not hold personal relations with neo-liberal politicians because one cannot be serious with opposing them in the chamber and have a beer with them later. There are millions of workers to have a beer with anyway. One doesn't need to have one with the Right!
How will you make a mark here?
To be a voice for working people and unemployed people in Ireland but also in all Europe as we are one movement as far as working class is concerned. To put an opposition to the right wing and economic agenda which is dominant in Europe. Your heroes in world history?
I am not keen on heroes but I particular admire men and women throughout history who stood up for justice, for democratic rights, for a socialist world. They can be well-known and many millions who are unknown....men and women who fought for a new and a better world. MEPs are very mobile. Are you used to travelling a lot?
I have travelled a fair amount throughout the years. I do not particularly like air-travel but it will have to be done.
Is becoming an MEP for you a springboard or a culmination of your career?
I would never see my political life as a career choice. It's a mission. It's a platform....If it is a springboard it is a springboard to try and represent better working people throughout Europe and represent an alternative to them. Also, our policy here is that I will live on an average industrial wage that's in Ireland and the rest goes to the movement.
Which languages do you speak?
Irish and English fluently, modest French and even more modest knowledge Spanish (soft smile). What is your favourite occupation when not working?
Unfortunately I have to say that the political struggle becomes all- consuming....not good in ways. Perhaps now that I am a Euro-deputy I will make a new resolution to have a little bit more private time and also to go to concerts and movies.
First impressions of the Parliament?
I like it, it's a nice place! I was here five years ago as an activist, and after having spent 7 hours here I got so interested in information politics that I ended up spending the next 5 years as a political activist.
What was the activism about?
The software patents. We were activists from all over Europe. We worked together to defeat the directive. This was in many ways the starting point of internet activism in Europe.
First time in Brussels?
I have only been at Place de Luxembourg (located behind the Parliament's building in Brussels) - but that looks very nice he says laughing.
What was your previous role?
I have spent the last five years as a full time political activist. Before I worked as an IT-developer.
Into which areas would you like to put most of your efforts/ How will you make a mark here?
It's quite easy for me to answer, since the Pirate Party has a very limited agenda. We are very focused.
We are about safeguarding human rights on the internet, in particular the right to privacy. The right to do things on the internet without being under constant surveillance. And we want to reform the rules on intellectual property. Finally we want more democracy and transparency in the EU.
Your favourite qualities in a politician
You have to do after the election, what you promised to do before the election.
First speech in the Chamber - nervous, excited...?
I haven't really thought about it... But I love talking and listening to my own voice. A thing I guess most politicians have in common (laughing). So I guess I look forward to it.
MEPs need to be very mobile. Are you used to travelling a lot?
I haven't travelled a lot during the last 5 years. That is the whole point of internet activism. You can do it without travelling! But I don't mind travelling, and I know it's a part of the job.
Which languages do you speak?
Swedish and English. I can sort of understand German, but I won't insult German people by trying to speak German to them (laughing).
What is your favourite occupation when not working?
It's been a while since I had some spare time... But I love to be out in our country cottage chucking up some woods or doing absolutely nothing.
Are you afraid to get lost in the EP building?
Actually not. I have some very good assistants, who have been good at guiding me around.
20090709STO57831 Christian Engström Joe Higgins' EP campaign website
EN
1
DIAPOPHOTO
20090702PHT57707.jpg
EN
2
DIAPOPHOTO
20090701PHT57606.jpg
EN
3
DIAPOPHOTO
20090701PHT57604.jpg
EN
4
DIAPOPHOTO
20090709PHT57838.jpg
EN
5
DIAPOPHOTO
20090709PHT57840.jpg
EN
6
DIAPOPHOTO
20090709PHT57836.jpg
EN
7
DIAPOPHOTO
20090709PHT57834.jpg
EN
8
LINK
http://www.glindra.org/about.html
EN
9
LINK
http://www.joehiggins.eu/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
