MEPs say no to violence in Iran, China and Honduras
Institutions
2009-07-17 - 10:49
An ethnic Uighur man passes by security forces standing guard outside the Grand Bazaar in Urumqi, Xinjiang province, China, 16 July 2009. ©BELGA/EPA/DIEGO AZUBE Condemnation of violence was the common thread across three debates the EP held Wednesday afternoon. MEPs discussed the violence in Iran after presidential elections, ethnic clashes in China and coup d'état in Honduras.
MEPs reviewed developments in world affairs which have hit the headlines in recent weeks. In three debates, Members assessed events in Iran, China and Honduras.
Iran
Events in Iran recently grabbed the world's attention, as violence broke out following the disputed outcome of presidential elections. MEPs across the House condemned:
- violence against protestors, obstruction of free journalism and torture in prisons
- called on Iranian authorities to stop the violence and start dialogue
Speaking in the Chamber British Labour Member Richard Howitt said: "Whatever people feel about the outcome of the Iranian elections, there is no doubt that hundreds have been injured, tens of people have been killed in the protests and thousands of people appear to have been detained as political prisoners."
Annemie Neyts-Uyttenbroeck , a Liberal Belgian Member said: "All the people of the world including the people of Iran have to have the right to elect their own leaders and to replace them when they are no longer fit for purpose."
Daniel Cohn-Bendit of the Greens/EFA called on the Commission and the Council to analyse what he considered the participation and responsibilities of some EU companies in the repression as they provide technology which could be misused by regime against protesters.
Fiorello Provera, an Italian MEP from the EFD bloc warned against Iranian nuclear programme which might be used "to blackmail the countries and entire international community".
China
The beginning of July saw ethnic violence in North-West China, pitching the predominantly Muslim Uyghur minority against Han Chinese who are the largest ethnic group in China, and massive intervention by the Chinese authorities to control the situation.
Speakers across the House condemned the ethnic violence in northwest region, and called for protection of minorities, but voices also warned against separatism.
Elmar Brok for the centre right EPP group: "If you don't reach agreement with the moderates then ever greater numbers of young radicals, who do not want to wait anymore, take over."
For the Socialists and Democrats, Romanian Member Adrian Severin said "minority rights...could not excuse separatist policies".
Charles Tannock for the European Conservatives and Reformists: "We should certainly not support in any way the secession of Xinjiang province".
Honduras
The Central American country of Honduras went into crisis as the military expelled the elected President Zelaya to Costa Rica following his attempt to organise a plebiscite to amend the constitution.
Speakers in the debate called for the restoration of the elected president and supported mediation efforts by Organisation of American States and Costa Rican president Óscar Arias - a Nobel Peace Prize laureate.
Jean-Luc Mélenchon of the leftist GUE/NGL group said: "Our pacifist principles should not mean that we give impression turning a blind eye to coup."
José Ignacio Salafranca , Spanish Member of the EPP remarked that "it is absolutely necessary for us to send an EU observation mission for elections in Honduras".
20090710STO58046 Iran: "We cannot leave the people alone" says MEP EU declaration on situation in China EU - Honduras
EN
1
PHOTO
20090715PHT58277.jpg
EN
3
LINK
http://www.consilium.europa.eu/uedocs/cms_Data/docs/pressdata/en/cfsp/109077.pdf
EN
4
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/external_relations/honduras/index_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20090619STO57314 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
