MEPs and Congressmen debate anti-recession measures
Economic and monetary affairs
2009-09-02 - 19:03
Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee MEPs exchanged views with their U.S. counterparts Wednesday on the economic crisis and new regulatory framework for financial markets. They agreed to improve contacts and information exchange between legislators from both sides of the Atlantic.
U.S. Representative Paul Kanjorski (Democrat, Pennsylvania), Chairman of the Capital Markets and Insurance Subcommittee, started the debate by saying that the main task should be firstly "identifying causes and scope of the crisis and then concentrate on solving practical problems".
Representative Scott Garett (Republican, New Jersey) said that the proper way to handle the crisis should be "focused on underlying problems and not the others like hedge funds and derivatives" - a reference to forthcoming EU reforms of the rules for these financial instruments.
Luis Gutierrez (Democrat, Illinois), Chairman of the Financial Services Subcommittee, emphasized the need for dialogue and co-operation between the institutions. On the question of regulation, he stressed that just rules are not enough, because "if you don't have the policeman, don't expect people to abide by the law."
Chairwoman Sharon Bowles (ALDE, UK), responding to concern about the hedge funds regulation, said that committee has only just started discussing the proposal, and that the final version might be quite different after amendments by Parliament and the Council.
Jean-Paul Gauzès (EPP, FR), asked that the transatlantic partners move at the same speed when changing the regulatory architecture, so as to avoid duplicating work to catch up with each other. But "moving as fast as we can increases our credibility", he noted.
Udo Bullman (S&D, DE), was certain that only acting together guarantees the smooth working of the regulatory framework. The EU and the U.S. should try to prevent arbitrage and calm fears that "one partner loses because of different rules", he said
Commenting on international co-operation, Sylvie Goulard (ALDE, FR), noted that citizens want to see "not just meetings of the G20, but also co-ordinated results".
Sven GIEGOLD (Greens/EFA, DE) was interested in American proposals for reconciling the retention of national tax sovereignty with closing international loopholes such as tax havens.
Kay Swinburne (ECR, UK), advocated a co-ordinated and proportionate approach to hedge funds, because U.S. funds also provide risk capital for European high-tech firms. Stopping this capital flow " could be disastrous for innovation in the EU", she said.
Nikolaos Chountis (GUE/NGL, GR), was interested in what the Federal Reserve has done to cleanse the banking system of "toxic" loans, while Godfrey Bloom (EFD, UK), argued that one of the measures should be rooting out those self-regulators who are actually just "made of bankers, by the bankers and for the bankers", ruling and deciding in secrecy.
Non-attached member Hans-Peter Martin (AT), warned that voters expect results. Otherwise, he said, "the crisis could help extremists to take advantage of the situation, as history shows".
2009-09-02 Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs In the chair Sharon BOWLES ALDE UK
20090902IPR60136
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
