Photo slideshow: Hearings of Commissioners-designate
Institutions
2009-09-03 - 15:58
The meeting room filled up quick with press as MEPs questioned the potential future Commissioners The three commissioners during the hearing at the EP: Algirdas Šemeta (Financial Programming and Budget), Karel De Gucht (Development and Humanitarian Aid) and Pawel Samecki (Regional Policy) On 1 and 2 September, the three candidates entering the European Commission for the final months of its mandate to replace Members who left early were in Parliament to set out their stalls to MEPs. The procedure allows MEPs to assess their suitability for their new jobs. On 16 September in a Session in Strasbourg Members will vote to approve, or not, their appointment. Here are some photos that capture a bit of the essence of the hearings. The first link below goes straight to more photos.
Lithuania's Algirdas Šemeta: Financial Programming and Budget
"Negotiations are never easy when money is involved" said Mr Šemeta, former Lithuanian minister of finances, during his presentation to the Budgets Committee of the European Parliament.
In light of the current global economic crisis, he reinforced the need for immediate responses. "There is no time to lose", he said, as this crisis "brings us opportunities and responsibilities towards future generations".
The Commissioner-designate to replace Dalia Grybauskaitė, who was elected President of Lithuania, underlined that "the economy is still the biggest concern for European citizens" and "Europe needs a clear sign of economic stability".
His top priorities included economic growth, job creation, EU energy security, responses to climate change and the EU's global role.
Belgium's Karel De Gucht: Development and Humanitarian Aid
Former MEP, Belgian MP and minister for foreign affairs, Mr De Gucht faced MEPs on the EP's Development Committee.
"Nobody appreciates and values the essential role of the European Parliament in making the EU process more accountable and democratic more than I" he said.
Designate to replace Louis Michel, now an MEP, Karel De Gucht gives the economic crisis top priority. He said the crisis was now striking developing countries and that "we cannot afford more social and political instability in the world".
On the international financial crisis and the LDCs he said: "There is a clear risk not only that the EU will fall short of its commitments to increase public development aid but even that its aid levels will be cut because of budgetary pressures. My position on this is clear: I am convinced that by helping our partner countries cope with the crisis we are also acting in our own interests", said Mr De Gucht, in reply to questions by Irish MEP Gay Mitchell and Dutch Socialist Thijs Berman.
As to the fight against corruption in developing countries, Mr De Gucht insisted, in reply to a question by Swedish EPP Member Alf Svensson that aid must be better targeted and that the way budgetary aid is used could be one way of tackling corruption.
Poland's Pawel Samecki: Regional Policy
Former member of the management board of the National Bank of Poland, Pawel Samecki was designated to replace Danuta Hübner, who was elected MEP. "Cohesion policy means solidarity, one of the basic values of Europe, and was, from the very beginning, meant to make sure that economic integration is for everybody", he said.
For Mr Samecki, key problems in regional policy include error rates in spending programmes, the need for better ex-post evaluations and impact assessment, as well as the need to cut red tape and simplify administration, to be "faster and more efficient in the implementation of funds". "Rules and procedures should be the minimum to meet the objectives of the policy" he added, "though simplification does not mean laxity".
He also agreed with MEPs Helga Trüpel, (Greens/EFA) and Reimer Böge, (EPP) on the need to simplify budget implementation and the rules governing the structural funds, and promised new proposals, such as introducing "one-stop-shops". Committee chair French MEP Alain Lamassoure reminded Mr Šemeta of his role, representing an institution independent of both the Council and Parliament and hoped that, as a newcomer, he could help the EU to do away with anomalies such as budget lines that are never used and cannot be afforded in times of financial crisis. Autumn hearings
An entirely new Commission will be designated this autumn. Before it can assume office, the European Parliament must first approve the nomination of its President, and thereafter hold full-scale hearings of members of his proposed team to decide whether to approve the new Commission as a whole. This process, a key component in the European Parliament's armoury of supervisory powers, will be fully reported on this website.
To see the full set of pictures of this week's hearings, click on the Flickr link below.
20090828STO59863 Photo reportage on 3 Hearings (see slideshow) New tasks need new resources, Budgets Committee MEPs tell Commissioner-designate Algidras Šemeta MEPs hear Karel De Gucht's vision of development policy EU Regional policy needs more knowledge and less red tape, MEPs tell Pawel Samecki EuroparlTV
EN
1
DIAPOPHOTO
20090901PHT60011.jpg
EN
2
DIAPOPHOTO
20090901PHT60007.jpg
EN
3
LINK
http://www.flickr.com/photos/european_parliament/sets/72157622101572461/show/
EN
7
LINK
http://www.europarltv.europa.eu/yourParliament.aspx?action=viewVideo&packageId=52ad5c2c-82e8-4f5b-99a0-92bde09c590f
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20090901IPR60078 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20090901IPR60076 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20090902IPR60138 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
