Olli Rehn: why visas have been scrapped for certain Balkan countries
Institutions
2009-09-02 - 16:04
Foreign Affairs Committee MEPs on Wednesday criticized the European Commission's decision to retain visa requirements for Bosnia-Herzegovina and Albania, despite lifting them for three other Balkan countries. Parliament's principal political groups underlined to Commissioner Olli Rehn the potential risk of regional instability that this decision is likely to create.
A few weeks before the Commission adopts its latest report on enlargement, on 14 October, Mr Rehn commented on its recent decision to partially waive the requirement for Schengen visas for three western Balkan countries.
"The abolition of visas is not just a political decision but is linked to compliance with particular criteria", said the Commissioner.
On15 July this year the Commission adopted a proposal to exempt citizens of the former Yugoslav republic of Macedonia, Montenegro and Serbia from EU visa rules. Provided they have the new biometric passports, people from these three countries will be able to travel freely around the Schengen zone from 1 January 2010.
The Commissioner told MEPs that the Commission could review the situation of Bosnia and Albania in mid-2010, depending on progress made by these countries on border controls, combating organised crime and introducing biometric passports.
The coordinators of Parliament's main political groups highlighted the potential risk of regional instability created by the Commission's decision. For example, Bosnian Serbs and Croats who have dual nationality will be able to travel freely to the EU.
Croatia and Serbia
Speaking about Croatia, Mr Rehn said "If this country meets the criteria as regards its judiciary, cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for ex-Yugoslavia (ICTY) and reform of its dockyards, and if the issue of its frontier with Slovenia is settled, we can envisage completing negotiations in the first half of 2010".
Hannes Swoboda (S&D, AT), Parliament's rapporteur for Croatia, asked the Commissioner if he was still involved in efforts to resolve the border dispute. Mr Rehn replied "the Commission has done its work. It's now up to the leaders of the two countries to overcome the remaining differences".
On Serbia, the Commissioner said "cooperation with the ICTY is much improved recently. This improvement could be enough to allow the interim agreement to go ahead in the near future". The Stabilisation and Association Agreement between the EU and Serbia signed on 29 April 2008 cannot enter into force unless Belgrade cooperates fully with the ICTY, under a compromise agreed by European foreign ministers.
No accelerated procedure for Iceland
"Even though Iceland is a member of the European Economic Area and the Schengen Area, which represents two thirds of the acquis communautaire , no accelerated procedure is envisaged for this country, which is currently between the 35th and 40th kilometres out of the 42.195 kilometres in a marathon", said the Commissioner in reply to questions by Ignacio Salafranca (EPP, ES) and Charles Tannock (ECR, UK).
2009-09-02 Committee on Foreign Affairs Chair Gabriele Albertini EPP IT
20090902IPR60120 Website of Commissioner Olli Rehn
EN
1
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/commission_barroso/rehn/index_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
