Human rights in Russia's North Caucasus
Human rights
2009-10-02 - 12:02
Chechnya, Russia. 17 July, 2009. The portrait of murdered human rights activist Natalia Estemirova on a memorial to journalists who died for free speech. Grozny. ©Belga The human rights situation in Russia's North Caucasus was discussed at a parliamentary hearing on Wednesday (30 September). Members were joined by journalists and human rights activists from the region who painted a grim picture of human rights abuses and impunity for those who commit them. They called on the EU to use a planned Partnership Agreement with Russia to exert more pressure of the Kremlin.
The Chechen wars of 1994-1996 and 1999-2008 were the largest conflicts in the post-Soviet territory, comparable with the conflicts in Yugoslavia. Thousands of people, mostly civilians, were killed. However, most of the perpetrators have not been brought to account yet. Many journalists and people who spoke out about human rights violations have been threatened or killed.
Both the European Union and Members of the European Parliament have condemned the crimes and called for them to be thoroughly investigated.
During the hearing representatives from both the Council and Commission said that regular human rights consultations with Russia had led to improvements in the situation.
In particular NGO's are under less pressure and Russia has established a human rights master program: "In dialogue no subjects are taboo anymore" said Council representative Jan Nordlander who is Sweden 's Human Rights Ambassador.
"Nothing changes"
Stanislav Dmitrievsky, editor-in-chief of the Russian-Chechen Friendship Society newspaper, "Pravozashchita" said via video-link that there was a "vicious circle": “Russian authorities are lying, EU representatives know that they are not told the truth...Russia knows that they know...but nothing changes".
Referring to a possible new Partnership Agreement between Brussels and Moscow the Commission's representative Rolf Timans said that "human rights will play a major role in negotiations on the new Partnership Agreement".
This theme was taken up by the Committee Chair Heidi Hautala (Green/EFA) MEP who said it should have an "operable, actionable clause" which would mean actions if human rights were breached. Lithuanian member Vytautas Landsbergis (EPP) warned of becoming “mutants of our principal identity” if empty talks continued and principles were not adhered to.
"Terror by the state"
Sergei Kovalev, former Human Rights Ombudsman of the Russian Federation described the situation as "terror by the state" and asked the EU to address the European Court of human rights in Strasbourg with a claim against Russia.
Mr Dmitrievsky said it was important to transmit the responsibility to concrete people, not to the state. "We know the names" he said. "Some are well known, some less". He urged the European Parliament to support the creation of a permanent commission to investigate the facts in North Caucasus.
“Please don’t stop!” pleaded Magomed Khazbiev, a representative of the Ingushetian opposition, describing the torture and disappearance of people in his country..
Practical help
In terms of practical steps to help people Rolf Timans said that the EU could help human rights defenders by giving them temporary visas, stepping up personal protection and providing financial means to the NGOs.
Thijs Berman (S&D), a former correspondent of Dutch radio in Moscow, suggested exchange programs and opening borders for Russian journalists, scientists and students to create consciousness about what real democracy is.
The European Union and Russia are due to hold their next summit in Stockholm on 18-19 November.
20090925STO61223 Press release European Parliament resolution of 17 September 2009 on the murder of human rights activists in Russia Recording of 30 September Hearing MEPs hold a minute of silence for murdered human rights activist Natalia Estemirova
EN
1
PHOTO
20091001PHT61666.jpg
EN
4
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/frd/vod/player?eventCode=20090930-1500-COMMITTEE-DROI&language=en&byLeftMenu=researchcommittee&category=COMMITTEE&format=wmv
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20090928IPR61367 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P7-TA-2009-0022 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20090716IPR58357 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
