FYROM, visa liberalisation with Balkans and Turkey: MEPs quiz Olli Rehn
Enlargement
2009-10-15 - 15:47
Several MEPs voiced support on Thursday for a proposal made the previous day by Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn for EU membership negotiations to be launched with the former Yugoslav republic of Macedonia. MEPs also asked the Commissioner about visa liberalisation with the Balkans and the implementation of the Ankara protocol.
Mr Rehn was appearing at a meeting of the EP Foreign Affairs Committee, the day after the Commission adopted its annual strategy paper on the enlargement of the EU.
Several MEPs, including Zoran Thaler (S&D, SI), rapporteur on the former Yugoslav republic of Macedonia, welcomed the Commission's recommendation to the Council that negotiations be opened with FYROM. Mr Thaler argued that the "parties concerned must use the new window of opportunity created by the Greek elections and the role that the new Greek prime minister, Georgios Papandreou, the architect of the Thessaloniki process of 2003, could play".
"Athens must also play its part", said Mr Rehn, who also mentioned that the Commission's proposal must be adopted unanimously by the 27 Member States. He added "All that may have implications".
Visa liberalisation
Jelko Kacin (ALDE, SI), rapporteur on Serbia, and Ulrike Lunacek (Greens/EFA, AT), rapporteur on Kosovo, said they were "delighted that the prospect of visa liberalisation for Kosovo is being envisaged". The Commission has proposed in a document separate from the progress reports that a dialogue be started with Kosovo - with a view to visa liberalisation - when "the conditions are in place".
Tanja Fajon (S&D, SI), rapporteur on the question of visa liberalisation for the EP Civil Liberties Committee, believed a strict framework must be adhered to for Bosnia-Hercegovina, Albania and Kosovo. Visa liberalisation must not be used as a bargaining chip for reforms which "these countries should be carrying out anyway".
Mr Rehn also confirmed that the Commission would "present proposals for Albania and Bosnia-Hercegovina by mid-2010, provided these countries meet the conditions for waiving visas".
Turkey and the Ankara protocol
Ria Oomen-Ruijten (EPP, NL), rapporteur on Turkey, stressed the need to consolidate fundamental freedoms and the rule of law, which are much needed in that country. "Turkey must not carry out reforms for us but for its own sake", she said.
Hélène Flautre (Greens/EFA, FR), chair of the EP Delegation for Relations with Turkey, described the progress report presented on Thursday as "overcautious", saying it gave little weight to "the courageous steps in foreign and domestic policy such as the rapprochement between Armenia and Turkey and the new focus on the Kurdish question and democratisation".
Olli Rehn replied that "the Commission's report reflects our support for fresh reform of cultural, religious and trade union rights".
To questions by MEPs including Elmar Brok (EPP, ED) and Richard Howitt (S&D, UK) on the deadline of the end of 2009 for implementation of the Ankara protocol, Commissioner Rehn emphasised that implementation of the protocol was essential. Signed in July 2005, the protocol states that Turkey will extend its customs union to all Member States of the European Union, including Cyprus.
He also underlined that it was up to EU foreign ministers to take decisions on the matter, which they would probably do at the EU summit in December. Eight negotiating chapters, including external affairs and agriculture, have been suspended, pointed out the Commissioner.
Charles Tannock (ECR, UK), rapporteur on Montenegro, wondered about the reasons for the delay in ratifying the stabilisation and association agreement with the EU.
20091012IPR62350
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
