EU-US: MEPs want stronger co-operation in security, financial regulation and climate protection
External relations
2009-10-22 - 14:20
Commitments to a new global security architecture, stronger co-operation in climate protection and economic crisis management, and establishing a transatlantic market by 2015, are all on Parliament's wish list for the next EU-US summit, to be held in Washington on 2-3 November.
A reinforced EU-US partnership is needed to deal with common global challenges such as nuclear proliferation, terrorism, climate change, pandemics, and to achieve the Millennium Development Goals, says the resolution adopted by the European Parliament on Thursday.
Missile defence, Iran, Middle East
MEPs "took note" of the US had abandoned its original plans for a missile defence shield in Europe and they called for "a new global security architecture involving especially the EU, the US, Russia and China". Parliament supported "a negotiated solution" with Iran. In the Middle East, MEPs want to see "a two-state solution with an independent, viable Palestinian state". Furthermore, the resolution asked the EU-US summit to "reach out to the Arab world".
Visas, human rights, climate conference
The resolution urged the US to abolish visas for all EU Member States. On human rights issues, Parliament repeated its appeal to abolish the death penalty and demanded that the US "return to the full practice of international standards of rule of law" and "put a hold to all extrajudicial measures".
To reach an international agreement at the climate conference in Copenhagen in December of this year, Parliament called for "an ambitious US commitment" and EU-US cooperation.
Transatlantic market by 2015
Ahead of the next meeting on 27 October of the Transatlantic Economic Council (TEC), MEPs insisted that EU and the US should co-ordinate their responses to crises, including reform packages for the financial sector and the reshaping of supervisory structures. Parliament favoured completing a transatlantic market, "based on the principle of a social market economy", by 2015. The resolution calls for stronger co-operation in the fields of intellectual property protection, energy efficiency, bio-fuels , and cyber security .
Transfer of personal banking data and passenger name records
Parliament reiterated that the transfer of European citizens' financial data to third countries should comply with all EU data-protection requirements and insisted that the new agreement governing these transfers should be negotiated with the full involvement of the European Parliament. Finally, MEPs asked for "balanced solutions" to air security needs and data protection of passenger name records (PNR) The resolution was adopted by a show of hands.
20091021IPR62955 Adopted text (click on 22 October)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
