Concern at delay in Schengen Information System II
Schengen
2009-10-22 - 13:15
Parliament is concerned at the further delays in modernising the Schengen Information System, a database that enables police forces across the EU to share data for law enforcement purposes. It includes missing persons, stolen goods and court proceedings.
MEPs note that "numerous problems and delays have meant that the new system has still not come into operation, and whereas doubts have been cast on the viability of the project". They want to know what extra costs are envisaged.
During Monday's debate, Justice Commissioner Jacques Barrot indicated there would be additional costs of €1 million for the first "milestone" of the system and announced that the Commission had invoked penalty clauses against the contractor.
MEPs call on the Commission to justify their confidence in the present contractor. They want to avoid the scenario that happened in connection with the development of the SIS II being repeated in relation to the visa information system (VIS), which has to be based on the same technical platform as SIS II. Regarding the VIS, Mr Barrot also said that the contractor had not managed to meet the criteria laid down and that some Member States were having difficulty adapting their national systems so as to use the VIS.
The draft resolution, tabled by the EPP, S&D, ALDE and ECR groups, was adopted by 507 votes to 88 with 19 abstentions.
Background
Although in operation since March 1995, the SIS had to be upgraded after the enlargements of 2004 and 2007 to be usable with a larger number of countries, and to make it more efficient and more secure.
However, SIS II has run into technical problems which have delayed its start. It is now expected to begin operations towards the end of 2011.
The VIS is intended to help combat "visa shopping", to simplify external border controls by making it easier to detect fake documents and to combat illegal immigration.
The UK and Ireland are not part of the Schengen zone but do have opt-ins. They have started taking part in some aspects of it including the SIS for law enforcement purposes and they both intend to opt in to SIS II.
20091021IPR62949 Adopted text will be available here (click on 22 October)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
