LUX Cinema Prize screening starts now
Culture
2009-11-03 - 16:30
Three films shortlisted for Parliament's €87,000 LUX Cinema Prize are being screened at the European Parliament in Brussels starting on Tuesday. They are Eastern Plays (Bulgaria, Sweden), Sturm (Germany, Denmark, Netherlands), and Welcome (France). Anyone with access to Parliament may attend. The winner will be revealed on 25 November in Strasbourg.
The films will be screened from 3 to 20 November in the specially built LUX Theatre (90 seats) near the VoxBox, on the third floor of Parliament's Altiero Spinelli building. MEPs may watch the films and vote for them (one vote per film) until 24 November. Any other person authorized to access the European Parliament may also attend the screenings.
The LUX Prize is for fiction or animation films illustrating or questioning the founding values of European identity, revealing Europe’s cultural diversity or providing insights into the EU integration debate. They must be produced or co-produced in the EU or EEA, should last at least 60 minutes, and for this year's contenders, have been released between 1 June 2008 and 31 May 2009.
This year's contenders
Eastern Plays by Kamen Kalev (Bulgaria, Sweden), depicts two brothers - one involved in a neo-Nazi movement and the other rescuing a Turkish family - reuniting and questioning what they really want from life.
Sturm by Hans-Christian Schmid (Germany, Denmark, the Netherlands), tells a story of a prosecutor at the Hague Tribunal. Participating in a trial of an alleged Bosnian war criminal, she realizes that she has opponents in her own ranks.
Welcome by Philippe Lioret (France) shows a swimming instructor who, wishing to impress his wife and win her back, decides to secretly help out a young Kurdish refugee who wants to swim across the English Channel.
The three contenders for this year's LUX Prize, revealed on 9 September at the 66th International Film Festival in Venice, were selected from among 10 films proposed by a panel of 17 cinema professionals appointed by the European Parliament's Committee on Education and Culture. The jury included a representative of last year's LUX Prize winner.
Award ceremony
The winner will be officially announced and the prize, worth €87,000, will be awarded in Strasbourg on 25 November by EP President Jerzy Buzek. The award will finance subtitling in the EU's 23 official languages, including the adaptation of the original version for visually- or hearing-impaired people, and, for each EU member state, the production of a 35-mm print per member state or a contribution to the DVD release. In this way Parliament aims to help break down language barriers that too often hinder the circulation of films throughout Europe.
On the eve of the award ceremony, on 24 November, a press conference with the three films' representatives will be held in Strasbourg, followed by a reception. Journalists may interview the representatives.
Multilingual DVD event
On 10 November, a special event in Brussels is will mark the official release of the 30-language DVD of the 2007 LUX Prize winner Auf der anderen Seite (Germany, Turkey). This will be the first release of such a multilingual DVD. Auf den Anderen Seite Director Fatih Akin, as well as the directors of this year's three contending films, Goethe Institute representatives and Culture and Education Committee MEPs will attend.
20091103IPR63558 LUX Prize web site Trailers of the three films
EN
1
LINK
http://www.lux-prize.eu/
EN
2
LINK
http://www.lux-prize.eu/prix_lux/nominees/index_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
