UN Human Rights Council "bias" disappoints MEPs
Human rights
2009-11-10 - 11:45
The UN Human Rights Council should drop its "political bias" on human rights in Palestine and other occupied Arab territories and take a more flexible and pragmatic approach to human rights worldwide, said Human Rights Sub-Committee MEPs at a public hearing on Tuesday. It is too soon to judge the HRC, replied its President Alex Van Meeuwen.
Responding to MEPs' criticism of the UN HRC's relativism on human rights, HRC President for 2009-2012 Alex Van Meeuwen said "at this moment it is premature to take stock of the activities of the Council" given that the first two years since its creation had largely been spent mainly building up its institutional architecture and that it had been able to focus on its core activities only in the past year.
As the first review of the UN HRC is to take place in 2011, most MEPs advocated a flexible and pragmatic approach, making full use of the existing instruments to promote and protect human rights worldwide. Participants also stressed the need to better involve civil society in the review process.
Human rights in Palestine and other occupied Arab territories
Commenting on the recent HRC resolution on human rights in Palestine and other occupied Arab territories, which endorses the recommendations of an independent fact-finding mission led by Justice Richard Goldstone, Richard Howitt (S&D, UK) said he was disappointed by the "politicization and lack of objectivity" of the HRC, which "is infected by the Israeli-Palestinian conflict". Mr Howitt called on the EU to "give up the bloc mentality, because in some cases it leads only to lowest common denominator positions" and to play a more substantive role.
Green MEPs Frida Brepoels (BE) and Nicole Kiil-Nielson (FR), stressed the need to act on this resolution and the importance of combating impunity.
Charles Tannock (ECR, UK) observed that that the UN HRC has a "serious political bias, concentrating on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, proved also by the disproportionate number of resolutions on Israel."
Ambassador van Meeuwen observed that the wide diversity of MEPs' opinions matched that of views debated within the HRC, and added that a key element in finding a solution would be "an objective investigation carried out by both Israeli and Palestinian parties".
Zimbabwe
Heidi Hautala (Greens/EFA, FI) and Ana Gomes (S&D, PT), pointed out that the UN Special Rapporteur on Torture had recently been refused permission to enter Zimbabwe, which "is a serious signal of the new wave of political violence", said Ms Hautala. Eric Tistounet, representing the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, deplored this inappropriate treatment of the UN representative and assured the MEPs that every effort was being made to enable the Special Rapporteur to continue his work.
Background
The Human Rights Council is a 47-strong inter-governmental body within the UN system. Set up in 2006 to replace the former UN Commission on Human Rights (CHR), it debates human rights violations and make recommendations as to how to remedy them.
20091109IPR64079 Subcommittee on Human Rights UN Human Rights Council European Parliament resolution of 14 January 2009 on the development of the UN Human Rights Council, including the role of the EU
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=DROI
EN
2
LINK
http://www2.ohchr.org/english/bodies/hrcouncil/
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2009-0021 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
