Tyre labelling: Industry Committee backs draft regulation
Industry
2009-11-24 - 10:59
From November 2012 all new tyres on sale in Europe will be classified and labelled for fuel efficiency, wet grip and noise performance, under a draft regulation backed by Industry Committee MEPs on Monday evening and scheduled for a plenary vote on Wednesday. Tyres will be subject to labelling similar to that required for household appliances.
Parliament's Industry Committee on Monday unanimously backed a compromise draft of the regulation agreed by MEPs and Council Presidency negotiators early in October. The committee vote is the last step before the plenary vote, scheduled for Wednesday.
"The new labelling system is a straightforward measure with great advantages for the environment and consumers", said rapporteur Ivo Belet (EPP, BE) in October, adding that the cost to manufacturers should be minimal.
Fuel efficiency, wet grip and noise
Like the European energy label, the tyre label will use classes ranging from best-performance (green “A” class) to worst (red “G” class). Besides indicating how much the tyre affects the car's fuel efficiency, it will also give information about its performance in wet conditions and its external rolling noise in decibels.
From 1 November 2012, suppliers of tyres for passenger cars, light and heavy duty vehicles (C1, C2 and C3 tyres) will have to inform consumers about fuel efficiency, wet grip and noise classes in any technical promotional material, including web sites. Re-treaded tyres, off-road professional tyres and racing tyres will be exempt from this requirement.
All C1 and C2 tyres produced after 1 July 2012 must either have a sticker or be accompanied by the label when distributed from the factory to a shop or a garage.
Unlike household appliances, tyres are not always on display in the shops, so MEPs insisted that retailers be obliged to show the label to the buyer before the sale and also on, or with, bills.
Very quiet tyres
To promote very quiet tyres, the Parliament negotiated a re-design of the noise pictogram. The level of external rolling noise will be indicated by ascending numbers of black "waves" emitted from the "speaker". Quiet tyres for cars (producing noise below 68 decibels), for example, will be labelled with one black and two white "waves" next to the value in decibels.
Incentives for fuel-saving and safe tyres
Potential incentives to promote better-performing tyres to consumers would be decided at national level. In principle, Member States would be allowed to provide incentives only for tyres ranked at least "class C" on fuel efficiency and wet grip.
Next steps
Parliament as a whole will put the Council common position to a vote on Wednesday. The regulation is to apply from 1 November 2012.
In the chair: Herbert REUL (EPP, DE) Procedure: co-decision, second reading Plenary vote: Wednesday, 25 November, 12:00h
20091124IPR65090 Common position text approved by the Council on 20.11.2009
EN
1
LINK
http://register.consilium.europa.eu/pdf/en/09/st14/st14639.en09.pdf
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
