EU membership candidates: Parliament outlines its criteria
Enlargement
2009-11-26 - 13:28
Current and potential candidate countries must continue reforming to stay on track for EU membership. Key issues such as the rule of law, freedom of expression, good neighbourly relations, treatment of ethnic minorities and the fight against corruption and organised crime must still be addressed, says a resolution approved by Parliament on 26 November.
Parliament's resolution on the European Commission's 2009 enlargement strategy for the Western Balkan countries, Iceland and Turkey was adopted this Thursday by show of hands. The resolution was drafted by Gabriele Albertini (EPP, IT).
Overall, Parliament reaffirms its commitment to the enlargement policy, one of the most successful of all EU policies, but says that the Copenhagen criteria should be respected by candidate countries as well as by the EU. European citizens concerns and questions about the enlargement should be addressed.
On the rule of law, MEPs welcome efforts made in the region, although some countries continue to face challenges in the fight against corruption and organised crime. On freedom of expression, the resolution considers freedom of media from political interference and the independence of the regulatory bodies as key issues for the Western Balkans and Turkey.
The authorities in Bosnia-Herzegovina and Albania are urged to fulfil all relevant criteria so that visa liberalisation for their citizens can come into force from July 2010. The Commission is asked to start a visa dialogue with the Kosovo authorities "as soon as possible". MEPs also advocate establishing a roadmap for visa facilitation and liberalisation, similar to those with the Western Balkan countries.
Bilateral disputes should be resolved by the parties concerned, says the resolution. These disputes should not constitute an obstacle to progress towards accession, but the EU should endeavour to resolve them before accession, it adds.
Among the criteria that all Balkan countries should respect, MEPs emphasise the need for full co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and an improvement of the situation of ethnic minorities, in particular the Roma .
Croatia
On country-specific issues, MEP consider that the accession negotiations can be concluded by mid-2010, provided that Croatia steps up its efforts and fulfils all the necessary criteria and benchmarks, including full cooperation with the ICTY. They welcome the bilateral agreement on resolving the border dispute with Slovenia, which has created the momentum to open further chapters in the accession process.
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
The Council is asked to "act in accordance " with the Commission’s recommendation to open and to set a date at the December summit for starting negotiations with the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. This country still has to reform its public administration and its judiciary, fight corruption and improve women’s rights and inter-ethnic relations.
On the issue of the country's name, Parliament calls on the governments of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Greece to intensify their efforts to find a solution. MEPs recall the importance of good neighbourly relations and urge the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia to be sensitive about issues affecting its neighbours. The recent establishment of a diplomatic relations with Kosovo is highlighted.
Turkey
The resolution highlights the importance of implementing judicial reform swiftly to improve the functioning of the Turkish state and society. MEPs regret the limited progress made in the area of freedom of religion (non-Muslim and Alevi communities) and freedom of expression, following the unprecedented fine imposed on a media group. The non-fulfilment of commitments stemming from the Additional Protocol to the EC-Turkey Association Agreement is also criticised. Turkey is urged to implement it in full and on a non-discriminatory basis.
MEPs welcome Turkey's signing of the Nabucco gas pipeline agreement and call for the opening of the energy chapter in the accession negotiations. Diplomatic efforts made to normalise relations with Armenia are underlined. The Turkish Grand National Assembly, as well as the Parliament of Armenia, should ratify the relevant protocols, says the resolution.
Western Balkans
The Council should ratify the Interim Agreement (IA) with Serbia without delay, says the resolution. Unilateral implementation of the IA by Serbia shows the country's commitment to moving forward on its path to membership, according to MEPs. The Agreement could be signed by the EU at its December summit.
Parliament welcomes Serbia's additional progress concerning co-operation with the ICTY, as noted in the latest ICTY Chief Prosecutor's report. However, MEPs regret the Serbian authorities' actions in calling on Kosovo Serbs to boycott the mid-November elections. Serbia is also asked to step up its co-operation with the EU rule of law mission EULEX, especially in northern Kosovo.
MEPs note some progress in the area of security and border management by Bosnia and Herzegovina but are dissatisfied overall with the limited progress achieved. The country's unstable political climate and the lack of a common vision shared by the Muslim-Croat Federation and the Serb Republic (Republika Srpska) is a concern for MEPs. The Council should to continue its efforts to pursue a dialogue with political leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in order to help the country and its peoples remain on the path to EU integration, says the resolution.
MEPs welcome the Commission's intention of strengthening relations with Kosovo , including exploring the possibility of Kosovo's participation in Community programmes. They believe the process of decentralisation should be concluded before the end of the year in line with the Ahtisaari Plan. They also welcome the unprecedentedly good turnout of Kosovo Serbs, which they see as an encouraging indication that the Kosovo Serb community is willing to acknowledge its responsibilities.
MEPs recognise the progress made by Albania and Montenegro since the last progress reports and encourage both countries to continue their efforts on the reform path. Parliament welcomes last week's EU foreign ministers' decision to invite the Commission to prepare its opinion on the country's application.
Iceland
Finally, MEPs welcome Iceland's decision of July 2009 to apply for EU membership. The country’s extensive alignment with EU legislation should enable it to be given candidate status in the near future, they say. Iceland’s track record in implementing its obligations under the EEA Agreement should be an essential element of the Commission’s assessment.
20091124IPR65211 Adopted text will be available here (click on 26 November)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
