Keep up the pressure on human rights in China
Human rights
2009-12-01 - 15:29
Human rights in China, including the case of Sakharov prize laureate Hu Jia, minority rights, the usefulness of the EU-China Human Rights Dialogue and recommendations for future actions in EU-China relations were debated at a public hearing held the Human Rights Sub-Committee on Tuesday 1 December, the day after the EU-China summit in Nanjing.
Sub-committee chair Heidi Hautula (Greens/EFA, Finland) asked whether the case of 2008 Sakharov prize winner Hu Jia had been raised with the Chinese authorities and what was happening to his family.
Unfortunately, the Chinese authorities had given no details other than the date when Hu Jia had been put in prison, replied Swedish Ambassador Jand Nordlander.
"The health condition of Hu Jia is frail and not good although he receives medication", reported Commission representative Michalis Rokas, adding that most of the restrictions imposed on Hu Jia's wife had been removed, although she had again been placed under house arrest during President Obama's visit to China.
Freedom of religion and the death penalty
China's discriminatory treatment of Falun Gong practitioners and ethnic and religious minorities in Tibet, and the Xinjang Uighur Autonomous Region (XUAR) of western China were severely criticised by MEPs, who also called for an unconditional moratorium on the death penalty.
Usefulness of the EU-China Human Rights Dialogue
A key issue at the hearing was the usefulness of the EU-China Human Rights Dialogue held on 20 November in Beijing, in the run-up to the EU-China summit of 30 November in Nanjing.
Although some participants considered that the EU-China Human Rights Dialogue had failed to produce results - Katrin Kinzelbach of the Ludwig Boltzmann Institute Vienna, called it a "marginalised dialogue among officials" - MEPs were against withdrawing from it, and argued that it should be evaluated, as it provides a mechanism for forcefully raising all human rights issues.
Public pressure on China works
"The EU needs to send a coherent strong message to the Chinese authorities: that individuals matter and human rights matter", said Gao Wenqian, Senior Policy Advisor "Human Rights in China" (HRIC). Quoting a Chinese proverb "Use the best steel to make the knife's edge", Gao Wenqian observed that "the best steel for advancing human rights in China is the growth of a truly independent Chinese civil society, where journalists, lawyers, and ordinary citizens can exercise their rights without fear and repression."
Barbara Lochbihler (Greens/EFA, Germany) also stressed that "criticism from outside helps to address the problems of Chinese citizens in the public sphere."
Leonidas Donskis (ALDE, Lithuania) echoed Gao Wenqian's view that "the international community is giving China a free pass on Human rights, mostly because many governments want to preserve their own investments and interest."
Recommendations for action
MEPs recommended a balanced combination of "quiet and public diplomacy" (Eduard Kukan, EPP, SK), and "the creation of a special unit within the EU delegation in China which should monitor the human rights situation on the ground" (Janusz Władysław Zemke, S&D, PL).
"The EU should consider the creation of a capacity within the European Commission or ICC (International Criminal Court) which could receive information on human rights breaches worldwide", said EP vice-President Edward Macmillan Scott (non-attached, UK).
The European Parliament should use its power to veto the conclusion of Partnership Agreements as a lever to ensure that they include human rights clauses, but a new condition should also be added, namely that the EU will conclude such agreements only with countries that have ratified the International Covenant on Civil And Political Rights (ICCPR), suggested Ms Kinzelbach.
Outcome of the Human Rights Dialogue and EU-China Summit
Swedish Ambassador Jand Nordlander briefed Human Rights Sub-Committee members on progress on the human rights dialogue agenda topics: the death penalty, the situation in Tibet and Xinjiang, the rule of law, freedom of expression, torture, the existence of "black" (unlawful) prisons and 10-year delay in China's ratification of the ICCPR.
With the Lisbon Treaty, in force as of 1 December 2009, the European Parliament has important new lawmaking powers. Virtually all EU legislation is now decided by the European Parliament and the Council of Ministers together - including agriculture, immigration, energy and the EU budget. As the only directly elected EU institution, Parliament's position in making sure the EU is accountable to its citizens is also strengthened, for example by MEPs having a bigger say in appointments to many of the EU's top jobs. 20091130IPR65545 EP resolution of 26 November 2009 on China: minority rights and application of the death penalty Sakharov Prize web site Human Rights Sub-Committee web site
EN
2
LINK
/parliament/public/staticDisplay.do?language=EN&id=42
EN
3
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=DROI
-//EP//TEXT TA P7-TA-2009-0105 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
