Turkey is part of the solution, not of the problem, says its EU minister
Enlargement
2009-12-03 - 12:49
Turkey's progress this year on the path to EU accession was debated by its EU affairs minister and chief negotiator Egemen Bağış and Foreign Affairs Committee MEPs on 2 December. His visit coincided with the committee's first discussion of a draft report on Turkey by Ria Oomen-Ruijten (EPP, NL).
Given the challenges that the EU faces - such as energy security, climate change, and economic crisis - "Turkey is committed to contribute to the solutions and is not part of the problem", Turkish Minister for EU Affairs and Chief Negotiator Egemen Bağış told the Foreign Affairs Committee.
Mr Bağış reaffirmed Turkey's determination to pursue the EU accession process, as demonstrated by its 4-year national reform programme, despite the fact that negotiations on several issues had been halted by Turkey's failure to apply to Cyprus the Additional Protocol to the Ankara Agreement.
Copenhagen criteria
EP rapporteur on Turkey Ria Oomen-Ruijten (EPP, NL) stressed that even though Turkey had passed laws relevant to the Copenhagen political criteria, it was still doing too little to implement them, particularly in the areas of women's rights and non-discrimination. She also asked what Turkey would do to enable the ratification of the protocol with Armenia, to which Mr Bağış replied that " Turkey wants to move forwards and have good relations with all its neighbours".
Asked by Alexander Graf Lambsdorff (ALDE, DE) when Turkey will achieve a breakthrough on constitutional reform, Mr Bağış replied "because 2010 will be a year without elections in Turkey, the government will try to reach a consensus with the opposition in order to enable the constitutional reform".
Bilateral issues
"How can Turkey continue to move towards the EU if it does not solve its bilateral issues?" asked Marietta Giannakou (EPP, EL), in a reference to Cyprus. " Why are you maintaining the status quo on occupation of Cyprus?" asked Takis Hadjigeorgiou (GUE/NGL, CY). "Regarding Cyprus, it takes two to tango" replied Mr Bağış, adding that "the final solution must be based on equality".
Maria Eleni Koppa (S&D, EL) criticised Turkey's violation of Greek air space in the Aegean sea. "We need to start exploratory talks to define air space", replied Mr Bağış.
Readmission agreement
"Illegal immigration is not just a Greek and Turkish issue, but a European one" and the EU-Turkey Readmission Agreement must be concluded on the principle of "common burden sharing", said Mr Bağış in reply to questions from several MEPs. For several decades, Turkish goods have been able to move freely within the EU, whereas Turkish citizens cannot, he added.
Religious minority rights
Commenting on debate over the Swiss referendum decision to ban the building of minarets and the problems still faced by religious minorities in Turkey, Mr Bağış said that "Turkey is a place of co-existence and has a history of more than 800 years in which different cultures live together."
Afghanistan
Replying to a question from Geoffrey Van Orden (ECR, UK) as to whether Turkey intends to reinforce its troops in Afghanistan, Mr Bağış noted that for the third time, his country was leading the International Security Assistance Force command and "if all members of NATO decide to increase participation, Turkey will not differ on that."
Iran
Elmar Brok (EPP, DE) asked about developments in Iran and Turkey's possible involvement in exporting nuclear materials. Mr Mr Bağış stressed the importance if dialogue with Iran, adding that "if Iran had nuclear weapons we would be more worried then you are."
Committee on Foreign Affairs
In the chair: Gabriele Albertini (EPP, Italy).
With the Lisbon Treaty, in force as of 1 December 2009, the European Parliament has important new lawmaking powers. Virtually all EU legislation is now decided by the European Parliament and the Council of Ministers together - including agriculture, immigration, energy and the EU budget. As the only directly elected EU institution, Parliament's position in making sure the EU is accountable to its citizens is also strengthened, for example by MEPs having a bigger say in appointments to many of the EU's top jobs. 20091130IPR65569 Committee on Foreign Affairs European Parliament resolution of 26 November 2009 on the Commission's 2009 enlargement strategy paper concerning the Western Balkan countries, Iceland and Turkey
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=AFET
-//EP//TEXT TA P7-TA-2009-0097 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
