Human Rights: Uganda and Azerbaijan
Human rights
2009-12-17 - 16:29
Two human rights resolutions - on anti-homosexual draft legislation in Uganda and freedom of expression in Azerbaijan - were approved by Parliament on Thursday. A debate and vote on the case of West Sahara human rights activist Aminatou Haidar were removed from the agenda.
MEPs call on the Ugandan authorities not to approve the "Anti-Homosexuality Bill 2009" tabled in the Ugandan Parliament in late September. The resolution calls on the Ugandan authorities review their laws so as to decriminalise homosexuality. Under this Bill, alleged homosexuals could be punished with life imprisonment or the death penalty.
The Bill could also lead to the imprisonment for up to three years of anyone, including heterosexual people, who fail to report within 24 hours the identities of anyone they know who is lesbian, gay, bisexual or transgender, or who supports the human rights of people who are.
MEPs remind the Ugandan government of its obligations under international law and the Cotonou Agreement, which calls for universal human rights to be respected. They firmly reject any moves to introduce the death penalty and are extremely concerned that international donors, NGOs and humanitarian organisations would have to reconsider or stop some of their activities should the bill become law.
Azerbaijan
MEPs are concerned about the deterioration of media freedom in Azerbaijan and deplore the practice of arresting, prosecuting and convicting opposition journalists on various charges. Parliament urges the immediate release of imprisoned journalists such as Eynulla Fatullayev.
The resolution also deplores the sentencing, on 11 November 2009, of bloggers Emin Milli and Adnan Hajizada to harsh prison terms “on the basis of highly unlikely charges and an unfair trial.” MEPs call for their immediate release and a new, fully open and fair trial.
MEPs ask the Azerbaijani authorities' decision to renew the FM radio licences of the international broadcasters BBC World Service, Voice of America and Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty.
Western Sahara off the agenda
Parliament decided on Thursday not to debate or vote a resolution on Sahrawi human rights activist Aminatou Haidar. A proposal by S&D group leader, Martin Schulz, to remove this item from the agenda was approved with 249 votes in favour, 163 against and 135 abstentions.
"There will be a solution to this case shortly. EU representatives are working to achieve a positive solution. It would therefore make sense to delete this item from the agenda as the debate would in fact prevent the progress of the diplomatic efforts", he said.
20091215IPR66449 Adopted text will be available here (click on 17 December)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
