Summary of hearing of Androulla Vassiliou - Education, Culture, Multilingualism and Youth
Hearings
Institutions
2010-01-14 - 18:29
Multilingualism, training and mobility for teachers and young people, the role of sport and the preservation of cultural diversity were among the issues when the Cypriot Commissioner-designate, Androulla Vassiliou, was questioned by MEPs on Thursday.
"We should make sure that every EU programme we apply has a direct impact on citizens' lives", Ms Vassiliou stressed. Among her key priorities the Commissioner-designate highlighted the importance of strengthening education, increasing mobility opportunities for young people and creating an environment that promotes culture and creativity.
Vocational training and teacher education
Hannu Takkula (ALDE, FI) and Doris Pack (EPP, DE), asked about measures to improve the education of teachers. "Teacher education is among the most important factors for students' success", said Ms Vassiliou, stressing that today's rapid technological evolution makes it even more important to invest more in it. She also said that teachers should be encouraged to be more mobile, e.g. by taking part in exchange programmes.
Ms Vassiliou promised, in a reply to Malika Benarab-Attou (Greens/EFA, FR), to fight for an increase in education and training budgets, but said that she needed MEPs' support for this and added that it was also up to local and regional authorities to invest and better connect to businesses.
Sport and the fight against doping
Sport is "a vehicle to achieve positive things", such as good health and team spirit, said Ms Vassiliou in reply to questions from Emma McClarkin (EPP, UK), and Seán Kelly (EPP, IE). She added that she will pay attention to all sports, not just football, and that developing sport at grass-roots level will be at the heart of her policies.
Ivo Belet (EPP, BE), asked whether anti-doping measures and the "whereabouts rule" breached athletes' right of privacy. Ms Vassiliou said that the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) rules have been improved, but that every measure should be proportional.
Social integration and children of illegal immigrants
Asked by Mary Honeyball (S&D, UK), about how to enhance social integration and give a social dimension to the Commission's EU 2020 strategy, Ms Vassiliou stressed the need to focus on young people in poor families. Nadja Hirsch (ALDE, DE) asked her views on the participation of illegal immigrants' children in EU educational systems. "We owe it to all children to provide them with a proper education and training... I will encourage Member States to do this", she replied.
Money promoting European identity
Morten Messerschmidt (ECR, DK), asked Ms Vassiliou whether EU funds for promoting European identity were well spent. "I want to believe that the Commission and the other institutions have been very careful in the way taxpayers' money has been spent", she replied, adding that her priority would be to make sure that the money is spent on areas where it makes a difference, and mentioned the European heritage label and the European Capital of culture as successful examples of this.
Bologna process and disparities among Member States
Asked by Alajos Mészáros (EPP, SK), whether she considered the Bologna process a success, the Commissioner-designate said yes, but added that "we have not reached the end of the road". Factors such as teaching quality, university ranking, autonomy and financing "also need to be taken into consideration".
Replying to a question by Hannu Takkula (ALDE, FI), on how to deal with the disparities among Member States' educational systems, she said that "co-operation and exchange of good practices, including setting benchmarks, is the way forward".
Youth and volunteering
Marco Scurria (EPP, IT) and Marian Harkin (ALDE, IE) asked what Ms Vassiliou would do to promote volunteering ahead of the 2011 European Year of Volunteering. "Volunteering should be given a push - but in the right direction", Ms Vassiliou said, underlining that volunteering should not substitute for paid jobs or be exploited by employers. She also highlighted the important role of mobility in helping young people to learn.
Cultural diversity in trade agreements
Asked by Marie-Therese Sanchez-Schmidt (EPP, FR) how she would promote cultural diversity, Ms Vassilou underlined the importance of providing for it in relations with third countries. "I think we should be innovative in how we promote cultural diversity, and I believe that trade agreements are a good way of promoting respect for cultural diversity", she said.
Linguistic diversity and Slovak language law
Linguistic diversity, including regional and minority languages as well as the languages of immigrant communities, "should be respected", said Ms Vasilliou in a reply to Maria Badia i Cutchet (S&D, ES). As to the new Slovak law on languages, she would follow its implementation closely, and if necessary, intervene, she replied to a question by Pal Smitt (EPP, HU) and László Tőkés (EPP, RO).
2010-01-14 Committee on Culture and Education In the chair Doris PACK EPP DE
20100113IPR67204 Hearings website - documents, procedure, background Culture and Education Committee site Video on demand - watch the hearing Broadcast quality video summaries plus photo coverage via FTP server Broadcast quality audio via FTP server Commissioner-designate's opening statement (EN) audio, 10:42 Commissioner-designate's opening statement (OR) audio, 10:42
EN
1
LINK
/hearings/default.htm?language=EN
EN
2
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=CULT
EN
3
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/frd/vod/search-other-events?language=en
EN
4
LINK
ftp://epavvideoget:mo12ssb@ftpeps01.europarl.eu.int/epavvideo/Hearings
EN
5
LINK
ftp://epavradioget:mo12SSB@ftpeps01.europarl.eu.int/epavradio/hearings
EN
6
MULTIMEDIA
20100114MLT67313.asf
EN
7
MULTIMEDIA
20100114MLT67319.mp3
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
