MEP Louis Michel on emergency aid for Haiti
Humanitarian aid
2010-01-18 - 11:48
Louis Michel MEP was EU development and humanitarian aid Commissioner when the Asian Tsunami hit in 2004. As the scale of the disaster in Haiti unfolds, it is clear the country will need massive help from the international community. Meeting on Monday (18 January) EU Ministers welcomed €30 million in humanitarian assistance from the European Commission and €92 million by member states. The estimated long term response is €200 million. We spoke with Belgian MEP Louis Michel, who oversaw the EU’s response to the Asian Tsunami and now co-chairs the Assembly of African, Caribbean and Pacific states.
You were the European Commissioner for development and humanitarian aid when the Tsunami struck in 2004, is this disaster comparable in scale and consequences?
I think so yes...Public infrastructure has been destroyed. Reconstruction will be paramount, it will have to be fast and it will have to be done well. It is certainly one of the gravest disasters in history – looking of the number of probable victims, the destruction of infrastructure. It will take time and money to reconstruct.
In addition, this happened in a country where the state and its core functions are very fragile. There are risks of chaos. There is the need for a framework, support to government functions, which are a big problem in Haiti. It will be necessary to ensure public order and security and thus the fact that the Americans are sending troops is rather a good thing.
Can you explain how the Commission’s department for Humanitarian Aid (known as "ECHO"), provides support when a disaster like this one happens?
The Commissioner himself can agree to provide an initial €3 million in cases where it is clear that the need is big. This was done for Haiti and I did the same thing after the Tsunami.
All relief operators that need funds can then turn to the Commission to draw from this money. The execution of these funds is almost in real time. The control is after, not before the funds are released. If for example an NGO says "we need 2,000 tents of this or that type at this price," the Commission can say yes immediately.
How do the EU and other actors make sure that the relief efforts are coordinated?
That is the responsibility of the UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA). Coordination of emergency aid is very difficult and we have to avoid everybody starting to "coordinate". OCHA is the UN agency in charge of emergency response and it is best placed to coordinate.
You have to bear in mind that the EU does not have an intervention corps that operates directly. We contribute by financing operators be they NGOs or UN agencies. There is a recurrent debate whether the EU should have its own operational, fast intervention corps. I am very sceptical. We don't want the actors stepping on each other’s toes and all the world’s well intentioned volunteers crowding the disaster scene.
The emergency response needs to be organised and the local authorities also have a role. So it is more complicated than it seems. To say: "quick, quick everybody should be there", is a recipe for disaster. Coordination is essential and one should not forget that all the aid workers need to not only look after the victims but also themselves - they need to eat and infrastructure is needed.
Haiti before the earthquake is now described as a precarious country, ill-prepared for this kind of event. Had the international community failed and abandoned Haiti?
I don’t think so. Haiti has been very much on top of the international community’s agenda. But the problem of the international community is that it doesn’t have any effective interlocutors. Haiti's big problem is the weakness of its governance structures, the fragility of the state. It is a very poor, unstable and vulnerable country.
Should there already be a strategy for the transition towards reconstruction after the immediate relief work?
In the coming days one needs to start devise actions to rehabilitate basic services that allow people to survive. And then we need a real reconstruction strategy, quite soon, but it will not be implemented very soon because rebuilding hospitals and so on isn’t done in three days. The amounts needed for reconstruction will be quite exceptional.
***
Relief organisations have estimated the financial need for emergency aid at 562 million USD.
EU Foreign Affairs ministers met today (Monday 18 January) in emergency session in Brussels to discuss aid as well as the medium to long-term needs of Haiti. The conclusions of their meeting can be found below.
20100115STO67362 EU Humanitarian Aid Press releases on Haiti by the Commission United Nations Louis Michel Foreign Affairs meeting
EN
1
PHOTO
20100118PHT67476.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/echo/
EN
3
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/echo/index_en.htm
EN
4
LINK
http://ochaonline.un.org/
EN
5
LINK
/members/public/yourMep/view.do;jsessionid=0AA0BBCA422E7C6CB8B98366E08509BB.node1?language=EN&partNumber=1&name=Michel&id=96670
EN
6
LINK
http://www.consilium.europa.eu/uedocs/cms_Data/docs/pressdata/EN/foraff/112374.pdf
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
