EU membership candidates: keep on reforming to stay on track
Enlargement
2010-01-27 - 14:29
Parliament gives a positive overall assessment of last year's efforts by Croatia and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia to qualify for EU membership, but also underlines that Turkey has made only limited progress towards meeting the "Copenhagen" EU eligibility criteria, in resolutions approved by the Foreign Affairs Committee on Wednesday.
Croatia , the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Turkey must continue reforming to stay on track for EU membership. Key issues, such as the rule of law, freedom of expression, good neighbourly relations, treatment of ethnic minorities and the fight against corruption and organised crime, must still be addressed.
The Foreign Affairs Committee adopted three resolutions on the progress made in 2009 by Croatia, Turkey and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, drafted by Hannes Swoboda (S&D, AT), Ria Oomen-Ruijten (EPP, NL) and Zoran Thaler (S&D, SL) respectively.
Croatia
MEPs consider that the accession negotiations with Croatia can be concluded in 2010. Croatia's successful accession would give "positive impetus" to the process of integrating the rest of the Western Balkans region within Europe, says the resolution.
But Croatia still needs to make efforts to strengthen its public administration, pursue reform of the judiciary "more resolutely", vigorously combat corruption and organised crime, and ensure the sustainability of refugee return.
Croatia is expected to "co-operate fully" with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and allow the Court access to documents requested for use in war crimes trials. MEPs point out that progress still needs to be made in finding the missing key military documents related to Operation Storm in 1995. These documents are to be used in the trials of some generals.
Croatia has continued to make progress in nearly all areas, "despite the nine-month stalemate in the accession negotiations", says the resolution. Arrangements for solving the bilateral border dispute "have created the momentum to open all remaining chapters", it adds. The Council should decide "as soon as possible" to open Chapter 23 (Judiciary and Fundamental Rights). Since the launch of accession negotiations, out of the 35 chapters, 28 have been opened and 17 have been provisionally closed.
MEPs are nonetheless concerned that public support for membership is diminishing in Croatia.
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
MEPs expect negotiations with the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia "to begin in the near future". They therefore ask the Council to confirm, at its March 2010 summit, that it accepts the Commission's recommendation to open negotiations. They also welcome the new Greek government's suggestion of a "symbolic and motivational target date of 2014" for the EU accession of Western Balkans countries.
The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia still has to reform its public administration and its judiciary, fight corruption and improve women’s rights and inter-ethnic relations, says the resolution.
On the issue of the country's name, Parliament asks the governments of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and of Greece to "redouble their efforts at the highest level to find a mutually satisfactory solution to the name issue". According to MEPs, the EU should be ready to assist in the negotiation process.
MEPs reiterate the importance of good neighbourly relations and welcome the "new, more positive climate between the governments of the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Greece", and in particular recent meetings between the two prime ministers.
MEPs are nonetheless concerned about the use of historical arguments in the current debate, including the phenomenon of "antiquisation", which risks increasing tensions with neighbours and creates new internal divisions.
Turkey
Progress on concrete reforms remained limited in 2009, says the resolution.
MEPs deplore the fact that Turkey has not implemented the Additional Protocol to the EC-Turkey Association Agreement for the fourth consecutive year. "Failure to do so may further seriously affect the process of negotiations", they warn.
MEPs regret the Constitutional Court's decisions to close the Democratic Society Party (DTP), and to annul the legislation limiting the jurisdiction of military courts. They say these are "a serious setback in Turkey's reform efforts" and ask therefore that the Constitution be reformed.
Ankara is asked to implement existing legislation better in the areas of women's rights, non-discrimination, freedom of religion, thought and belief, freedom of speech and expression, zero tolerance of torture and the fight against corruption. Turkey should also intensify its efforts to meet the Copenhagen criteria, says the resolution.
The Turkish Government should contribute "in concrete terms" to the comprehensive settlement of the Cyprus issue, based on a bi-zonal, bi-communal federation. By starting the withdrawal of its forces from the northern part of the island and addressing the issue of settlements of Turkish citizens, Turkey would help "facilitate a suitable climate for negotiations", say MEPs.
As positive news from Ankara, MEPs cite the broad public debate on issues within the so-called democratic opening, and a law removing restrictions on broadcasting in Kurdish. They also appreciate the diplomatic efforts made to normalise relations with Armenia, but ask that the relevant protocols be ratified. They also acknowledge Turkey's role in regional security (Black Sea and Middle-East).
Turkey remains a strategic partner for energy according to the Foreign Affairs Committee. MEPs welcome the Signing of the Nabucco Pipeline and call for the opening of the energy chapter in the accession negotiations. 12 out of the 35 chapters have so far been opened. The environment chapter was opened in December 2009.
Croatia resolution adopted by 54 in favour, none against and 8 abstentions
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia resolution adopted by 56 in favour, 5 against and 5 abstentions
Turkey resolution adopted by 60 in favour, none against and 11 abstentions
Vote in Plenary: February I 20100125IPR67949 Foreign Affairs Committee web site
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=AFET
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
