The Week Ahead 1-7 February 2010
Institutions
2010-01-29 - 11:30
Committee meetings and political groups week – Brussels
Hearing of Kristalina Georgieva. The new Bulgarian Commissioner-designate is scheduled to appear before the Development Committee for a three-hour hearing (Wednesday).
SWIFT agreement. The Civil Liberties Committee is set to vote on the EU’s agreement with the US on the sharing of bank transfer data (Thursday).
EP President in France. Jerzy Buzek will be in Paris for an official visit to France. He will meet President Nicolas Sarkozy, Prime Minister François Fillon and others, including leaders of the French National Assembly and Senate (Tuesday-Wednesday).
EP/European Council. Herman Van Rompuy, President of the European Council, will attend a meeting of the political group leaders and the EP President (Thursday).
Spanish Presidency. Foreign Minister Miguel Ángel Moratinos will be at the Foreign Affairs and Development Committees (Thursday).
EP/Mongolia. President Buzek will meet the President of Mongolia, Elbegdorj Tsakhia, after which the two leaders will give an informal press briefing (Monday).
Ukrainian election. A delegation of MEPs will observe the second round of Ukraine’s presidential election (Thursday- Monday).
Preparations for the plenary. The political groups will devote most of the week to their plans for the 8-11 February plenary session. The key event is the scheduled vote on the new European Commission. The session also includes debates on the progress made by Croatia, Turkey and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia towards EU membership and votes on Haiti, Iran and Yemen, as well as on the Copenhagen climate summit. Rules on EU support for improving social housing and a debate on needlestick injuries in hospitals area also on the agenda.
Pre-session press briefing. Parliament’s Press Service and the spokespeople of the main political groups will present the session agenda at the regular briefing on Friday (Anna Politkovskaya room PHS 0A050, 11am).
20100129IPR68208 For details of all the week's events, see The Agenda
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20100600AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
