Security and defence: EU should enhance its strategic autonomy
Security and defence
2010-02-24 - 14:06
The EU must enhance its strategic autonomy through a strong and effective foreign, security and defence policy, said the Foreign Affairs Committee on Tuesday. Its report on the European Security Strategy (ESS) and the Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP), also looks at how the Lisbon Treaty will affect the CSDP and calls for faster deployment of EU operations. The new US anti-missile system should take account of the EU approach and must be planned "in dialogue with Russia", it adds.
The European Security Strategy adopted by the European Council in 2003 and its follow-up report of 2008 listed as key threats facing EU: the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, terrorism and organised crime, threats related to cyber-security and energy security, the impact of climate change, regional conflicts, failed states, poverty and piracy. These threats should be addressed through the Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP) and the Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP), said MEPs on Tuesday.
EU's strategic autonomy
MEPs stressed that the EU must enhance its strategic autonomy through a strong and effective foreign, security and defence policy. Its aims should be to preserve peace, prevent conflicts, strengthen international security, protect the security of citizens, defend EU's interests in the world, and uphold its founding values, while contributing to effective multilateralism in support of international law and advance respect for human rights and democratic values worldwide.
The committee also called for "more effective and better defined" crisis management operations, and synergies between the civilian and military activities of the EU and of its Member States.
The report stresses that "the progress and development of the CFSP must fully respect and not undermine the neutrality and non-alignment of some of the EU Member States".
New anti-missile system
According to the committee, "the new version of the anti-missile shield envisaged by the American administration should be studied in depth and verified". If such a system were to be developed, says the report, "it should take account of a common European approach to protecting Europe against ballistic threats, in dialogue with Russia, and with efforts being made to involve the European defence industry in its development".
Non-proliferation and disarmament
MEPs wanted to further strengthen all three pillars of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons (NPT), i.e. non-proliferation, disarmament and co-operation on the civilian use of nuclear energy. Here the committee welcomed the aims and commitments of the new US administration. With regard to Iran and North Korea, MEPs pointed out that the Union "had undertaken to use every means at its disposal to prevent, deter, halt and, where possible, eliminate proliferation programmes".
Military and civilian operations
MEPs welcomed the success of EU naval operation Atalanta off the coasts of Somalia and the Horn of Africa. They regretted, however, the continuing problems with the prosecution of suspected pirates and armed robbers apprehended in the operation area, which they believed undermined the credibility of the international anti-piracy efforts.
MEPs urged the Council and the Commission to significantly increase resources for civilian engagements in Afghanistan, and recommended prolonging the mandate of the EU observation mission in Georgia by one year. The Union must also pursue its activities in the Palestinian Territories, they added.
Rapid deployment
The committee wants to see further progress in the rapid deployment of CSDP missions and EU forces, including the establishment of a European air transport fleet, a new generation of observation satellites, and a maritime surveillance system. MEPs also wanted better intelligence to be provided to EU military teams.
The Lisbon Treaty and CSDP structures
The committee called for the Lisbon Treaty's provisions on CSDP to be debated this year by MEPs and members of national parliaments. MEPs want to discuss in particular the mutual assistance clause and the solidarity clause in the event of armed aggression on the territory of a Member State, or terrorist attack, natural or man-made disasters, the role of the Foreign High Representative and the European External Action Service (EEAS) in crisis management, the permanent structured co-operation of Member States with higher military capabilites, and the start-up funding for operation preparations.
MEPs backed the idea of setting up a Defence Council of EU defence ministers within the Foreign Affairs Council, and called for a permanent EU operations centre to be established under the supervision of the High Representative for Foreign Affairs. The committee also recommended setting up a new European External Action Academy.
Next steps
The report by Security and Defence Subcommittee chair Arnaud Danjean (EPP, FR) on the implementation of the European Security Strategy (ESS) and the Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP) was adopted by the Foreign Affairs Committee with 48 votes in favour, 6 against, and 6 abstentions, on Tuesday in Brussels. It is likely to put to a vote by the full Parliament in the March plenary session in Strasbourg.
Committee on Foreign Affairs
in the chair:
Gabriele Albertini (EPP, IT)
Rapporteur:
Arnaud Danjean (EPP, FR)
Procedure: own-initiative
20100223IPR69377 Security and Defence Sub-Committee Foreign Affairs Committee
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=SEDE
EN
2
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=AFET
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
