Europe 2020 strategy: how to make it work?
Employment policy
2010-03-04 - 16:35
Doubts as to how the Europe 2020 economic strategy can made to work were raised by Employment and Social Affairs Committee MEPs with Commissioner László Andor on Thursday, the day after the European Commission unveiled its proposal.
"The 2020 strategy aims to get us out of the crisis and meet the challenges of globalisation and the demographic deficit. The EU unemployment rate has topped 10% and is likely to rise further. The strategy has three pillars: smart, sustainable and inclusive growth", said Employment and Social Affairs László Andor, presenting it to the committee.
Doubts about implementation
"The Lisbon strategy failed because Member States didn't play the game", said Thomas Mann (EPP, DE). "How can we be sure that the 2020 strategy aims will be achieved? How can we measure them? asked Elisabeth Lynne (ALDE, UK). "This strategy sets out more limited aims, and involves governmental structures more closely. Co-ordination must lead to implementation" replied Mr Andor.
Combating poverty
"Why this figure of 20 million?" asked Karima Delli (Greens/EFA, FR), about the Commission's proposal to lift 20 million people out of poverty. "Statistics show us the number of people at risk of poverty. Ideally, poverty should be eradicated. The question is whether, realistically, we can do it with European instruments", replied Mr Andor.
Stimulating job-creating growth
"To offset the loss of growth, we must invest in human capital, education, research and development, so as to encourage Member States to give stronger commitments", said Mr Andor in reply to a question by committee chair Pervenche Berès (S&D, FR) on how best to stimulate job-creating growth.
"It is difficult to look at the 2020 strategy without looking at what is happening now in Greece. During the crisis, the social model was cited as a stabilising factor. Yet today, Greece is being asked to destabilise its social model", said Ms Berès in her conclusions. "The Commission is not interfering with Greece's social model. The aim is to stabilise this country's public finances", replied the Commissioner.
In the chair: Pervenche Berès (S&D, FR)
20100304IPR69984 Employment and Social Affairs Committee
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=EMPL
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
