The Week Ahead 8-14 March 2010
Institutions
2010-03-05 - 10:45
Plenary Session – Strasbourg
Foreign Policy. MEPs will debate the EU’s foreign and security policies with High Representative/Commission Vice-President Catherine Ashton, ahead of votes on their priorities in the field (debate and votes Wednesday). There will then be specific debates on the Arctic and Cuba (Wednesday, vote on Cuba: Thursday). Ms Ashton will take part in a meeting of the Conference of Presidents where the setting-up of the European External Action Service will be discussed. (Wednesday).
Reducing red tape. Parliament will vote on legislation to relieve the burden of accounting requirements for the smallest businesses (debate Monday, vote Wednesday).
Climate change strategy. MEPs will discuss the EU’s post-Copenhagen-summit strategy for climate change negotiations immediately after the plans are adopted by the Commission (Tuesday).
Natural disasters. The earthquake in Chile and last week’s storms which did particular damage in France will be debated with the Commission. There will be a vote on the storms and recent flooding in Madeira (Thursday).
International Women’s Day. EP President Jerzy Buzek will open the session with a statement marking International Women’s Day, followed by speakers from the political groups and the Commission (Monday).
Barroso Question Time. Commission President José Manuel Barroso will answer questions on any subject from the political group leaders, then questions on the fundamental rights and the implementation of the Lisbon Treaty from any MEP (Tuesday).
Israel/Gaza. MEPs are set to vote on a resolution on the UN Goldstone Report on the Israel/Gaza conflict (Wednesday). President Buzek will meet the father of Gilad Shalit, the Israeli soldier held captive in Gaza since 2006. His case will be considered during debates on human rights, along with cases concerning Mexico and South Korea (Thursday).
Financial transaction taxes. Parliament will debate international taxes on financial transactions with the Commission (Monday, vote Tuesday).
Euro-Med Assembly. President Buzek will join MEPs and parliamentarians from the EU’s Mediterranean neighbours for the plenary session of the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly in Amman, Jordan (Friday-Sunday).
20100305IPR70027 For details of all the week's events, see The Agenda
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20101100AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
