EU competition policy: time to rethink the fines strategy and tackle state aid
Competition
2010-03-09 - 12:39
The need to assess the effectiveness of Member States' state-aid activities during the crisis, scale back the protectionist reflexes that it triggered and update EU competition rules, inter alia by revisiting the "fines only" policy, is highlighted in a resolution adopted by a show of hands today. On-line advertising, and the telecoms, pharmaceuticals and dairy sectors, are listed as needing further action.
Parliament must be given a bigger say in plans to reform the motor vehicle block exemption and all other competition policy areas, the economic crisis must not become a pretext for relaxing merger rules, and the Commission's next competition policy report should devote a chapter to small and medium-sized enterprises, given the specific difficulties that they face, says the resolution.
Time to crack down on state aid and protectionism
The extraordinary amounts of state aid recently granted, albeit necessary during the worst of the economic crisis, are not only swelling public deficits, but will also distort competition, says the resolution, which calls for an independent report on the potentially distortive effects of state intervention in the financial sector. The resolution also calls on the Commission to publish a report on the effectiveness of state aid granted under the "green recovery" programme and for environmental protection. "Two years ago we were told that the recovery package would bring about the long overdue shift to a sustainable economy. Has the money brought about that shift? Have state aid beneficiaries become greener?", asked rapporteur Sophia in 't Veld (ALDE, NL), in a debate with the Commission on Monday.
State aid to banks must reduced as a matter of urgency, but in a co-ordinated way to avoid creating unfair competitive advantages around the EU, says the resolution, which also broadly supports a strong EU-level supervisory framework for cross-border crisis management in the financial sector. More specifically, it also backs the idea of a European deposit guarantee system and a European bail-out fund.
"Fines only" policy
The resolution disputes the Commission's reasoning that the only instrument to ensure compliance is that of imposing ever-higher fines. "As a single instrument, high fines may be too blunt", said Ms in 't Veld. The resolution notes that the fines instrument has a negative side, since it also can cause job losses. Instead, it calls for more sophisticated tools to be developed, and in particular the use of individual liability.
Sector-specific inquiries
The Commission should institute sector-specific inquiries at Parliament's recommendation, as well as on its own initiative, says the resolution. Specifically, the resolution calls for comprehensive sector inquiries into online advertising and the dairy product distribution chain. It also calls for more action to prevent the pharmaceutical industry from blocking the market entry of generic medicines and a further inquiry into the telecoms industry.
20100308IPR70129 Profile of rapporteur Sophia in 't VELD (ALDE, NL) Adopted text will be available here (click on 9 March)
EN
1
LINK
/members/expert/alphaOrder/view.do?language=EN&id=28266
EN
2
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
