Strengthening the democratic legitimacy of EU foreign and security policy
Security and defence
2010-03-10 - 15:02
MEPs believe the EU must enhance its strategic autonomy and conduct a strong and effective foreign, security and defence policy, and mean to use their budgetary power and democratic right to scrutinise these policies, including funding for the EU external action service, say two resolutions adopted on Wednesday 10 March.
MEPs stress the need to increase the democratic legitimacy of common foreign and security policy (CFSP) to comply with the Lisbon Treaty, e.g. by systematically consulting Parliament before common security and defence policy (CSDP) missions are launched.
These views are set out in a report - drafted by Gabriele Albertini (EPP, IT), and adopted on Wednesday with 592 in favour, 66 against and 11 abstentions - on the Council report on CFSP activities in 2008, an assessment on the EU's foreign and security policy around the world.
EU Special Representatives
Parliament calls for greater parliamentary scrutiny of the appointment and the evaluation of EU Special Representatives (EUSRs), underlining the need for gender balance. It adds that Parliament's relevant committee should be consulted about appointments the High Representative will make to senior posts in the European External Action Service and certain EUSRs and Heads of Delegation should appear before the committee on their appointment.
Review inter-institutional agreements
As Parliament now has greater budgetary powers, MEPs call for a review and extension of inter-institutional agreements, to ensure harmonious implementation of budgetary and consultation procedures for the CFSP and the CSDP. Parliament should also have better access to sensitive information (classified as top secret, secret or confidential), they add.
Extra funding needed
MEPs are concerned about underfunding of EU budget Heading IV ("The EU as a global player") and hence the EU's ability to conduct a "credible and proactive" foreign policy. The EU needs extra funding to meet "unforeseen global challenges", they believe. They ask to be consulted on the procedures for urgent financing of CFSP initiatives.
CSDP
The other resolution, drawn up by Security and Defence Sub-Committee chair Arnaud Danjean (EPP, FR), looks at how the Lisbon Treaty will affect the Common Security and Defence Policy (CSDP). This report, which calls for enhanced strategic autonomy of the EU, was approved with 480 votes in favour, 11 against and 64 abstentions.
Permanent operations centre
MEPs backed the idea of setting up a Council of EU defence ministers within the Foreign Affairs Council, and called for a permanent EU operations centre to be established under the supervision of the High Representative for Foreign Affairs. Parliament also recommended setting up a new European External Action Academy.
US anti-missile shield
The proposed US anti-missile system "should take account of a common European approach to protecting Europe against ballistic threats", and must be developed "in a dialogue on a continental scale", "with efforts being made to involve the European defence industry in its development", say MEPs.
With regard to Iran and North Korea, MEPs point out that the Union has "undertaken to use every means at its disposal to prevent, deter, halt and, where possible, eliminate proliferation programmes". Parliament urges the Council and the Commission to significantly increase resources for civilian engagements in Afghanistan.
Faster deployment of EU missions
MEPs want to see further progress in the rapid deployment of CSDP missions and EU forces, including the establishment of a European air transport fleet, a new generation of observation satellites, and a maritime surveillance system. Finally, Parliament also calls for better intelligence to be provided to EU military teams.
20100310IPR70325 MEPs to step up scrutiny of EU foreign and security policies + related links Video recording of debate in plenary - 10 March 2010 Adopted text will be available here (click on 10 March)
EN
2
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/frd/vod/player?date=20100310&language=en
EN
3
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20100226BRI69636 ITEM-001-EN NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
