Storms in France and Madeira: mobilise EU solidarity funding fast and flexibly, say MEPs
Regional policy
2010-03-11 - 13:00
The EU Solidarity Fund must be mobilised "in the most urgent and flexible way and to the greatest possible extent" to help the areas hit by severe storms in February, as soon as the national governments have submitted their aid requests, said MEPs in Strasbourg on Thursday morning.
France, the island of Madeira (Portugal), as well as parts of Spain, Belgium, Germany and the Netherlands suffered serious damage from violent rain storms in February. At least 42 people were killed in Madeira as a result of torrential floods, and almost 60 people perished in western France, where the "Xynthia" storm destroyed large parts of coastal towns and small islands.
"We need an urgent response from the EU, said Ricardo CORTÉS LASTRA (S&D, ES) of the Regional Development Committee, whose delegation of MEPs was in Madeira last week to evaluate the damage. "Extraordinary situations call for extraordinary measures", he added.
Parliament wants a more flexible fund
MEPs say criteria for granting solidarity funding should be simplified, so as to create a stronger and more flexible instrument, "able to respond effectively to the new challenges of climate change". Parliament backed a Commission proposal to this end in May 2006, but the Council has since blocked progress on the issue.
MEPs therefore urge the Spanish Presidency and the Commission to "reactivate the revision" of the European Solidarity Fund Regulation.
Background information
The European Solidarity Fund intervenes in cases of major natural disasters in EU or EU-candidate countries. It was set up after severe floods hit central Europe in the summer of 2002 and operates with a budget of €1 billion per year.
To receive funding, a stricken country must submit a request within 10 weeks of the initial damage. The Commission then examines the request and - if it meets the criteria - proposes to Parliament and Council, as the budgetary authority, an "amending budget" to make the payments available.
Payments from the Fund are limited to funding emergency operations by public authorities, to remedy damage not covered by private insurance.
The resolution was approved with 474 votes in favour, 7 against and 50 abstentions.
20100310IPR70347 Adopted text will be available here (click on 11 March)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
