Better leaflets for prescription medicines
Public health
2010-03-16 - 11:31
Packets of pills Do you remember everything the doctor said during your short encounter about the medicine prescribed for you? Probably not. You've got questions and the leaflet with the medication doesn't help much.
New rules currently under discussion aim to give citizens access to high-quality information on prescription medicines in a non-promotional way via the internet and health-related publications. Information would not be communicated via radio and TV.
In a workshop on 4 March, MEPs and experts discussed how best to improve the information contained with prescription medicines and how to bring it all to the internet.
Information leaflets
Professor Theo Raynor, from Leeds University said up to 50% of people on long-term medication don't take it as prescribed. "Most medicines are taken by people in their own homes. They are in charge, so they need this information."
Participants said information in the leaflets should be clear and visible, with a fact box and in line with European standards.
"Package leaflets should be less comprehensive; they have to be easier to read for patients," according to Dr Frank Ulrich Montgomery from the Standing Committee of European Doctors. "Leaflets and the summary should be available on the internet."
Portuguese Socialist Antonio Fernando Correia de Campos called for a common approach in collating information. "The information must not be just collected from the producers. If we want quality information, we also need time for international or national agencies to analyse it," he said.
Internet has an increasing role
A recent study showed 74% of patients wanted to have information from health professionals about what web sites they should consult, Roxana Radulescu from the European Patients Forum said.
Swedish Conservative Christofer Fjellner, who will steer the legislation through Parliament said, "a lot of patients and some medical professionals are looking for information on the Internet. It can be a very good source of information, but it also gives access to lots of false information. What we can do is create better information on the Internet."
Paul Woods from the European Federation of Pharmaceutical Industries and Associations called for a European solution. "Why should patients go to US or unreliable sites to search for information?" he said.
What's next
The Environment Committee will vote on prescription medicine in June and the plenary vote is scheduled for September.
Legislation on prescription medicines is part of a package on pharmaceuticals. The other topics are fake medicines and monitoring of drugs.
20100305STO70032 Proposed new rules Environment and public health committee
EN
1
PHOTO
20100315PHT70680.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5729462
EN
3
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=ENVI
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
