Buzek: "European institutions alone can not render the EU economy competitive, Member States have to feel 'ownership' of the strategy"
Institutions
2010-03-17 - 18:50
Following the first ever meeting with the College of European Commissioners in Brussels, European Parliament President Jerzy Buzek said: "This was a very successful meeting. It was very useful to discuss directly with the college setting out the Parliament's priorities."
"We debated many important topics, including the Europe 2020 economic strategy. The EU institutions alone cannot render the EU economy competitive. We need to work with the Member States and the National Parliaments. Member States must feel "ownership" of the 2020 strategy. We need to invest in infrastructure especially in energy, digital technologies and transport ".
On the European External Action Service (EEAS), EP President Buzek said:
"The democratic and financial accountability of the EEAS to the European Parliament, including annual budget discharge, is essential. The EP would like the service to be as administratively close to the Commission, as politically possible. There should be proper institutional and geographic balance in EEAS appointments. "
Other topics debated with President Barroso and the College of Commissioners: Negotiations on the new European Parliament - European Commission Framework Agreement, relations with the Council of Ministers and the presence of the European Commission in plenary sessions, including how to create a livelier question time with Commissioners).
The meeting took place against the backdrop of the ongoing negotiations between the European Parliament and the European Commission on a Framework Agreement which aims at define working relations between the two institutions and lay down rules for the flow of information between them.
In addition to the President of the European Parliament taking part in meetings of the College of Commissioners from time to time, it is envisaged that Commission President José Manuel Barroso will similarly participate in EP Conference of Presidents (political group leaders) meetings.
20100317IPR70859
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
