MEPs give conditional backing to EU diplomatic service
External relations
2010-03-23 - 20:00
Budgetary and political accountability are crucial to gain Parliament’s support in setting up the diplomatic service, MEPs told Catherine Ashton on Tuesday. They also voiced firm opposition to the idea that the European External Action Service should have a secretary-general, calling instead for “political” deputies to be appointed to stand in for the High Representative when needed.
Most EP political groups backed what is now unofficially called the “Brok/Verhostadt model” for the European External Action Service (EEAS), as set out in an informal document by Parliament's co-rapporteurs, Elmar Brok (EPP, DE) and Guy Verhofstadt (ALDE, BE). Under this model, the EEAS would be an autonomous service linked to the Commission in administrative, organisational and budgetary terms, while being accountable to the Parliament in both political and budgetary terms.
During the debate, the two MEPs raised the issues of the secretary-general and which person or persons might stand in for Mrs Ashton, t he European Union’s High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, when needed . They stressed that "deputies must not be civil servants". "We want a political figure", said Mr Brok.
Mrs Ashton answered that she "got the message of the political side of representation" and added that it "should not be the pre-Lisbon formula". She has also promised to do her best "to be available" but did not answer MEPs' question as to how she would be represented in her absence.
Regarding the secretary-general, “we don’t know which nationality he will be”, she said, answering rumours that Pierre Vimont, the current Ambassador of France to the United States, would occupy the post.
Mrs Ashton did not answer MEPs' questions about the timeframe of proposals for the setting up the service. Bernhard Rapkay (S&D, DE), in particular, asked when an official proposal for a staff statute would be presented.
Budgetary accountability and Community method
"There can be no doubt about budgetary accountability of the EEAS to Parliament. The EEAS and the officials working in it will be subject to the same type of financial control as if they were working in the Commission", she told MEPs. "The service will fully respect the Community method and it will cooperate with the Commission services as if it was a directorate-general of the Commission", she added.
Guy Verhofstadt insisted that development and neighbourhood policies should be fully integrated inside the EEAS "to make it more ambitious" and to "avoid having two distinct and separate administrations". On development policy, Mrs Ashton said "I have made some concrete proposals for the EEAS that I believe keep development policy where it belongs - at the heart of the EU's external action". Single geographical desks covering the whole world would be created.
Franziska Brantner (Greens/EFA, DE) asked the High Representative to create a strong crisis management and peace-building department. “I don’t really want to set up a conflict prevention department. It is a horizontal issue”, she said.
In line with the Brok and Verhofstadt proposals, she confirmed that "most senior heads of delegation could come here to AFET [the EP Foreign Affairs Committee] for an informal exchange of views once they are formally appointed and before they take up office". Moreover, delegations would give back up to official visits by members of Parliament.
Answering a question by Kristian Vigenin (S&D, BG) as to how she was planning to have "a proper geographical distribution of posts, which is important for new and small Member States", Mrs Ashton said she wanted "all Member States to be represented but it will take time".
20100322IPR71102 Committee on Foreign Affairs
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=AFET
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
