EP president condemns killing of French policeman and arrests of Cuban activists
Institutions
2010-03-24 - 16:08
At the start of Thursday's plenary sitting, Parliament's President Jerzy Buzek made statements to the House about two recent events. He condemned the killing of French policeman Jean-Serge Nerin by the Basque separatist group ETA on 16 March and expressed support for members of the Cuban opposition group Ladies in White (Damas de Blanco) who have been arrested by the Cuban authorities. Ladies in White was awarded the European Parliament's Sakharov Prize for human rights in 2005.
On Wednesday, at the start of the session, the House approved a small number of changes to the agenda announced by President Buzek. Among these, the debate on the meeting of G20 employment ministers was brought forward from Thursday to Wednesday, replacing the debate on air safety, which was postponed to the April plenary. In addition, Parliament will vote this Thursday on guidelines for FRONTEX surveillance of the EU's maritime external borders.
Highlights of the session
2011 budget: Parliament to spell out its priorities
Young people, economic recovery and research should be the top priorities for next year's EU budget, says a draft resolution from the EP Budgets Committee which will be put to the vote on Thursday.
Eurozone and economic governance: debate with ECB president Trichet
Economic governance and monetary policy will take centre stage on Thursday as MEPs hold their annual debate on the euro area with ECB president Jean-Claude Trichet.
MEPs give their views ahead of EU spring summit
MEPs will discuss the main topics on the agenda of the European Council taking place in Brussels on 25-26 March: the EU's new strategy for jobs and growth, exit strategies from the current economic crisis and the follow-up to the Copenhagen conference on climate change. Commission President Barroso and Spanish Minister López Garrido will take part in the debate.
Food quality: legislation needed
The compulsory labelling of farm produce gives consumers valuable information about food quality and can boost farmers' competitiveness, says a draft resolution by the EP Agriculture Committee, which believes legislation is needed in this area.
Rescuing migrants at sea: are "guidelines" enough?
MEPs could veto proposed guidelines on surveillance of the EU's external sea borders by the border agency FRONTEX, if the full Parliament backs the view of the Civil Liberties Committee, which rejected the proposals on the grounds that these duties should be enshrined in law, not merely in guidelines.
Citizens' initiative: current state-of-play
The Lisbon Treaty makes provision for at least one million EU nationals to submit a "citizens' initiative" to the Commission asking it to draft an EU law on any topic subject to the EU treaties. The Commission is due to bring forward legislation soon to put this clause of the treaty into effect. MEPs will hear the current state-of-play in a debate with Commissioner Šefčovič and Spanish Minister López Garrido.
Tibet two years after the violence in Lhasa
MEPs will discuss the current situation in Tibet with the Commission in a debate on Wednesday.
Transaction tax and debt moratorium to help developing countries
The world's richer nations should set up a financial transaction tax at global level to create a fairer financial system and to generate more resources for funding development, says a draft resolution by the Development Committee.
Integration of Roma people
Ahead of the second European Roma summit taking place in Cordoba on 8 April, MEPs will vote on a resolution on the role of the EU in the integration of the Roma into wider society.
20100322IPR71124 Final draft agenda - 24-25 March 2010 Newsletter EuroparlTV - watch live broadcasts from Brussels plenary
EN
1
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?reference=2010-03-2&language=EN
EN
3
LINK
http://www.europarltv.europa.eu/ParliamentLive.aspx
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20100315BRI70579 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
