Signing off the 2008 budget: MEPs' proposals for better monitoring of EU spending
Budgetary control
Committees Budgetary Control
2010-03-23 - 21:12
The European Commission's budgetary management for 2008 should be formally approved, decided Parliament's Budgetary Control Committee on Tuesday in its vote on the "budget discharge procedure". By contrast, the Council's budget discharge should be postponed, said MEPs, citing a continuing lack of cooperation. Parliament's spending for 2008 should be approved, although some internal controls should be better.
The committee cited significant improvements in the control of agriculture spending by the European Commission but also continuing weaknesses in other policy areas. Though Council had been more forthcoming with information, MEPs were still not entirely satisfied and therefore proposed that the full Parliament postpone giving discharge until October.
To improve the control of EU spending, the committee not only voted on whether to give the institutions their discharge or not, but also adopted resolutions with recommendations on how to monitor spending better. Overall, MEPs say control of EU spending could be made easier by simplification and better cooperation with Member States.
Better control of EU agriculture funds
Regarding the budget of the Commission, the Budgetary Control Committee recommended, by 25 votes to 4, that Parliament grant the discharge. In their resolution, MEPs welcomed the improvements made recent years, for instance that the average EU 27 error rate for agriculture in 2008 was - for the first time ever - below two percent. "Error" means, in this sense, not only cases of fraud, but - in most cases - other irregularities such as mistakes in reporting or filling in forms.
However, the committee regrets that there are still large-scale errors in rural development, structural funds, research, energy and transport, enlargement and external action. MEPs urged the Commission to prepare and send Parliament a new agenda on how it will reduce the level of errors further. They also asked the Commission and Member States to simplify the rules for receiving EU funding in cases where these are unnecessarily complicated.
More transparency in Member States and Commission
A general problem with controlling the spending of EU funding lies with the Member States, which spend 80 percent of the EU budget. Most States do not draw up national management declarations, as called for by Parliament for a long time, which could facilitate the control of this expenditure. The committee welcomes the fact that Denmark, the Netherlands, Sweden and the United Kingdom have all made such declarations.
MEPs want to see more transparency in the Commission, including public information about members in expert and working groups and the setting-up of a public register of NGOs receiving EU funds. They also ask the Commission to revise its code of conduct to include a definition of the term "conflict of interest", actions to be taken in case of such conflicts and clearer rules on the acceptance of gifts.
The resolution on the Commission's discharge was adopted by 24 votes to 4, with one abstention.
Discharge to be given to Parliament
The Budgetary Control Committee recommended, by 21 votes to 4, that the plenary grant the President of Parliament the discharge for implementation of the EP's 2008 budget. MEPs adopted a various suggestions on improving the transparency and efficiency of the internal control system of the EP budget but they rejected strong criticisms of Parliament's internal control system contained in the draft resolution.
To improve the control system, the committee requested earlier access to financial information and asked the Secretary-General to say how he intended to achieve "clearer, shorter, more precise, more relevant, more professional annual activity reports aiming at providing the discharge authority with relevant information on the institution's use of public money".
Postponed decision on discharge for the Council
Last year, the Parliament decided to postpone the vote on the discharge to the Council until November since the Council did not cooperate sufficiently with the Budgetary Control Committee.
The Council continued to refuse to participate in Parliamentary discharge debates and, unlike other institutions, it has not submitted an annual activity report to Parliament. The committee unanimously decided once again to recommend postponement of the decision on the discharge of the Council's budget, which this year is €743 million.
Agencies - granting discharge to 22 of 23
In a package of 23 reports, MEPs recommended discharge to 22 out of 23 EU agencies. The exception was the European Police College (CEPOL), for which the committee suggests postponing the decision because of an ongoing OLAF investigation and structural and systematic problems in the college. To remedy the problems, the committee suggested an action plan, to be adopted by CEPOL by 30 June 2010.
Other institutions and European Development funds
On Monday and Tuesday, the Budgetary Control Committee also recommended that discharge be granted for the following institutions:
7th, 8th, 9th and 10th European Development Funds: 19 votes in favour and two against
Court of Justice: 27 votes in favour and one against
Court of Auditors: 27 votes in favour and one against
Economic and Social committee: 25 votes in favour and two against
Committee of the Regions: 25 votes in favour and two against
European Ombudsman: approved unanimously
European Data Protection Supervisor: approved unanimously
Next steps
The vote in plenary is scheduled for Wednesday 21 April. For each institution or agency, the Parliament can choose to either grant or postpone the discharge. For a postponement, Parliament will inform the institution or agency concerned about the reasons for not granting discharge. The institution or agency is then required to remedy the problems by October, when the plenary will vote again, this time to either refuse or grant the discharge.
In the Chair : Luigi DE MAGISTRIS (ALDE, IT)
23.03.2010
Rapporteurs: Discharge of the Commission: Bogusław Liberadzki (S&D, PL) Parliament: Bart Staes (Greens/EFA, BE) Other institutions: Ryszard Czarnecki (ECR, PL) Agencies: Véronique Mathieu (EPP, FR) 7th, 8th, 9th and 10th European development funds: Inés Ayala Sender (S&D, ES)
20100322IPR71100 The budgetary control committee's thematic page on the 2008 discharge - with links to all reports Members of the budgetary control committee - with links to all rapporteurs' profiles on Parliament's web page Budgetary control handbook - introduction to the work of the committee Press release on the start of the discharge procedure (10 November 2009) Video recordings of committee meetings, with hearings and debates related to the discharge 2008 Adopted reports, with voting figures, will appear here Press release: Parliament approves Council's accounts for 2007
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/editoDisplay.do?language=EN&menuId=2035&id=1&body=CONT
EN
2
LINK
/activities/committees/membersCom.do?language=EN&body=CONT
EN
3
LINK
/activities/committees/publicationsCom.do?language=EN&body=CONT
EN
5
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/frd/vod/search-committees?language=en&search_parameter_legislature=7&select_searchcommettees_field=CONT&search_date_start_0=&search_date_end_0=
EN
6
LINK
/activities/committees/reportsCom.do?language=EN&body=CONT
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20091109IPR64085 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20091124IPR65103 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
