3 questions to Tony Blair on Middle East and Faith Foundation
External relations
2010-03-25 - 12:46
Former UK Prime Minister Tony Blair was in Parliament on Monday 22 March to talk about Palestine Tony Blair was at the European Parliament Monday to meet MEPs from the Development and Foreign Affairs Committees. On the agenda was Palestine and how to boost the economy and development to improve the plight of the Palestinians. He was joined by senior UN officials and members of the Palestine-Israeli community. At the hearing many MEPs were sceptical about the overall prospects for peace in the region. He answered some questions about his visit to the Parliament.
In terms of the Middle East Peace Process generally, are we entering a new phase and is there any prospect of a breakthrough?
It’s a cliché in the peace process to assert that "we are entering a critical phase". But I think it is crucial in the period ahead to marry together a meaningful, genuine political process with a sustained and vigorous effort to help build the foundations of a Palestinian State.
There is a real opportunity here. It’s clear that President Obama is committed to work with the broader international community and the parties to reach a deal within a reasonable timeframe. President Abbas and Prime Minister Fayyad have dedicated themselves to building a functioning Palestinian State which can live side by side with Israel, in peace and security. The Government of Israel recognises and subscribes to the "Two State" principle.
But the process is fragile and can be easily reversed. This is why it is crucial that the parties, with the international community’s support, move now from proximity talks to direct negotiations, and then on to a final status deal. Only negotiations between the parties, with supporting change on the ground, can lead to a lasting and just peace.
Regarding the economic sustainability of a future Palestinian State, do you see any hope of a "peace dividend" similar to that which revived Northern Ireland?
Certainly. The Palestinian territory is blessed with natural resources and entrepreneurial, skilled and determined people. Prime Minister Fayyad’s government has set out a case for statehood and is putting into action a plan to make that a reality. As the foundations of the state are built and the weight of the occupation gradually lifted, the prospects for a vibrant Palestinian economy are huge. The Palestinian Authority will host a second Palestine Investment Conference in early June, which will seek to leverage foreign direct investment and give the economy a further boost.
As an example of what can be achieved, one has only to look at the Palestinian high-tech sector, which boasts a workforce of 3,600 engineers, combined with a number of entrepreneurs committed to working alongside the Israeli high-tech sector and on their own account, to produce high-end ICT products for a global market.
Your Faith Foundation stresses the peaceful cooperation and interaction between faiths. Is this principle sometimes difficult to sustain when it is confronted by the deep rooted religious tensions which exist in the Middle East?
The point of the Faith Foundation is at one level very simple. It is that as the world becomes ever more globalised, religion can serve either to emphasise the differences between peoples, or help them come together and understand and accept their shared humanity and spirituality. I have found in my work with the Faith Foundation that people of different faiths are ready and willing to work with one another to solve shared problems, for example to combat malaria, one of the Millennium Development Goals. The Middle East is no exception. It is all too easy to succumb to extremist agendas which emphasise difference and hatred of the other. The truly challenging, but ultimately far more satisfying, calling is to seek out and promote shared values.
***
Mr Blair was speaking in his capacity as special Middle East envoy for the Quartet of the UN, US, Russia and the European Union.
20100319STO70948 Press release Tony Blair office
EN
1
PHOTO
20100322PHT71063.jpg
EN
3
LINK
http://www.tonyblairoffice.org/
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20100322IPR71095 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
