"The alternative to elections in Sudan would be war" - Ana Gomes
External relations
2010-04-08 - 11:35
Ana Gomes Sudan elections 11-13 April Referendum on independence of Southern Sudan January 2011 War-torn Sudan is due to hold its first democratic presidential, local and legislative elections since 1986. But will the 11-13 April elections really be democratic? There are fears of manipulation, a number of opposition parties are boycotting them and, following threats, the EU decided Wednesday to withdraw election observers from Darfur. We spoke to Portuguese Socialist Ana Gomes who is heading Parliament's observation mission.
President Omar al-Bashir's regime is accused of trying to manipulate the elections. Is there any chance that they will take place in a free and democratic manner?
Some parties are boycotting the elections and some have called for them to be postponed, but others are still in the running, at least for some of the polls. The elections have not been cancelled or postponed by the National Electoral Commission. We are watching closely to see what happens.
Our objective is to have first-hand, direct observation, if elections take place. Then we will evaluate everything and tell the world what we have heard and seen. This is why we are heading to Khartoum Thursday as initially planned, despite all the confusing and disturbing news.
These elections are important for Africa, because the future of Sudan, Africa's largest country, is in question. These elections are part of the CPA (Comprehensive Peace Agreement) of 2005, which ended a 50-year war in which over 2 million people died. They are a necessary step for the referendum on the independence of Southern Sudan scheduled for January. The alternative could be war and nobody wants to see that.
Sudan is the biggest country in Africa with many languages. Does the election observation mission have enough resources to credibly assess how the elections are run?
The EU mission organised by the European Commission is there for a long period and is adequately staffed by qualified experts with the necessary languages skills. The EP observation mission is short-term and more focused on how the elections proceed.
We have very experienced people on the ground, who have observed elections in all corners of the world, we cannot be fooled...We go without prejudgements and because all parties want us to be there, but we go with a full understanding of the risks.
We will be faithful to our mandate by telling the truth about what happens. Only in this way will we enhance Europe's credibility, in particular in the eyes of the Sudanese who want democracy and the rule of law.
The Sudan People's Liberation Movement (SPLM, ex-rebels from the South of the country, now part of the governmental coalition) will boycott some of the elections because of the risk of fraud and insecurity. Could that threaten January's referendum on Southern Sudan?
The SPLM has withdrawn its presidential candidate and won't run in Darfur, but will stand for legislative, regional and municipal elections. The SPLM and most people in the South want the elections because they see a connection with the referendum foreseen for January 2011.
That is why, despite all the problems and risks, they want these elections to take place. And it is one reason why we Europeans should be there to observe, evaluate independently and share our assessment with the world.
20100406STO72098 Details about EP observation mission Election observation in third countries Comments from Veronique De Keyser, MEP and Chief Observer of the EU mission, and Thabo Mbeki
EN
1
PHOTO
20100329PHT71464.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/intcoop/election_observation/default_en.htm
EN
4
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/avservices/player/streaming.cfm%3Ftype=ebs%26sid=157522
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20100406IPR72147 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
