Limiting animal testing while not hindering scientific research
Agriculture
Committees Agriculture and Rural Development
2010-04-08 - 10:59
Legislation to regulate the use of animals for scientific experiments has moved a step closer after Parliament and Council representatives reached on Wednesday an agreement on the final details of draft legislation in the pipeline. The key point is to improve animal welfare without hampering the fight against diseases.
If endorsed by Parliament and Council, the new legislation would reduce the number of animal tests and introduce an assessment, before the experiment being carried out regarding the protection of animal welfare.
Elisabeth Jeggle (EPP, DE), the Member who led Parliament's team of negotiators, will present the results to the EP Agriculture Committee in the afternoon of 12 April..
Among other things, the draft legislation addresses the issue of introducing alternative methods that produce less pain or distress, a better regulation of the use of primates, the classification of the severity of tests and the inspections to be carried out to ensure compliance. More details can be found at the link at the end of this text.
Procedure not over yet
The agreement reached on Wednesday by the Parliament and Council delegations is the result of a lengthy procedure. In December 2009, the delegations had reached a compromise on main political issues, but had to omit the comitology arrangements, due to the foreseen changes in this area with the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty. Wednesday's meeting confirmed the political deal reached last year and led to an agreement on the whole text of the draft legislation.
The deal must still be endorsed by the EP's political groups. For this reason it will now be formally submitted to the Agriculture Committee and subsequently to the full Parliament for a final vote. Both Parliament and Council will need to approve it to turn the draft text into law. The vote in the Agriculture Committee, not yet formally scheduled, could take place on 3 or 4 May.
Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development
Procedure: second reading, negotiations (trialogue)
In the Chair: Elisabeth Jeggle (EPP, DE)
20100408IPR72325 Press release on the political agreement reached in December
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20091207IPR66096 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
