ACP focuses on problems of immigration
Delegations
2010-04-08 - 11:09
2 members of Famille Bou Bess - a rap groups of formers illegal immigrants with Louis Michel "Temporary migration" could help with immigration problems ACP will be helped to adapt to banana agreement Belgian MEP Louis Michel co-chairs the ACP-EU parliamenatary assembly with Zambia's Charles Milupi. The assembly, comprising 78 MEPs and 78 MPs from African, Caribbean and Pacific nations met at the end of March in the Canary Islands to discuss South-North migration, a new EU-Latin America agreement on bananas and the situation in Southern Sudan. Mr Michel told us more.
The Canary Islands are a gateway to the EU for migrants from sub-Saharan Africa and you have just met a group of young Senegalese singers who arrived by sea. Do you think we should have "temporary migration" to deal with this problem?
The fact that the plenary session of the Assembly is being held in the Canary Islands is symbolic. The European islands lying off the coast of Africa and on the Caribbean route have made the news in the wake of tragic events that claimed the lives of many Africans seeking a better future. We discussed the issue with our ACP counterparts arguing against the idea, much too widespread in Africa, that Europe is a paradise for immigrants. Most immigrants have no idea that the journey will be so perilous and that once they arrive, working conditions may be precarious and unfair. In addition, they may face xenophobia. Migrants are often tempted to give their families an rose-tinted image of their life in Europe. It is important, and we parliamentarians can contribute here, to make the reality clear.
I am a long time supporter of temporary migration, which would allow people to work abroad and then return to their country of origin, knowing that they can easily get a new visa and work permit letting them leave again. Most migrants arrive legally but become illegal when their visa expires. I am convinced that if they had the assurance of being able to re-enter legally, they would be readier to return home.
The Canary Islands and the ACP countries are major banana producers. What will the impact of the recent agreement aimed at increasing the competitiveness of South American bananas be?
I welcome this agreement, which ends the 15-year "banana war". I know there are some concerns about the consequences, but measures will be taken to help ACP countries adapt. These will be tailored to each country, identified and developed by the ACP in consultation with the EU as part of the broader agriculture and development strategy. ACP countries will always have free access to European markets.
20100406STO72097 Press release on meeting ACP-EU site
EN
1
PHOTO
20100329PHT71468.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/intcoop/acp/10_01/default_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20100330IPR71947 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
