MEPs monitor polls in Sudan
External relations
General
2010-04-12 - 11:48
MEPs in the European Parliament election observation delegation to Sudan are currently monitoring the ballots in Khartoum and the southern city of Juba. The complexity of the elections is a challenge to both voters and observers.
Most of the MEPs arrived in Sudan on 8 April and will be staying until 16 April. The elections are taking place on 11-13 April. These, the first multiparty general elections in Sudan in nearly 25 years, are taking place at all levels of government, presidential, legislative and local.
MEPs in both capitals
The European Parliament delegation, headed by Ana Gomes (S&D, PT), is working together with the EU Election Observation Mission headed by MEP Véronique De Keyser (S&D, BE). Ana Gomes said "Parliament decided to send a delegation taking into consideration the importance of these elections to Sudan and the whole of Africa. We have come without prejudice and with a strong experience. At the right moment we will share our assessment with everybody. We are keen to tell what we have seen, not only from the technical point of view, but as observers who see elections as a crucial step towards democracy and who evaluate the whole process, not just the polling."
Four MEPs are following the elections mainly in the Sudanese capital Khartoum: Ana Gomes, José Manuel Garcia-Margallo y Marfil (EPP, ES), Juan Fernando López Aguilar (S&D, ES) and John Attard-Montalto (S&D, MT). Two Members flew to Juba, the capital of South Sudan, on 10 April: Frank Engel (EPP, LU) and Jacek Wlosowicz (ECR, PL).
Meetings with political parties and civil society
After their arrival in Khartoum the MEPs were briefed by EU Chief Observer De Keyser and her team. They visited the National Election Commission and met several representatives of political parties and civil society to hear their views on the political situation in Sudan and on the elections. The MEPs also visited the EU Delegation in Khartoum to discuss the elections with the ambassadors of EU states represented in Sudan.
During the electoral period the MEPs are visiting several polling stations as observers and will then share their views with the EU Election Observation Mission, consisting of 130 short-term and long-term observers deployed throughout the country, excluding Darfur.
A complex electoral process
There are over 16,000 polling stations in Sudan. As several elections are taking place at the same time, voters will receive 8 different ballot papers in North Sudan and up to 12 in the South. Since nearly half the population is illiterate and these are the first elections for most voters, the challenges for both voters and observers are enormous.
At the end of the first day of polling, EP delegation head Ana Gomes said "We feel we are being welcomed by the Sudanese people, judging from reactions at the polling stations and in all our contacts, including those with the main opposition parties that decided to withdraw from some elections. This is encouraging as it runs counter to the hostile statements made earlier against international observers".
20100412IPR72473 Photographs of the EP delegation mission to Sudan Interview with EP Delegation Head - Ana Gomes (S&D, Portugal) EP election observation in third countries
EN
1
LINK
ftp://epavvideoget:mo12ssb@ftpeps01.europarl.eu.int/epavvideo/EBS/Sudan/Photos
EN
3
LINK
/intcoop/election_observation/default_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20100406STO72098 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
