Opening of Brussels plenary session: MEPs to debate euro summit of 7 May
Institutions
Plenary sittings
2010-05-05 - 14:21
This week's Brussels session began early, with a special voting session to catch up on the votes held over from the last Strasbourg session. The House first approved a number of changes to the plenary agenda, including the addition of a debate on the eurozone summit of 7 May. MEPs also decided to postpone the vote on the budgetary discharge of the Council.
The first three items in the order of business on Wednesday from 3pm were agreed as follows:
Joint debate on the reports by Íñigo MÉNDEZ DE VIGO (EPP, ES) on the composition of the European Parliament (the 18 new MEPs)
A new item: a debate with Council and Commission on the preparation of the Summit of Heads of State or Government of the euro area of 7 May
The EU 2020 debate already scheduled
In addition, the vote on the budgetary discharge to the Council was postponed pending negotiations with Council. The other discharge votes go ahead as planned.
The report by Vittorio PRODI (S&D, IT) on ‘adapting to climate change’ will not have a short presentation on Wednesday night. The vote on this report takes place on Thursday.
The report by Vital MOREIRA (S&D, PT) on financial support for Ukraine moves to the May II session in Strasbourg, to allow an opportunity for a first reading agreement to be reached.
Thursday's vote on guidelines relating to inter-transmission system operator compensation was removed from the agenda.
Condolences for murder of human rights activists in Mexico
Following the votes, Parliament's President Jerzy Buzek made a number of announcements. First he expressed Parliament's condolences at the killings in Mexico of Beatriz Cariño, the director of the human rights group CACTUS, and Finnish human rights observer Jyri Antero Jaakkola.
EP President's visit to Washington
Mr Buzek then told the House of his recent visit to Washington, where he had met leading US political figures and opened the new European Parliament liaison office, to promote relations with Congress.
9 May is Europe Day
Lastly, he highlighted the forthcoming 60th anniversary - on 9 May - of the Schuman declaration, a founding document of the European Union. Each year 9 May is now celebrated as Europe Day and the EP will be holding its traditional Open Days on 8 May in Brussels and 9 May in Strasbourg. Events will also be held in Luxembourg.
20100504IPR74090 Final draft agenda - 5-6 May 2010 EP Live - watch the plenary live EuroparlTV- watch live broadcasts from plenary
EN
1
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?reference=2010-05&language=EN
EN
2
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/frd/live/live-video?language=en
EN
3
VIDEOLINK
http://www.europarltv.europa.eu/ParliamentLive.aspx
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
