EU watchdog Nikiforos Diamandouros interviewed
Ombudsman
2010-05-03 - 09:02
European Ombudsman Nikiforos Diamandouros People confused over national & European Ombudsman EU Ombudsman role expanding due to treaty changes How does it feel to be the man responsible for ensuring that the Institutions of the European Union are open and transparent? As he prepares to present his annual report to MEPs we caught up with European Ombudsman Nikiforos Diamandouros and asked him about some of the complaints that his office in Strasbourg in France received. You can watch his present his annual findings live to the Petitions Committee on 4 May.
In 2008, 75% of complaints lodged with you were found to be inadmissible. Is there a lot of confusion as to what the Ombudsman actually does?
The figure has come down a bit. But it still is about 70%. It is very difficult even for very sophisticated people to understand that when there is a violation of EU law, if it's on state level, they can't come to me. They should go to their national Ombudsman.
This accounts for almost 80% of the inadmissible complaints.
For this very reason we have set up the European Network of Ombudsmen to transfer all the complaints to the right institution without the citizen or complainant having to run around to find out which institution is the right one. In other words, we do that job for them.
So, prima facie, you are right: there is confusion. But it is the kind of confusion that is easily addressable.
In your seven years of office, how has the job changed? How, for instance, has the Lisbon Treaty affected your work and the role of the Ombudsman?
The institution has evolved very much in those seven years. The office has more than doubled: from 28 persons in 2003 to 65.
This suggests a trend of strengthening, growing and reaching out. I have every reason to believe that Lisbon will open up further opportunities. The Charter of Fundamental Rights now has equal legal value as the treaties. It is legally binding. And remember that article 41 of the Charter recognises good administration as a fundamental right of every citizen of the Union.
Also, the Treaty has made all the institutions, offices, agencies and bodies subject to my mandate, including the European Council and foreign policy and security now come under my mandate.
It would be reasonable to expect that all this translates into more complaints and more opportunities for the Ombudsman to serve the citizens better.
While the Ombudsman's decisions aren't binding, there is still about 70% compliance. Why do you think that is?
The EU has a very strong tradition of rule of law. It is now trying to enhance its democratic profile. This means that there is a great deal of respect, understanding and compliance with rules and decisions, not just decisions of the courts, but the rules of the game in general.
You are quite right, though: the Ombudsman is a non-judicial means of address. It is an alternative to the courts and I do not have the power to issue binding decisions.
But rather than a weakness, I see that as a challenge! Because I then have to argue so compellingly and so convincingly that it becomes very difficult for the other side not to accept my ruling. This doesn't mean there aren't moments of disagreement, moments of frustration or that they instantly accept it. It may take quite a bit of time. But the end result usually is high compliance. And I think that brings a high degree of satisfaction institutionally for all of us.
***
The word ombudsman is actually ancient Swedish in origin. The modern use of the term started in 1809, when Sweden got its first Parliamentary Ombudsman. Since, the word has been incorporated into several different languages, including English. The European Ombudsman is appointed by the European Parliament to investigate complaints of maladministration in EU institutions, bodies, offices and agencies.
The Ombudsman has no judicial means to compel compliance, but can issue critical remarks, recommendations and special reports. Over the years, the European Ombudsman has worked close to 35.000 cases. Of these, only 16 have resulted in a special report to Parliament.
20100429STO73777 Ombudsman Petitions Committee Agenda Tuesday Petitions Committee live Tuesday morning from 10
EN
1
PHOTO
20100427PHT73571.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.ombudsman.europa.eu/home/EN/default.htm
EN
3
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=PETI
EN
5
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/frd/live/live-video?language=en)
-//EP//TEXT COMPARL PETI-OJ-20100504-1 01 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
