2008 annual anti-fraud report: further progress needed
Budgetary control
Plenary sittings
2010-05-06 - 12:19
Irregularities in EU spending fell from €1.024 million in 2007 to €783.2 million in 2008 but the Commission and Member States still need to step up their efforts to monitor the way EU money is used, according to a resolution adopted by MEPs on Thursday. Improvements are needed in the areas of VAT collection, the workings of the EU anti-fraud office OLAF and the process whereby governments report irregularities to the European Commission.
Although the estimated irregularities in fields like regional and agricultural expenditure were less in 2008 than in 2007, a large part of EU funds are still misspent. MEPs call on the Commission to take action to recover this money.
Regarding the EU's own budgetary resources, MEPs support the Commission recast of the regulation on combating VAT fraud. They stress the need to make Member States more accountable in this area, starting with the quality of the information entered into the databases, and say the Commission should verify the accuracy of the information and ensure that all VAT amounts payable are collected.
Problems with pre-accession funds and reporting of irregularities
The pre-accession funds were an exception to the overall positive trend, with irregularities increasing between 2007 and 2008. Parliament recognises the steps taken in Bulgaria and Romania to improve management and financial controls but calls on both countries to build up their administrative capacity to manage EU funding and to improve public procurement procedures.
In agricultural expenditure, MEPs criticise the failings observed in Austria, Sweden, Slovakia and Hungary in respect of the reporting of irregularities to the Commission.
OLAF must play a role on international stage
EU external aid is another sector increasingly affected by irregularities and fraud, partly due to the problem of double financing of projects. And, pointing to the EU's annual contribution to the United Nations, MEPs repeat the need to strengthen OLAF’s mandate in the international context.
Speed up creation of European Prosecutor's Office
The need for greater transparency and measures to tackle fraud, corruption and financial crime are also stressed. The public procurement sector is the one most open to risks of mismanagement, fraud and corruption, say MEPs. They urge the Commission to take all steps needed to establish the European Prosecutor’s Office for combating crimes affecting the financial interests of the Union, as provided for in the Lisbon Treaty.
Lastly, Parliament calls for an end to tax evasion and illicit activities that go through offshore havens. MEPs want the Commission to be given a mandate to negotiate anti-fraud agreements with Andorra, Monaco and San Marino and a new, more far-reaching agreement with Switzerland.
20100505IPR74159 Report on the protection of the Communities' financial interests and the fight against fraud – Annual Report 2008 Adopted text will be available here (click on 6 May)
EN
2
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A7-2010-0100 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
