Environment MEPs get tough on illegal timber trade
Environment
2010-05-11 - 17:58
20%-40% of the world’s wood production comes from illegally logged tropical forests Illegal timber a cause of deforestation Between 20%-40% of the world’s wood production comes from illegally logged tropical forests. In April last year the European Parliament voted to ban trade in illegally logged timber following the example of the US. Now the text is back at Parliament and Environment Committee MEPs are not satisfied with what the EU governments in the Council have made of it - shying away from a real ban. Last week the Environment Committee voted again.
Parliament’s rapporteur is outgoing (due to her election to Westminster) British Green MEP Caroline Lucas. Speaking after the vote she said "strong support came from across the political spectrum on key issues including adoption of an overriding prohibition on placing or making available illegally harvested timber on the EU market, extension of traceability requirements throughout the supply chain, and setting of minimum standards for penalties, including criminal sanctions".
What’s the problem?
The problem is that a very large proportion of tropical wood comes from natural forests – not from plantations or sustainably managed forests – which are lost forever and whose protection is crucial in the fight against global warming.
Worse, in many regions at least just as much timber is logged illegally as legally, and for the customer it is almost impossible to make an ethical choice.
Illegal logging is a major driver of deforestation, with the volume of industrial wood from illegal sources estimated at 350 to 650 million m 3 per year, representing 20%-40% of global industrial wood production.
Illegal logging depresses timber prices, strips natural resources and tax revenues, and increases poverty of forest-dependent people.
Tropical timber is popular for its look, price and qualities – most sorts having an elegant look, being very hard and often resistant to weather conditions. Some examples are Teak bathroom or garden furniture, mahogany cupboards and meranti window frames. A variety of tropical timber is used in construction for wooden floors or bridges. An alternative is European oak has similar qualities but is usually more expensive.
While some labels ensuring the origin from legal and responsible forestry exist, the one issued by the Forest Stewardship Council being probably the most well known, it remains difficult to ensure that the furniture you buy was not made from illegally logged trees, contributing to the destruction of vital rain forests. Especially as only a small proportion of wood on the market is labelled.
Kick-off to negotiations with the Council
The Council position officially adopted in March was considerably weaker than Parliament's 1st reading position. It did not contain a prohibition on trading illegally harvested timber and timber products, and it did not specify penalties, or require criminal sanctions for serious infringements; the regime for the recognition of monitoring organisations was different to what Parliament had asked for as well.
On 4 May 2010 the Environment Committee adopted a draft recommendation for a second reading, reinstating most of Parliament’s first reading amendments which the Council had not taken on board.
The EP and Council have now started negotiations on a possible compromise between the positions of the two legislators before the Parliament’s plenary vote scheduled for July.
20100507STO74261 Press release Procedure file
EN
2
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/prelex/detail_dossier_real.cfm?CL=en&DosId=197511
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20100503IPR74018 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
