Ending homophobia – stopping discrimination
Fundamental rights
2010-05-14 - 08:03
Gay and lesbian activists form a human chain around a rainbow flag during celebrations marking the annual International Day Against Homophobia (IDAHO). ©BELGA_AFP PHTO_TED ALJIBE What do countries as geographically diverse as Saudi Arabia, Uganda and Jamaica have in common? All of them criminalised homosexuality. Ahead of the International Day Against Homophobia on 17 May, attention focuses on what can be done to end discrimination and stigmatisation of LGBT (lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender) people within and outside EU borders
"Homophobia is a blatant breach of human dignity that questions fundamental rights, and thus it must be strongly condemned," Parliament's President Jerzy Buzek told us ahead of the International Day Against Homophobia and Transphobia (IDAHO). Mr Buzek will deliver a video message on combating discrimination of sexual minorities on the day itself.
The map of persecution
Homosexuals can face fines, long-term imprisonment and even the death penalty in many (mostly African and Arab) countries.
Spanish Green MEP Raül Romeva points the finger at some Middle East, Caribbean, Far East and African countries including Uganda, Tanzania and Kenya. As a rule, he said, LGBT rights are most strongly suppressed in countries with a state religion. He is responsible for trying to broker a deal with EU ministers on a proposed antidiscrimination directive,
Ending prejudice (hatred, rejection and violence) within EU
As recently as the second half of the 20th century, homosexual acts were illegal in many European countries. Have Europeans moved far beyond labelling homosexuality an "illness and mental disorder"? Occurrences of hate speech, bullying, prohibitions of equality and gay pride marches, indicate progress is still needed.
Mr Romeva notes that in some EU countries LGBTs are forced to "either live in hiding or total denial, so many of them are deprived of fundamental rights and risk their job and sometimes even life, to live openly as LGBT".
He told us that hate-crimes are the clearest sign of homophobia and discrimination and supports campaigning, dialogue and proper anti-discrimination legislation as the way towards tolerant societies which are "united in diversity".
"The anti-discrimination directive is not only a sign to discriminatory societies to change their behaviour - it is also a message to the outside world that the EU is serious about protecting fundamental rights and about not creating a hierarchy of peoples,", he added.
Stopping discrimination
The most acute problem in this area in the EU is "the clash between, on one hand very liberal policies in some countries, where society, politicians and authorities have a tolerant, open and inclusive approach and on the other hand the member states where none of this is the case", Mr Romeva said.
"The bottom line is that LGBT people in all EU member states should be protected from discrimination by the treaty, the Charter of Fundamental Rights, and where necessary, the Commission and Council should take action to inform and educate politicians and authorities to lead and show a good example".
---
An informal intergroup on LGBT issues gathers MEPs from across the political spectrum. Members Michael Cashman, Ulrike Lunacek, Sophie in’t Veld and Christofer Fjellner took part in the Baltic Pride march in Vilnius on 8 May.
20100507STO74266 Legislative resolution on antidiscrimination directive Resolution on homophobia in Europe Jerzy Buzek Informal intergroup on LGBT issues ILGA-Europe
EN
1
PHOTO
20100511PHT74493.jpg
EN
4
LINK
/president/view/en/the_president/latest_news.html
EN
5
LINK
http://www.lgbt-ep.eu
EN
6
LINK
http://www.ilga-europe.org
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2009-0211 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0167 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
