More must be done for young people, say MEPs
Education
Plenary sittings
2010-05-18 - 12:46
More efforts should be made to promote non-formal education, combat youth unemployment and help young people with special needs, says a resolution adopted on Tuesday by the European Parliament. According to MEPs, youth mobility and volunteering need to be encouraged, and more attention should be given to sex education and promoting healthy lifestyles.
Parliament wants young people to be involved in the formulation of youth policy and calls for Member States to "provide support for local youth parliaments and councils". There should be "a youth perspective in policies, programmes and actions in the culture and media fields", says the resolution, and a European youth pass should be devised "so that young people can gain access to cultural institutions throughout the EU at a very low charge".
Youth mobility
"Even more effort should be made to promote the mobility of young people within Europe", argue MEPs. They advocate speeding up the adoption of the European framework system for the recognition of qualifications and urge Member States "to guarantee the total transferability of acquired social benefits". Parliament lauds the role of the Comenius, Erasmus and Leonardo da Vinci programmes but calls for improvements to Erasmus Mundus.
Combating youth unemployment
MEPs are "concerned about the increasing numbers of young people who are unemployed, under-employed or who have no job security, especially in the current economic crisis". They also note that "an insecure job situation may lead young people to refrain from or to postpone starting a family, thus having an impact on demographic developments". Parliament strongly supports special measures targeted at young people as part of the EU's economic recovery plans. MEPs call for support for youth entrepreneurship and the development of youth retention strategies in countries and regions prone to outward migration.
Volunteering and non-formal education
The decision to designate 2011 as European Year of Volunteering is welcomed. MEPs advocate extending the European Voluntary Service programme and informing more young people about its existence. They also suggest creating a "European Volunteer Pass" and recommend "fostering stronger recognition of non-formal education". At the same time MEPs stress that "voluntary activities should not replace professional, paid employment opportunities but add value to society".
Young people with special needs
Parliament "underlines the need to provide effective, tailor-made support to young people with disabilities". It also advocates equal access to education for young people from low-income and immigrant families, as well as "special support to young mothers". MEPs draw attention to the problem of school drop-outs and urge measures to ensure that "as high a percentage of young people as possible complete their period of compulsory education".
Non-discrimination, sex education and healthy lifestyle
The resolution emphasises "the importance of eliminating all kinds of discrimination among young people, such as discrimination based on sex, racial or ethnic origin, religion, disability, age and sexual orientation". It also stresses the need for better sex education and draws attention to "the continuing high level of under-age pregnancies". The importance of "further combating the use of drugs, alcohol and tobacco-related harm and other forms of addiction, including gambling" is highlighted by MEPs, who also emphasise the role of sport in promoting healthy lifestyles for young people.
20100517IPR74663 Broadcast quality video, audio and photo coverage of the plenary via FTP server Adopted text will be available here (click on 18 May)
EN
1
LINK
ftp://epavvideoget:mo12ssb@ftpeps01.europarl.eu.int//epavvideo/EBS/Strasbourg/week20/
EN
2
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
