EP President Jerzy Buzek meets Chinese Prime Minister Wen Jiabao
External relations
General
2010-05-27 - 15:30
"'One tree is not enough to build a temple': we need multilateral governance - we need China as a strong partner," said EP President Jerzy Buzek after his meeting with China's Prime Minister Wen Jiabao in Beijing. "I explained that the European Parliament represents 500 million citizens of the EU who deeply believe in respect for fundamental political rights and freedoms."
During his visit to China, President Jerzy Buzek discussed with Chinese leaders economic and trade relations, the financial crisis, energy and climate change, the enhancement of political relations and the joint tackling of major global security issues.
President Jerzy Buzek said: "We want to engage China and we want to engage with China.
'One tree is not enough to build a temple': we need multilateral governance - we need China as a strong partner. We must face the challenges of climate change, energy and financial crisis together.
China plays an important role in the world economy. We very much appreciate its steady commitment to macroeconomic stability and its recent development.
I think we need to finish constructing a solid bridge between China and Europe and we need to build this bridge from both sides. There is one essential element to finish this bridge: respect for rule of law, civil rights and minorities."
During the meeting with Prime Minister Wen Jiabao President Buzek mentioned specific cases.
Buzek said: "I explained that the European Parliament represents 500 million citizens of the EU who deeply believe in respect for fundamental political rights and freedoms."
President Buzek reminded that over ten years ago China signed the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, a document still to be ratified.
Buzek said: "I came in a spirit of friendship and I'm looking for progress in all areas, which will help us to become stronger global partners."
President Jerzy Buzek is since Tuesday, 25 May 2010 in China and stays there until Saturday, 29 May 2010. During his official visit he met with Vice-President Xi Jinping, Premier Wen Jiabao, Chairman of the National People's Congress Wu Bangguo and Minister of Foreign Affairs Yang Jiechi. Climate change and energy are key issues for the President during his visit. On this topic he met with the Minister of National Energy Administration Zhan Guobao and with Xie Zhenhua, the climate change envoy of China. President Buzek will deliver a speech at the University of Nanjing tomorrow (Friday, 28 May 2010) and will visit on Saturday, 29 May 2010, the EU Expo Pavillion in Shanghai where he will also hold the keynote speech at the Conference of the European Parliament on "China-EU: a revisited partnership in the aftermath of the global financial, economic and social crisis". 20100527IPR75131 President Buzek's website
EN
1
LINK
/president/view/en/the_president/latest_news.html
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
