The Week Ahead 31 May – 6 June 2010
Institutions
General
2010-05-28 - 10:44
Committee meetings – Brussels
Road and water passenger rights. The Transport Committee deals with legislation giving bus, coach and boat passengers similar rights to those already available to air passengers (Tuesday).
Air accident investigations. A draft law setting common standards for air accident investigations, such as how and when to inform relatives of those caught up in an accident, will be put to a vote in the Transport Committee (Tuesday).
Hazardous substances in electrical and electronic equipment. The Environment Committee votes on changes to the rules on electronic devices, aiming to reduce the quantity of toxic material they contain (Wednesday).
Divorce rules. The Legal Affairs Committee will vote on whether Parliament should allow ten member states to work together on common rules concerning cross-border divorce issues (Tuesday).
Derivatives markets/financial services. Ahead of legislative proposals due later in the year on the supervision of derivatives markets, MEPs in the Economics Committee will vote on their political stance on the issue. Also, the EP Press Service is organising a workshop for journalists on current legislation on financial services (both Wednesday).
EP/Iran. The Foreign Minister of Iran, Manouchehr Mottaki, will take part in discussion with the Foreign Affairs Committee (Tuesday).
Bosnia and Albania. The Foreign Affairs Committee votes on the progress made by Albania and by Bosnia and Herzegovina in European integration (Tuesday).
EP President visits Greece. Jerzy Buzek makes an official visit to Greece, meeting President Karolos Papoulias, Prime Minister George Papandréou, Parliamentary Speaker Philippos Petsalnikos and opposition leader Antonis Samaras (Wednesday).
EP/Pakistan. Mr Buzek meets Pakistan’s Prime Minister Yousuf Raza Gilani in Brussels (Thursday).
Energy policy. Ahead of next week’s interparliamentary meeting, President Buzek will discuss the idea of a European Energy Community with both the Industry and Environment Committees (Tuesday and Thursday).
20100528IPR75200 For details of all the week's events, see "The Agenda"
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20102300AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
