MEPs and MPs to debate European Energy Community initiative on 7 and 8 June
Energy
Committees Internal Market and Consumer Protection
2010-05-31 - 17:36
A single energy market, sustainable production and security of energy supply will be the key topics at a joint meeting of MEPs and MPs from all EU Member States on 7 and 8 June at the European Parliament in Brussels. Participants will debate the European Energy Community initiative launched early in May by EP President Jerzy Buzek and former Commission President Jacques Delors.
The meeting, entitled "Towards a European Energy Community for the 21st Century?", is organised by the European Parliament and the Spanish Parliament (Cortes Generales). It will be co-chaired by EP President Jerzy Buzek, Speaker of the Spanish Congress of Deputies José Bono Martínez, and Speaker of the Spanish Senate Javier Rojo Garcia.
On the first day, a report entitled "Towards a European Energy Community: A Policy Proposal" will be presented by Professor of Energy Law at Kings College London Marc van der Woude and Professor of European Law at Tilburg University Leigh Hancher. It makes the case for a fully-functioning European energy market, using integrated networks, corrected by price stabilisation measures and complemented by innovation policies.
Participants will then discuss the issues raised in three working groups, on energy security, establishing a single energy market and new and renewable energies. The groups' reports will be presented on the second day, in the meeting's plenary session. Representatives of the Council Presidency and the European Commission will also take part in the debate.
The EP press service will publish press releases about both days of the event, which will also be streamed live on Parliament's web site. President Buzek, speaker Bono Martínez and speaker Rojo Garcia will also hold a joint press conference (details to be confirmed).
For further info, including the latest draft programme of the Joint Parliamentary Meeting, please see link below.
20100531IPR75273 "Towards a European Energy Community for the 21st Century?"
EN
1
LINK
/webnp/cms/lang/en/pid/1354;jsessionid=185FBAEA1B43817E7893DF1D66DB4C65
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
