MEPs push for air accident investigations to be independent
Transport
Committees Transport and Tourism
2010-06-01 - 14:34
Despite major improvements in safety standards, growing air traffic volumes are making it harder to prevent accidents. In a draft EU law approved on Tuesday with amendments, MEPs aim to ensure the independence of accident investigations. They also call for families of victims to be informed about an accident within two hours and want passengers booking a ticket to have the right to indicate a contact name in case of an accident.
MEPs of the European Parliament's Transport Committee consider it essential to ensure that the safety investigation into an accident is conducted "free of any form of pressure and entirely independently of regulatory or judicial authorities". The safety investigation authorities should be given access to all relevant information, "including immediate and unconditional access to the site of the accident", MEPs add. They want each Member State to set up a civil aviation accident emergency plan.
Access of the judiciary to safety investigation information
MEPs propose to limit the access of judicial authorities to the information obtained during the accident investigation (e.g. cockpit voice records), unless there is a suspicion of unlawful interference. This would ensure that the people concerned are not afraid to speak to accident investigators, whose purpose is not attributing blame but establishing the facts for the sake of prevention. Under the committee's amendment, the information provided by a person during the safety investigation could not be used against that person in a criminal trial. Moreover, they say, "information not relevant to the safety investigation, particularly information with a bearing on personal privacy, that is derived from cockpit voice and image recordings and their transcripts, shall be subject to full protection and may not be forwarded or disclosed". Member States should enact legislation preventing the inappropriate use of sensitive safety information, add MEPs. This conflicts with the position of some Member States in the Council that want judicial authorities to be able to access almost any information relating to an air accident.
Informing the families of victims
The committee adopted an amendment obliging EU airlines, as well as non-EU airlines departing from an EU airport, to "implement procedures allowing them to produce a list of all the persons on board an aircraft as soon as possible but at any rate within two hours of the notification of the occurrence of an accident to this aircraft".
MEPs want passengers booking a ticket to have the right to indicate a contact person in case of an accident. "This information may be used only in the event of an accident" and it "may not be used for commercial purposes", they say. The list could not be made public before the families of the passengers had been informed by the authorities. Member States would be able to decide to keep all or part of the list confidential. The state responsible for the safety investigation would also be required to appoint a main contact for passengers' families.
Trans-European structures in the field of aviation safety
At present, conclusions of aviation accident investigations are not analysed at European level. The committee wants the European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA) to analyse such data. MEPs also would like to limit the influence of EASA in accident investigations, as it may be biased since it has responsibility for certifying aircraft. On a different note, MEPs call for a European Network of Civil Aviation Safety Investigation Authorities to be set up. They would like it to have more formal powers than proposed by the Commission or some countries in the Council.
Due to the negotiations planned with the Council to reach a first-reading agreement, Parliament's plenary vote is likely to be scheduled for September.
Christine DE VEYRAC (EPP, FR). Draft report on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on investigation and prevention of accidents and incidents in civil aviation
In the chair: Brian SIMPSON (S&D, UK)
20100531IPR75275
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
