President Buzek presents EU Energy Community initiative to fellow MEPs
Energy
Committees Industry, Research and Energy
2010-06-02 - 09:35
Strong political backing from EU Member States is needed for improved EU energy networks, common R&amp;D funding for alternative energy sources, and oil and gas purchasing groups, EP President Jerzy Buzek told the Industry and Energy Committee on Tuesday. Mr Buzek later appeared before the EP Environment Committee to press home his message.
The idea of an EU Energy Community, launched early in May by EP President Jerzy Buzek and former Commission President Jacques Delors, is to push forward a common EU energy policy and complete the single energy market. Mr Buzek told MEPs Tuesday that a strong political initiative from EU Member States is needed to complement the Commission's necessarily limited action under existing laws.
He also stressed that Europe has to compete ever more fiercely for energy sources and while citizens may not understand geopolitics, "they understand if their heating is turned off due to the disruption of energy supplies from third countries".
To deliver results, the European Energy Community needs to build stronger co-operation, especially to interconnect national energy grids, establish a common energy fund to pay for alternative energy R&D, and to set up oil and gas purchasing groups to buy from foreign suppliers, suggested Mr Buzek.
Mr Buzek acknowledged that legal difficulties could slow the project, and advocated "enhanced co-operation", a Lisbon Treaty provision that enables at least nine Member States to proceed with a common policy which others can join later, when they are ready.
Members' reactions
MEPs from two biggest political groups, EPP and S&D, backed the initiative overall, and especially its strategic focus on investing to modernise energy infrastructure, but noted likely legal and technical difficulties. The Greens and Conservatives were more critical, arguing that now is not the time for the EU to launch another "big idea", given the "failure of the Lisbon agenda" and "treaty fatigue". Plenty of EU energy market legislation has yet to be properly implemented, they added.
Mr Buzek replied that it is crucial to change the way in which Europe deals with energy, but emphasized that the project needs political support from Member States. He also explained that the committee presentation was only the start of a broader debate on this issue.
Further presentation to the Environment Committee
Mr Buzek repeated his key messages to MEPs in the Environment Committee. Speaking beyond the topic of the European Energy Community, he reflected on cooperation issues with the wider world, in particular with China, which had demonstrated interest in renewables and energy efficiency primarily to increase energy security not for climate protection.
On behalf of its members, Environment Committee Chair Jo Leinen (S&D, DE) welcomed the commitment to energy solidarity in the Lisbon Treaty and Mr Buzek's initiative. MEPs underlined the importance of implementing existing legislation. They also supported greater connectivity of energy infrastructure in the EU, in order to link the remaining "islands" on Europe's energy map. Finally, several Members also commented that the European Parliament could do more to improve its own energy efficiency performance.
20100531IPR75299 Industry, Research and Energy Committee
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=ITRE
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
