The Week Ahead 7-13 June 2010
Institutions
General
2010-06-04 - 11:21
Committee meetings and political groups week – Brussels
Energy: joint parliamentary meeting. EP President Jerzy Buzek and other MEPs are joined by national MPs from around the EU to discuss energy policy, and in particular the idea of a European Energy Community . Parliament’s scientific assessment panel, STOA, holds a related meeting with experts from the Energy Foresight Network (both events Monday-Tuesday).
Residence and work permits. A draft law to create a “one-stop-shop” system for third country nationals to be able to make one application both to reside and work in an EU country will be put to the vote in the Civil Liberties Committee (Thursday).
Language rights in criminal proceedings. The Civil Liberties Committee also votes on common standards to ensure that citizens involved in criminal trials have access to interpretation and translation facilities (Thursday).
EP President in Romania. Jerzy Buzek makes an official visit to Romania, including meetings with President Traian Băsescu, Prime Minister Emil Boc and parliamentary leaders (Wednesday).
President’s activities. Mr Buzek also meets Montenegro Prime Minister Milo Đukanović in Brussels (Thursday, with press point) and travels to Lisbon and Madrid for ceremonies marking 25 years of Portuguese and Spanish EU membership (Saturday).
MEPs in US for talks on economic crisis. MEPs from the committee on the economic and financial crisis will be in Washington DC for talks with the IMF, World Bank and members of the US Congress before meeting key financial players in New York (Monday-Friday).
Preparing for the plenary. The political groups will devote most of the week to preparations for the 14-17 June plenary session in Strasbourg. The draft agenda includes legislation on working time of lorry drivers and food labelling, plus a vote on intellectual property and a debate on plans for the 17 June EU summit.
Pre-session briefing. The regular briefing with political group spokespeople and the EP Press Service reviewing the agenda will take place on Friday at 11am (Anna Politkovskaya room, PHS 0A050).
20100604IPR75545 For details of all the week's events, see "The Agenda"
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20102400AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
