European Energy Community: the way forward
Energy
General
2010-06-07 - 19:43
A single energy market, sustainable production and security of energy supply are the key topics for debate at a joint meeting of MEPs and MPs from all EU Member States that opened on Monday at the European Parliament in Brussels. The debate has been prompted by the European Energy Community initiative launched early in May by EP President Jerzy Buzek and former Commission President Jacques Delors.
The meeting, titled "Towards a European Energy Community for the 21st Century", is organised by the European Parliament and the Spanish Parliament (Cortes Generales) and is co-chaired by EP President Jerzy Buzek and the Speaker of the Spanish Senate, Javier Rojo Garcia.
In the opening speech Mr Buzek expressed his support for the creation of a new European community, with a fully-functioning single energy market, using integrated networks, corrected by price stabilisation measures and complemented by innovation policies.
"We need to implement existing legislation and put some flesh on the bones," stressed Mr Buzek, calling for political support from national parliaments and governments. The main elements of the proposal are the interconnection of national energy grids, the establishment of a common energy fund for alternative energy R&D and the setting up oil and gas purchasing groups to buy from foreign suppliers.
The Spanish Senate speaker, Mr Rojo Garcia, pointed out that energy can and will play a fundamental role in renewing the structure of the EU. "There is a real need for it now and it is quite urgent", he said. He also called for an energy policy to be "safe, clean and secure for the wellbeing of the EU and its citizens," with interconnected energy networks and reinforced energy market mechanisms.
Later on, more than 250 participants discussed the issues raised in three working groups, on energy security, establishing a single energy market and new and renewable energies. The groups' reports will be presented on Tuesday, in the meeting's plenary session.
Representatives of the Council Presidency and the European Commission will also take part in the debate.
The event is streamed live on the Parliament's web site; for further info, including detailed programme of the Joint Parliamentary Meeting, please see link below.
20100604IPR75539 JPM Towards a European Energy Community for the 21st Century Watch the meeting on EP Live
EN
1
LINK
/webnp/cms/lang/en/pid/1354
EN
2
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/frd/vod/search-committees?language=en
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
