MEPs discuss Citizens' Initiative with Ombudsman
Ombudsman
Committees Constitutional Affairs
2010-06-15 - 10:00
What is the role of the European Ombudsman in handling the Citizens' Initiatives that can now be proposed, under the Lisbon Treaty, by one million EU citizens? Who decides which initiatives are admissible and on what grounds? These were among questions put by MEPs of the Constitutional Affairs Committee to the Ombudsman on Monday.
The committee is currently debating the Commission's proposal on the Citizens' Initiative, a new instrument in the Lisbon Treaty enabling one million citizens to ask the Commission to table a draft law. European Ombudsman Nikiforos Diamandouros met with the MEPs on Monday to give his views on this new procedure.
Role of Ombudsman
Both co-rapporteurs on the issue, Zita Gurmai (S&D, HU) and Alain Lamassoure (EPP, FR), asked what kind of a role the Ombudsman would play in the Citizens' Initiative. Gerald Häfner (Greens/EFA, DE), co-rapporteur for the Petitions Committee, also wanted to know on what legal basis the Ombudsman would act.
Mr Diamandouros noted that the Citizens' Initiative could give rise to complaints to the Ombudsman and that his role was to promote good administration. He emphasised that his role was limited to the issue of good administration and that his contribution "under no circumstances envisages augmenting the power of the Ombudsman or enhancing the competence" of that office.
Admissibility of initiatives
Several MEPs asked about the admissibility of the initiatives. According to Morten Messerschmidt (EFD, DK), the Commission proposal states that initiatives which are "against the values of the EU" should be inadmissible. He asked the Ombudsman's opinion about this. Mr Diamandouros answered that such matters needed to be settled by the Parliament and Council, not the Ombudsman.
Rafal Trzaskowski (EPP, PL) was concerned about possible disappointments in cases where the initiatives were deemed inadmissible, for example, on the grounds of subsidiarity. He asked if the Ombudsman could rule on subsidiarity issues.
Faced with several similar questions on admissibility, the Ombudsman stressed that he could not take positions on political issues. He noted "You honour me enormously by assuming that as a non-lawyer I can address your legal questions, many which are also profoundly political questions". He stressed that the proposal on the initiative was "an opportunity for the Parliament to get centrally involved in this political process".
Main concerns of the Ombudsman
The Ombudsman shared the concerns expressed about the Citizens' Initiative raising expectations and resulting in disappointment. He believed four issues needed to be carefully considered: registration and admissibility, complaints, time-limits and supervision of the Commission's responses.
Next steps
The Citizens' Initiative will be debated in the Constitutional Affairs Committee on 12 July, when the rapporteurs of the Committee of Regions and the European Economic and Social Committee will take part in the meeting. The issue will also be discussed at a committee meeting together with representatives of national parliaments on 30 September.
Constitutional Affairs Committee 14 June 2010 In the chair: Carlo Casini (EPP, IT)
20100614IPR76018 Website of Constitutional Affairs Committee
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=AFCO
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
