MEPs set out clearer and more consistent food labelling rules
Food safety
Plenary sittings
2010-06-16 - 17:16
Food labels should feature mandatory nutritional information and guideline daily amounts, according to draft EU legislation as adopted by MEPs on Wednesday. However, they rejected a proposal for 'traffic light' values to highlight the salt, sugar and fat content of processed foods.
Following a lively debate, MEPs voted for labelling rules that will enable consumers to make healthy, well-informed choices, while limiting as far as possible the administrative and financial burden on food businesses.
"Overall I am satisfied with the result of today's important vote on clearer food information rules. Personally, I am pleased that MEPs did not support traffic light labelling, but I also feel that we can continue to improve the current proposal to better inform consumers", commented Renate Sommer (EPP-ED, DE), who drafted Parliament's report.
Prominent, compulsory nutrition labelling
MEPs backed the European Commission proposal that quantities of fat, saturates, sugar and salt - as well as energy - must be indicated on the front of food packs. These should be accompanied by guideline daily amounts and expressed with per 100g or per 100ml values. They also voted for details of protein, fibres and transfats to be included elsewhere on the packaging. T o ensure the labels are legible, MEPs want a wide range of factors to be taken into account.
Red light for colour values: simple or simplistic?
A clear majority of MEPs rejected a proposal by the S&D, Greens/EFA and GUE/NGL groups to introduce a traffic light system, which would have required certain processed foods to bear red, amber and green values to indicate high, medium or low levels of salt, sugar and fat. They also opposed such schemes being allowed to run in parallel at national level.
New country of origin requirements
Country of origin labelling is already compulsory for certain foods, such as beef, honey, olive oil and fresh fruit and vegetables . MEPs supported extending this to all meat, poultry, dairy products and other single-ingredient products. They also voted for the country of origin to be stated for meat, poultry and fish when used as an ingredient in processed food. However, this may be subject to an impact assessment.
Meat labels should indicate where the animal was born, reared and slaughtered, says Parliament. In addition, meat from slaughter without stunning (according to certain religious traditions) should be labelled as such.
Nutrient profiles reinstated
By a single vote, MEPs rejected an Environment Committee recommendation to delete 'nutrient profiles' from existing EU nutrition and health claims legislation. Considered unscientific by its critics, the system is seen by others as essential to assess health claims.
Exemptions for non-prepacked food and alcohol
MEPs want food that is not prepacked, such as meat from a butcher, to be exempt from nutrition labelling rules. Microenterprises making handcrafted food products should also be excluded, they say. A majority of MEPs supported an exemption for alcoholic drinks but they demanded strict labelling for mixed alcoholic drinks or 'alcopops', further suggesting that these should be kept separate from soft drinks where they are sold.
Entry into force
The final vote in Parliament today was 559 in favour, 54 against and 32 abstentions. However, no quick agreement is expected with Council, so the draft legislation is likely to return to Parliament for a second reading. Once the legislation is adopted, food business will have three years to adapt to the rules. Smaller operators, with fewer than 100 employees and an annual turnover under €5 million, would have five years to comply.
20100615IPR76127 Adopted text will be available here (click on 16 June) Report on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the provision of food information to consumers Profile of rapporteur Renate SOMMER (EPP, DE)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
3
LINK
/members/expert/alphaOrder/view.do?language=EN&id=4282
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A7-2010-0109 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
