Bosnia and Herzegovina: MEPs dissatisfied over limited progress
External relations
Plenary sittings
2010-06-17 - 14:26
MEPs are dissatisfied over the limited progress on reforms related to EU integration made by Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), a potential candidate for EU membership. The nationalistic and secessionist rhetoric polarising society is detrimental to the country’s bid for EU integration, said MEPs in a resolution adopted on Thursday. Despite these failings, they nevertheless backed a proposal to allow BiH citizens visa-free travel to the EU.
Ahead of the October general elections, MEPs are concerned about the unstable political climate and the lack of will by Bosniac political forces and leaders to achieve a common vision. The use of inflammatory language and the nationalistic and secessionist rhetoric which undermine relations between the Serb, Muslim and Croat communities and the functioning of the central State must stop, says the resolution, which was adopted by a show of hands.
Parliament calls for an agreement to be reached on a "properly functioning" and strengthened central state. This would improve the country's overall situation and enable it to meet the EU accession criteria. BiH is composed of two entities with a great degree of autonomy: the Muslim-Croat Federation and the Republika Srpska (RS). MEPs urge the two entities and all political forces, in particular the RS Government, to respect the Dayton Agreement, and also to treat with due respect the High Representative and all the international staff in the country and to refrain from any personal attacks.
All citizens of the multi-ethnic BiH must enjoy the same rights without any discrimination, states the resolution, referring to the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) and Article 2 of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement (respect for democratic principles and human rights).
Cooperation with the ICTY is “satisfactory”, say MEPs, who nonetheless ask the BiH authorities to facilitate the arrest of all ICTY indictees and dismantle their support networks.
Visa liberalisation backed
Significant progress has been made in meeting the roadmap criteria for a visa-free regime. MEPs congratulate the BiH authorities for their efforts on this front but ask them to adopt the remaining legislation. The ability to travel within the EU is seen as an important factor in further EU integration as well as inter-ethnic reconciliation, states the resolution. The proposal to lift visa requirements for BiH citizens, put forward by the European Commission on May 27, is thus welcomed by MEPs. They add the aim should be to waive visas for Bosnian citizens by the end of 2010, subject to remaining benchmarks being met.
Significant reforms needed
Key political reforms need to be made to meet the standards required for accession, says Parliament. These include a reform of the judicial system - a prerequisite for the EU integration process - and respect for human and minority rights, in particular for gender identity and sexual orientation. Progress also needs to be made in the fight against corruption and in strengthening independent media.
The BiH authorities are also asked to find “fair, comprehensive and durable solutions” for some of the 115,000 internally displaced persons and refugees, and to help them integrate into society.
Apologies from neighbouring countries
Finally, MEPs welcome recent statements by the Croatian President, who apologised for Croatian policies in Bosnia and Herzegovina in the 1990s and paid tribute to victims from each community. Parliament sees this gesture to be an important step in the promotion of ethnic reconciliation among the Balkan nations, and calls on the other neighbouring countries to follow this example.
20100616IPR76215 Adopted text will be available here (click on 17 June) Joint motion for a resolution on the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//TEXT MOTION B7-2010-0342 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
