Strong backing for human rights defenders
Human rights
Plenary sittings
2010-06-17 - 12:28
Ways of raising the profile of the work of human rights defenders as well as recommendations on issuing EU emergency visas to enable them and their families to take refuge in Europe are set out in a resolution drafted by Human Rights Subcommittee chair Heidi Hautala (Greens/EFA, FI) and approved by the European Parliament on Thursday.
MEPs pay tribute to the invaluable work of human rights defenders but stress how important it is not to define the term "human rights defender" too strictly, because in practice this could limit their protection in the home country.
Practical measures: emergency visas and shelter
As human rights defenders may be at risk in their home countries, MEPs urge Member States to issue emergency visas for them and their families, and provide them with temporary protection and shelter. This could include financial support, help with their human rights activities and opportunities to lecture in universities and attend language courses.
MEPs call on the EU High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy to finalise a European Protection and Shelter programme by the end of 2010, to be implemented in 2011.
The impact of new technologies on human rights defenders
The EU should "systematically denounce and reprimand international companies" that provide "oppressive regimes with surveillance technology, thereby facilitating persecution and arrests of human rights defenders", says the resolution. New technology developments and their impact on human rights defenders need to be assessed, and the results incorporated in existing EU programmes human rights and human rights defenders.
Human rights and trade policy
Human rights should play a more prominent role in trade policies and trade agreements between the EU and third countries, say MEPs. In this context they propose a ‘human rights assessment’ of third countries that engage in trade relations with the EU.
More visibility for human rights defenders
To raise the profile of human rights defenders, the EU High Representative and all Commissioners with external relations responsibilities should systematically meet with human rights defenders when they travel officially in third countries, say MEPs.
Civil society should be more extensively involved in preparing the EU's human rights dialogues with third countries, public attention should be drawn to individual cases, and human rights defenders' names should be made public provided it does not put them at risk, says the resolution.
Sakharov Prize network - platform for supporting human rights defenders
MEPs plan to develop ways to use the Sakharov Prize network (launched in December 2008 on the 20th Anniversary of the Sakharov Prize), to help provide sustained support for human rights defenders. They also voice concern over infringements of the human rights of certain Sakharov Prize winners.
Paying special attention to vulnerable groups
EU Human Rights policy should include targeted measures in favour of women human rights defenders and other particularly vulnerable groups, such as journalists and defenders working to promote economic, social and cultural rights, children's rights and minority rights, including those of religious and language minorities, indigenous peoples and LGBT rights.
The EP resolution was adopted by a show of hands.
EU Human Rights report and trade in equipment used for torture
Besides the report on protecting human rights defenders, MEPs on Wednesday discussed with the High Representative Catherine Ashton the need for strict control of the trade in implements that could be used for torture. They also discussed the Council's EU Human Rights Report covering the period from July 2008 to December 2009, which will serve as the starting point to prepare Parliament's own annual report on human rights in the world. This will be adopted during the December Strasbourg plenary session, when the award ceremony for the Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought will also take place.
20100616IPR76219 Adopted texts will be available here (click on 17 June)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
