The Week Ahead 21-27 June 2010
Institutions
General
2010-06-18 - 13:56
Plenary session and committee meetings - Brussels
Special plenary session/EU summit. European Council President Herman Van Rompuy will report to Parliament on the outcome of the 17 June European Council during a special plenary session in Brussels (Wednesday).
EP President in Moscow. Jerzy Buzek makes an official visit to Russia, meeting President Dmitri Medvedev, Foreign Minister Sergei Lavrov, Energy Minister Sergei Shmatkó and the speakers of the two chambers of the Russian parliament, Sergei Mironov and Boris Gryzlov. Mr Buzek will hold a press conference at the end of the visit (Monday-Tuesday). The Human Rights Subcommittee will hear from Mr Buzek on human rights issues following his visits to Russia and China (Thursday).
ECB/Trichet. The President of the European Central Bank takes part in the latest session of the monetary dialogue with the Economics Committee (Monday).
Banking crisis. The Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee votes resolutions on cross-border crisis management in the banking sector and on the remuneration of directors of listed financial services companies (Tuesday).
EU External Action Service. A meeting of the European Parliament, the Council Presidency, the High Representative and the Commission will take place in Madrid (Monday). The Legal Affairs Committee debates the status of staff of the new EU diplomatic service
Biocides/Electronic equipment. The Environment Committee votes on new legislation on biocidal products, aiming to improve labelling requirements and reduce the need for animal testing among other things. A second vote concerns an update of the EU's rules on disposal of waste electronic equipment (Tuesday).
EU enlargement. The Foreign Affairs Committee votes resolutions, on Iceland's application to join the EU, on Albania, and on Kosovo (Tuesday).
Conference of Presidents - Belgian Presidency. Ahead of Belgium's six-month presidency of the Council, which begins in July, President Buzek and the political group leaders will meet the Belgian government, after which Mr Buzek and Prime Minister Yves Leterme will hold a press conference (Thursday).
20100618IPR76342 For details of all the week's events, see "The Agenda"
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20102600AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
