Safer pest control products and a quicker approval process
Environment
General
2010-06-22 - 15:54
Biocides, such as anti-bacterial disinfectants and insect sprays, should be safer and subject to a quicker approval process, said Environment Committee MEPs voting on a legislative proposal on Tuesday. MEPs also want to reduce the number of experiments on animals to test such products.
The proposed legislation will replace existing rules from 1998. It aims to better harmonise the rules on approving and using biocides, while complementing the latest pesticides and REACH chemical legislation. The report by European Parliament rapporteur Christa Klass (EPP, DE) was adopted by the Environment Committee with 47 votes in favour, 5 against and 6 abstentions.
To ban or not to ban: a health and environment question
Substances that are carcinogenic, mutagenic or toxic for reproduction are already banned. MEPs want the new legislation to tighten up the rules on endocrine disruptors (interfering with hormones) or persistent, bioaccumulative and toxic (PBT) substances and persistent organic pollutants.
However, MEPs also clarified that it should be possible to allow a substance at national level if, due to the absence of effective alternatives, banning it would pose a serious danger to health or the environment. Anticoagulants commonly used in rat poisons, for example, would be allowed by this provision. The authorisation of these substances would be subject to risk mitigation measures and a substitution plan, whereby efforts would be made to find alternatives.
Authorisations at EU level
MEPs want a centralised Community authorisation procedure to be possible for all biocidal products, not only new or "low-risk" products, as proposed by the Commission. Products containing substances that are on an exclusion or substitution list, however, should not receive Community-wide authorisation.
The European Chemicals Agency (ECHA) should give its verdict on applications within three months, rather than the nine months proposed. MEPs also suggest that companies should pay a one-off charge, rather than an annual fee for authorisation of their products.
Sharing animal testing results, protecting data
MEPs insist experiments on animals should only take place as a last resort. Biocide product testing on vertebrates should not be duplicated. Producers of biocides must agree to share results from animal testing in exchange for fair compensation - or face independent arbitration.
MEPs also want to ensure that producers are asked to supply the right type and amount of information about their biocides. At the same time, data protection rules should be tightened up to defend legitimate commercial interests. Producers, importers and users of biocides should keep records of up to ten years to allow proper checks.
No more 'sofa rash'
In the wake of incidents such as rashes caused by fungicide-treated sofas, the proposed legislation includes articles that have been treated with biocidal products. MEPs want treated articles to be labelled if they could come into human contact.
Nanomaterials
MEPs expressed concern about the lack of information on the effects of nanomaterials. Since their use in biocides may increase in future, MEPs want them to be separately assessed, and add that products containing such tiny particles should be labelled.
Next steps
The European Parliament plenary is due to vote on the legislative proposal in September 2010. It will then be examined by Council.
Procedure: Co-decision (1st reading)
In the chair: Jo LEINEN (S&D, DE)
20100621IPR76410 Environment, Public Health and Food Safety Committee web site
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=ENVI
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
