The internet: opportunities and risks discussed at hearing
Education
2010-06-25 - 12:14
The role of the internet in education was discussed. ©BELGA Internet can help "virtual mobility" "facilitates peace and social cohesion" The internet is a marvellous technological gift to our generation, but we must learn to use it properly. Experts at a public hearing organised by the Culture Committee on 25 June agreed that the internet has inestimable potential to reinforce cross-cultural understanding in Europe and the wider world. However, they warned that there are dangers implicit in the use of the internet and these need to be tackled.
This ambiguity was reflected by the Chair of the Culture Committee, German Christian Democrat Doris Pack. "The internet offers a lot of information. Now we have to see how we can learn from it."
She said the European Union should promote and protect cultural diversity, ensure that it gets to all age segments and provide materials on the Internet about different cultures.
Virtual mobility now available
Internationalism has become an essential component of higher education with the Leonardo da Vinci and Erasmus programs are clear examples.
Johannes De Gruyter, from the Catholic University of Leuven said that thanks to ICTs (Information and Communications Technologies), we have virtual mobility "an international and collaborative experience in a context of teaching and learning", which brings students together and allows students who can't leave their homes or cities to take part in international programs.
He cited videoconferences between students from different parts of the world in which they can exchange experiences and improve their language skills and business applications, where a video game teaches students how to behave in different situations, for example, during a business meal with a Chinese executive.
Digital alphabetisation
Andrew Rasiej, Founder of Personal Democracy Forum said, "we are all swimming in this huge ocean of culture that the Internet provides to us, but to understand it accurately, we need to boost digital alphabetistion".
In the future, he added, part of this alphabetisation will include learning to make videos and communicate through videos without having to use text.
In five years, the whole world will be interconnected through mobile devices, he said, but warned that schools are falling behind, because ICTs are not being used as much as they should be.
And what are the risks?
Verena Wiedemann, from UNESCO said "our objective is to provide global access to knowledge because it is fundamental for societies. It facilitates peace and social cohesion, taking into account that societies are more and more intercultural. It will also reinforce European integration".
But, she warned of the huge power concentration in the hands of a few multimedia groups, who have global influence.
Professor Jean-Joël Jeanneney, Former President of the French National Library and President of Europartenaires: said, "we should not let the Internet develop spontaneously, without the intervention of public authorities...It is their duty to guide users and order the information offered".
20100618STO76332 Europarl Culture Committee
EN
1
PHOTO
20100624PHT76642.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/frd/vod/player?eventCode=20100624-0900-COMMITTEE-CULT&language=en&byLeftMenu=researchcommittee&category=COMMITTEE&format=wmv#anchor1
EN
3
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=CULT
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
