The Week Ahead 28 June – 4 July 2010
Institutions
General
2010-06-25 - 13:41
Committee meetings and political groups week
Financial stability measures. The Economics Committee will vote on a resolution on the mechanisms set up by the Council to provide a financial safety net for Eurozone countries (Monday).
Deficit statistics. The same committee votes on measures aimed at assuring the quality of data provided by Member States regarding their budget deficits (Monday).
External action service. The Foreign Affairs Committee discusses its formal position on the creation of the EU’s new diplomatic service, following the political agreement reached a week earlier (Monday).
Fair revenues for farmers. The Agriculture Committee is due to set out ideas on how to ensure a better functioning food supply chain in Europe (Monday).
President’s activities. EP President Jerzy Buzek begins the week in Washington DC where he takes part in the Transatlantic Dialogue on Democracy Support (Monday-Tuesday). In Brussels, he will meet NATO Secretary General Anders Fogh Rasmussen (Thursday) and attend the opening ceremony of the Belgian EU Presidency (Friday), before taking part in the 10th anniversary of the Community of Democracies in Krakow (Saturday).
Preparing for the session. Parliament’s political groups will devote most of the week to preparations for the 5-8 July plenary session in Strasbourg. The agenda currently includes a range of financial market supervision legislation, laws on the rights of bus and waterway travellers, on “novel” foods, on pollution from industrial sources and on obligations for timber suppliers. There will also be debates with the Spanish and Belgian Prime Ministers on the outgoing and incoming presidencies of the Council.
Pre-session press briefing. The regular briefing on the session agenda, including the EP Press Service and the spokespeople of the main political groups, will take place at 11am on Friday 2 July (Anna Politkovskaya room, PHS 0A050).
20100625IPR77032 For details of all the week's events, see "The Agenda"
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20102700AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
