The Week Ahead 5-11 July 2010
Institutions
General
2010-07-02 - 12:28
Plenary Session – Strasbourg
Financial markets/economic governance. Parliament is set to vote on laws on EU supervision of financial markets, as well as rules on bonus payments in the banking and investment sector (debates Tuesday, votes Wednesday). The latest proposals on economic governance will be debated with Commission President José Manuel Barroso (Tuesday).
External action service. The Foreign Affairs Committee will give its verdict on the creation of the EU diplomatic service (Tuesday), then the plenary will debate the plans with Catherine Ashton (Wednesday) ahead of a vote (Thursday).
Terrorist finance tracking/SWIFT. MEPs will decide whether to allow a new agreement between the EU and US on the monitoring of banking data from the financial messaging system SWIFT. The Civil Liberties Committee will examine the issue first (Monday) , ahead of a plenary debate (Tuesday) and vote (Thursday).
Council Presidencies: Spain and Belgium. José Luis Rodriguez Zapatero will present the outcome of Spain’s Council presidency to Parliament (Tuesday), while Yves Leterme will set out the priorities for the new Belgian presidency (Wednesday).
Passenger rights. Legislation on the rights of bus, ferry and waterway passengers will be put to the vote at second reading (debate Monday, vote Tuesday).
Novel foods. A draft law on food from new sources, such as cloned animals, will also be put to the vote at second reading (debate Tuesday, vote Wednesday).
Restricting pollution. New rules on emissions from industrial plants look set to become law as Parliament votes at second reading (debate Tuesday, vote Wednesday).
Iceland/EU. Parliament will debate Iceland’s application for EU membership and adopt a resolution setting out its position (debate and vote Wednesday).
President’s activities. Jerzy Buzek will meet the French Prime Minister, François Fillon (with a press point), and Fu Ying, Vice-Minister of Foreign Affairs of China (both Tuesday).
20100702IPR77648 For details of all the week's events, see "The Agenda"
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20102800AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
