The Week Ahead 12 - 18 July 2010
Institutions
General
2010-07-09 - 12:28
Committee meetings – Brussels
Security of gas supplies. The Industry Committee votes on an agreement on EU legislation aimed at guaranteeing the gas supply to customers at times of crisis. (Tuesday)
Protection of animals. The Agriculture Committee takes a vote on a second-reading agreement on legislation to restrict animal testing in scientific experiments and introduce alternative methods that cause less pain or distress to animals. (Monday)
Belgian presidency. Most EP committees hold discussions with Belgian ministers on the Council Presidency's policy priorities in various areas over the next six months (Monday-Thursday).
EU-NATO relations. Foreign Affairs and Security and Defence Committee MEPs discuss EU-NATO relations and the new NATO strategic concept with NATO Secretary-General Anders Fogh Rasmussen (Wednesday)
Trade and economic relations with Turkey. The International Trade Committee votes a resolution outlining steps to improve trade and economic relations with Turkey. (Wednesday)
Anti-Counterfeiting. Progress in negotiations on the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement (ACTA) Trade will be debated with Commissioner Karel De Gucht in the Civil Liberties Committee (Tuesday)
GM crops. Health and Consumer Policy Commissioner John Dalli presents new Commission proposals on the authorisation and cultivation of genetically modified organisms (GMOs) to Environment Committee MEPs. (Tuesday)
Employment policy and green jobs. The Employment and Social Affairs Committee is to adopt its political stance on guidelines and targets for Member States' employment policies. It also votes a resolution on creating green jobs in a new sustainable economy. (Wednesday)
Inter-parliamentary meeting on cohesion policy. Regional Development Committee MEPs will meet their counterparts from national parliaments to discuss the Lisbon Treaty's practical implications for EU cohesion policy. (Monday)
Summer recess. From 19 July the European Parliament's activities are suspended for the summer recess until 30 August.
20100709IPR78569 For details of all the week's events, see "The Agenda"
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20102900AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
