Human rights: Kenya's refusal to arrest al-Bashir, jailing of Syrian activist
Human rights
Plenary sittings
2010-09-09 - 16:08
The European Parliament has criticised the invitation by the Kenyan authorities to Sudan's President Omar al-Bashir, who was able to attend the signing ceremony for the new Kenyan constitution without being troubled in any way. In a second resolution adopted in Strasbourg on Thursday, MEPs call for the release of Syrian human rights defender Haythan Al-Maleh.
Parliament expresses its regret at Kenya's decision to invite President Omar al-Bashir to attend the signing of the new Constitution on 27 August, since Mr al-Bashir has been the subject of an arrest warrant from the International Criminal Court (ICC) since March 2009 for crimes against humanity and war crimes.
The 31 African countries that have ratified the Rome Statute, including Kenya, are obliged to arrest any person who is wanted by the ICC and to deliver them to the Court or deny the person admission to their territory.
MEPs deplore the positions of the African Union and the Arab League, which are refusing to cooperate with the ICC. They call on the EU High Representative to ensure that this item is placed on the agenda at the next AU/EU Summit.
Imprisonment of Syrian human rights campaigner
Parliament also calls on the Syrian authorities to "immediately and unconditionally" release Mr Haythan Al-Maleh, an 80 year-old Syrian human rights lawyer who was sentenced on 4 July 2010 by a military court to three years' imprisonment on the grounds of ‘transferring false and exaggerated news that weaken national sentiments’.
The deteriorating state of Mr Al-Maleh's health worries MEPs. He suffers from arthritis, diabetes and thyroid problems, and is being deprived of regular access to medication.
The resolution also calls on the Syrian Government to release immediately all prisoners of conscience, including Mr Muhannad Al-Hassani, Mr Ali Al-Abdullah, Mr Anour Al-Bunni and Mr Kamal Labwani.
20100909IPR81800 Adopted texts will be available here (click on 9 September)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
