The Week Ahead 13-19 September 2010
Institutions
General
2010-09-10 - 13:09
Committee meetings and political groups week – Brussels
EU Summit. EP President Jerzy Buzek will address EU leaders at the latest meeting of the European Council, before holding a press conference. After the summit, European Council President Herman Van Rompuy will come to Parliament to brief the political group leaders on the outcome (Thursday).
Cuban ex-prisoners. A group of former political prisoners in Cuba will have a discussion with the Human Rights Subcommittee (Monday) and a meeting with President Buzek the next day.
Economic policy/Reynders. Belgian Finance Minister and ECOFIN Council chair Didier Reynders will brief the Economic Affairs Committee on the Belgian Presidency's plans. (Monday).
Arctic conference. MEPs join a meeting of national parliamentarians from the Arctic countries for the 9th Conference of Parliamentarians of the Arctic Region, which takes place in the EP (Monday-Wednesday).
Economic governance. Commissioner Olli Rehn, Director of the IMF's Fiscal Affairs department Carlo Cottarelli and Breugel Institute representative Andre Sapir will participate in a public hearing on economic governance and stability in the eurozone (Wednesday). President’s activities. Mr Buzek also meets President of Austria Heinz Fischer, Commission President José Manuel Barroso, Moldovan Prime Minister Vlad Filat (all on Wednesday) and Belgian Prime Minister Yves Leterme (Friday).
Plenary preparations. Parliament's political groups will devote most of the week to preparations for the 20-23 September plenary session in Strasbourg. The agenda includes a debate with Mr Van Rompuy and the European commission on the results of the EU summit, the final vote on setting up a new system of financial market supervision, as well as legislation on securing Europe's gas supplies, ensuring proper monitoring of the adverse effects of medicines, setting minimum standards for air accident investigations and restricting the use of biocides.
Pre-session press briefing. Any changes to the agenda approved by the Conference of Presidents will be announced at the regular press briefing on Friday at 11.00h, with Parliament’s press services and the main political group spokespeople on hand to comment on the session (PHS 0A050 Anna Politkovskaya room).
20100910IPR81960 For details of all the week's events, see "The Agenda"
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20103800AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
