Sahel region: education and training needed to combat radicalisation
Security and defence
Committees Security and Defence
2010-09-14 - 09:58
Educating youngsters, training police and judges and regional co-operation are vital to combat the growing influence of terrorist organizations in the Sahel region, EU counter-terrorism co-ordinator Gilles de Kerchove told Security and Defence Subcommittee MEPs in a discussion on Monday of security challenges in region, most notably in Mauritania, Mali and Niger.
The Sahel region, a geographical belt stretching from Senegal and Mauritania in West Africa to Sudan and Eritrea in the east of the continent, faces a "dangerous cocktail of threats", EU counter-terrorism co-ordinator Gilles de Kerchove told MEPs on Monday.
Countries in West Africa, notably Mali and Mauritania, were undergoing a massive radicalization, he added. Radical preachers from countries like Pakistan were present, and several judges had studied Sharia law. The influence of Al-Qaeda's regionally active branch, AQIM, was growing, one of the symptoms being the recent kidnappings of Western nationals, said Mr Kerchove.
Poverty, draught and the continued food crises were fuelling this process, he underlined. "Without development you can't have security", Mr Kerchove added. He underscored that young people should be offered education and professional alternatives to joining terrorist organizations. After technical assistance, it was time to move to a political mobilization of the EU, he said.
To combat terrorism effectively, the rule of law system should be strengthened, the public credibility of institutions enhanced and corruption curbed, said Cecilia Ruthström-Ruin, chief of the terrorism prevention branch of UN Office on Drugs and Crimes.
She underlined that special legal training should be provided for local criminal judges, and that countries in the region should establish strong regional co-operation in criminal matters.
No EU position on ransom payments
Replying to a question by Arnaud Danjean (EPP, FR) on China's role in the region, Mr Kerchove said Beijing's presence, contrary to its involvement in other regions of Africa, was not particularly remarkable.
Replying to questions by Ana Gomes (S&D, PT), and Sabine Lösing (GUE/NGL, DE), on the use of ransom payments, Cecilia Ruthström-Ruin said these were illegal under UN rules. Mr Kerchove added that the EU was disorganized and there was no single EU stance in this question.
European Commission development director Manuel Lopez Blanco agreed with Norica Nicolai (ALDE, RO) on the need for a comprehensive EU strategy on development and anti-crime measures in the region. Malika Benarab-Attou (Greens/EFA, FR), highlighted the role of women in the education and advocated a strong EU presence there.
20100913IPR82029 Security and Defence Sub-committee
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=SEDE
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
