Security of gas supplies: joint EU response in future
Energy
Plenary sittings
2010-09-21 - 12:23
European households can expect not to have their gas cut off in any future gas supply crisis, thanks to EU-wide co-ordination and interconnection arrangements laid down in legislation approved by the European Parliament on Tuesday. The legislation also aims to improve the general management of such crises.
The new rules on the security of gas supply are intended to reduce vulnerability to future disruptions and boost infrastructure development at national and EU level. Market mechanisms remain the first course of action, but households will be protected first during a crisis.
Within two years Member States will have to design prevention plans and the Commission will have an increased role in coordinating emergency measure and ensuring that national plans do not endanger the security of supply to other Member States in crisis.
Parliament adopted the draft regulation by 601 votes to 27, with 23 abstentions. Spanish MEP Alejo Vidal Quadras (EPP) who was responsible for steering the draft legislation through the House, emphasised in the final debate on Tuesday morning that the regulation is a "genuinely powerful instrument" to improve security of gas supplies and a "milestone regarding this issue in the EU" adding that "if applied speedily and effectively it will be a powerful message to our gas suppliers that Europe stands all for one and one for all in the crises".
Energy Commissioner Günther Oettinger welcomed the end of the legislative process and announced that the Commission had set aside €1.4 billion for infrastructure projects such as reverse flows. Implementation of the rules will be reviewed in the next 2 to 3 years.
Household heating guaranteed
In the event of extremely low temperatures European gas companies would be required to ensure supplies to householders in the following cases:
- extreme temperatures during a seven-day peak period;
- any period of at least 30 days of exceptionally high demand;
- at least 30 days in the event of infrastructure disruption under average winter conditions.
Preventive measures
Member States will need to ensure that even if their biggest source of gas or a large part of the network fails, the remaining network is capable of meeting total daily gas demand on a day of "exceptionally high demand" (which, statistically, happens once every 20 years).
National authorities will have four years to comply with this supply standard but cross-border interconnections among EU countries will have to be in place within three years of the legislation's entry into force.
Emergency response
If, despite these preventive measures, an emergency happens due to serious disruption or exceptionally high demand, the Member State concerned will activate a national emergency response plan.
The three main crisis levels are "early warning", "alert" and "emergency". In an emergency, the plans must ensure that cross-border access to storage facilities and the flow of gas across borders are maintained.
The European Commission would have to declare a "Union emergency" or a regional emergency at the request of at least two Member States who have declared national emergencies. During a Union emergency, the Commission would ensure a smooth flow of information as well as coordinating national measures and any joint action with non-EU countries.
20100920IPR82928 Adopted text will be available here (click on 21 September)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
