Improve living standards in banana-producing ACP countries, say MEPs
Development and cooperation
Committees Development
2010-10-05 - 13:07
Almost €200 million in EU support for 10 banana-exporting countries in Africa, the Caribbean and the Pacific should help cut poverty, boost living standards and promote compliance with labour, health and environment standards, especially as regards using pesticides, says a report approved by Development Committee MEPs on Tuesday. This support aims to offset the negative impact on ACP producers of reducing EU tariffs on banana imports from Latin America.
To offset the negative economic and social effects on ACP banana producers of a reducing EU tariffs on banana imports from Latin America, the EU is offering almost €200 million in support to 10 ACP countries for four years. The aim of the so-called Banana-Accompanying Measures (BAM) is to help areas dependent on banana exports to adjust, by improving competitiveness and promoting the economic diversification of banana-dependent areas.
The EU is gradually reducing the tariff on banana imports from Latin America further to a December 2009 WTO agreement which put an end to a 15-year banana trade dispute with Latin American countries.
Which countries will get EU support?
The 10 ACP banana-producing countries benefitting from these measures are: Belize, Cameroon, Côte d'Ivoire, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ghana, Jamaica, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and Suriname.
Questions remain about BAM funding
The budget foreseen is €190 million for 2010-2013 (the country-specific activities to be supported in 2010 will be defined so that the program can kick off early in 2011). The money has been redeployed from different parts of the external relations budget, which MEPs believe leaves too little room for manoeuvre to deal effectively with potential crises.
MEPs "consider that due to the long standing issue on trade in bananas, the foreseen budget could have been integrated earlier in the EU multi-annual budget", and that "a ny new instrument should not be financed through redeployment as this would jeopardise the existing priorities".
Small farmers - the target of EU financial support
MEPs insist that financial support must be used to combat poverty, by improving the living standards of small farmers and small entities , as well as complying with labour and occupational health and safety and environmental standards.
Combating poverty must be taken into account so as to ensure that everyone in the supply chain can benefit from acceptable standards of living and easier access to the markets and that banana revenues are allocated fairly.
Facts about the EU banana market
In 2008, EU consumers bought 5.4 million tonnes of bananas, of which 72% came from Latin America, 17% from ACP countries and only 11% from the EU itself (Cyprus, the French overseas departments of Guadeloupe and Martinique, Greece, Portugal (Madeira and the mainland) and the Spanish Canary Islands).
Banana producers within the EU, mainly from the outermost regions, receive support from the EU's POSEI programme ( Programme d'Options Spécifiques à l'Èloignement et l'Insularité ).
Next steps
The report by Charles Goerens (ALDE, LU), approved in committee on Tuesday by a show of hands, will be put to a plenary vote, as a first-reading position, at the October session in Strasbourg.
In the chair Eva JOLY (Greens/EFA, FR)
20101004IPR84971 Development Committee Watch webstreaming live ACP-EU Declaration on the EU-Latin America bananas agreement
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=DEVE
EN
2
LINK
/eng-internet-publisher/eplive/public/default.do?language=en
EN
3
LINK
/intcoop/acp/60_19/pdf/815343en.pdf
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
