Parliament and Commission sign revised Framework Agreement
Institutions
Plenary sittings
2010-10-20 - 12:42
Today in Strasbourg, European Parliament President Jerzy Buzek and European Commission President José Manuel Barroso signed the revised Framework Agreement governing working relations between the two institutions. The signature brings to a successful conclusion a process that started almost one year ago with the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty.
The revised Framework Agreement adapts the existing accord from 2005 to the new Treaty framework. Both Presidents expressed confidence that it will deepen the relations between the two institutions and offer practical solutions in line with the increased competences of Parliament under the Lisbon Treaty. Important elements of the agreement have been implemented already, even before it comes into force, including progress on preparing the Commission's work programme for 2011.
"More influential position of the European Parliament"
President Buzek said: "The European Parliament is proud of this new five-year Framework Agreement with the European Commission. It reflects the new more influential position of the European Parliament under the Lisbon Treaty and takes our special partnership with the European Commission to a new level. I welcome in particular that the Commission has undertaken to report on the concrete follow-up given to any legislative initiative requests by Parliament and the acceptance of the principle of equal treatment by the Commission of Parliament and the Council of Ministers in legislative and budgetary matters."
President Barroso said: "This agreement marks a new departure following the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty which reinforces the roles of the Commission and the European Parliament in driving forward the European agenda. I'm confident our work together will now go from strength to strength."
Maroš Šefčovič, Commission Vice-President for Inter-institutional Relations and Administration, who negotiated on behalf of the Commission, added: "It's crucial that we have a solid and formally agreed basis for our work together, and that it's actually put into daily practice on the ground. I'll do everything I can to ensure that this happens. I'd like to thank the Parliament's negotiators for their efforts throughout what were always very frank discussions!"
20101020IPR88488
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
