Parliament backs major breakthrough in relations with Commission
Institutions
Plenary sittings
2010-10-20 - 12:33
A revised framework agreement on co-operation between Parliament and Commission won strong backing from MEPs in a plenary vote on Wednesday. Immediately thereafter, both institutions' Presidents signed this agreement, which reflects Parliament's new powers under the Lisbon Treaty.
The revised framework agreement between the two institutions makes major improvements in the fields of legislative procedure and planning, parliamentary scrutiny, the EU's international relations, obligations to provide information and the Commission's presence in Parliament. It reflects the Lisbon Treaty balance of powers, in which Parliament and Council are equal legislators.
The revised text is an "historic agreement" which will "ensure the Lisbon Treaty can enter into force in a living way" said Parliament's rapporteur Paulo Rangel (EPP, PT), in a debate on Monday.
Equal treatment of Parliament and Council
A key achievement for Parliament was to include in the text the basic principle of equal treatment for Parliament and the Council by the Commission in access to meetings and information.
The "special partnership" between the two institutions includes regular high-level meetings and stricter obligations for the Commission to provide MEPs with information on certain meetings and on how Parliament's resolutions and initiatives are followed up.
Other major improvements
The agreement steps up Parliament's involvement in the Commission work programme and in electing the Commission President. There are new rules on Commissioners' participation in election campaigns, and the Commission will seek Parliament's opinion when revising its Code of Conduct for Commissioners.
Parliament will also be able to contribute more to international negotiations and conferences, as MEPs will have better access to the relevant meetings and hitherto confidential documents. Finally, the Commission's presence in Parliament is strengthened by a new question hour with all members of the Commission.
Immediate effect
Parliament adopted two reports by Paulo Rangel, one on the framework agreement itself and the other on changes needed in Parliament's own rules of procedure.
Immediately after the vote, Parliament President Jerzy Buzek and Commission President José Manuel Barroso, together with Parliament's chief negotiator on the agreement Klaus-Heiner Lehne (EPP, DE) and Commissioner Maroš Šefčovič, signed the new framework agreement, which takes effect immediately.
20101020IPR88628 Background on Framework Agreement
EN
1
LINK
/en/pressroom/content/20100202BKG68427
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
