MEPs lay down "red lines" on EU trade with Latin America
External/international trade
Plenary sittings
2010-10-21 - 14:42
MEPs voice strong support for expanding trade with Latin America, subject to clear "red lines" to ensure food security and prevent further environmental damage, in a resolution adopted on Thursday. The resolution also criticises Argentina's recent protectionist trade measures.
While encouraging efforts by some Latin American governments to conclude trade agreements with the EU, MEPs voice grave concern about the protectionist measures taken by Argentina during the financial crisis against food imports. These measures constitute "a real non-tariff barrier incompatible with WTO obligations", warn MEPs, who also stress that this could pose serious obstacles to the ongoing EU-Mercosur negotiations.
Mercosur
Latin America continues to be a key EU external trade interest. The resolution, drafted by Helmut Scholz (GUE, DE), welcomes the conclusion of an EU-Central America association agreement. MEPs also urged that negotiations be resumed with Mercosur, subject to a prior assessment of the impact of an agreement, which some estimates say could boost meat exports to Europe by up to 70% in the case of beef and 25% in that of poultry, mostly from Brazil and Argentina. These exports are "cheaper because of less stringent sanitary, environmental and social standards", say MEPs.
Clear "red lines"
All multilateral agreements, say MEPs, must enshrine clear standards in the following areas:
environmental standards to fight climate change, deforestation and house-gas emissions,
food security of imported agricultural products,
protecting of small food producers from both sides, especially in the controversial banana sector, which affects EU outermost regions, and
reducing overall poverty in Latin America and exchanging aid for trade.
Misconduct by EU multinationals
Parliament's non-binding text also recognises "that in the past some cases of misconduct by companies operating in Latin America have occurred, involving ecological degradation, cases of exploitation of labour and serious human rights violations". European multinationals are responsible for the EU's image in the region and should play a constructive role by applying high environmental, social protection and quality management standards, stress MEPs.
20101020IPR89471 Adopted text will be available here (click on 21 October) Report on trade relations with Latin America
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A7-2010-0277 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
