€146 million for energy saving, efficiency and renewable energy projects
Energy
Committees Industry, Research and Energy
2010-10-26 - 15:51
On Tuesday the European Parliament's Energy Committee gave its green light to an agreement with the Council to free up €146 million of uncommitted funds to finance energy saving, energy efficiency and renewable energy projects.
Amended legislation on the European Energy Recovery Plan (EERP) will channel the unspent money into a new fund, to finance projects such as:
renovations of public and private buildings to improve energy efficiency or switching to renewable energy;
the construction of renewables-based heat-and-power installations, with distribution networks, and their integration into electricity grids;
clean urban public transport solutions, particularly electric and hydrogen vehicles;
local infrastructure, including efficient street lighting, electricity storage, smart metering and smart grids.
The fund will focus chiefly on helping local and regional authorities to pay for such projects, which must be economically and financially viable, so as to refund the investment in due course.
Contributions from the fund could take the form of loans, guarantees, equity or other financial products. Up to 15% of the funding may be used to provide technical assistance to public authorities to help set up the projects. Geographical balance is to be an important criterion in the selection of projects.
Background
The EERP, which was launched in 2009, aims to boost economic recovery by funding energy projects such as cross-border gas and electricity inter-connectors, offshore wind parks, and Carbon Capture and Storage projects (CCS). In 2010 a total of €3.98 billion was earmarked for such plans.
Parliament sought unsuccessfully to include energy efficiency and renewable energy in the EERP when it was first proposed. The European Commission promised to consider this at a later stage, using funds unspent by the end of 2010. Thus, a total of €146.34 million will be available from 1 January 2011 and must be allocated by 31 March 2014.
The proposed rule changes were approved by the Energy Committee by 49 votes to 2 with no abstentions. The full Parliament will vote on the changes during the November session in Brussels.
In the chair: Herbert Reul (EPP, DE)
20101025IPR90074 Website of the Committee on Industry, Research and Energy (ITRE) Watch webstreaming live
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=ITRE
EN
2
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/frd/live/live-video?language=en
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
