European Parliament press pack for EU summit 28-29 October 2010
Institutions
2010-10-28 - 14:03
Economic and climate policy are once again at the top of the agenda as EU heads of state and government meet in Brussels 28-29 October 2010. The European Parliament has become a key player in deciding the big issues at European level; this press pack brings together the latest EP press releases and background notes on the main subjects under discussion.
Economic policy
In recent weeks, Parliament has signed off on legislation to establish three European supervisory authorities. Looking at the wider challenges in the wake of the financial crisis, MEPs also called for global supervision and regulation of markets, a tax on financial transactions and the establishment of a permanent European Monetary Fund. Only this week, MEPs clinched a deal with EU governments to rein in hedge funds activities, and they also set out their preliminary views on six proposals to beef up economic governance, ahead of their decisions on this issue as co-legislators. They stressed the need for Parliament to take a strong, united stance on setting up a deficit surveillance mechanism, debt levels, and economic imbalances in the eurozone.
EU Budget
Negotiations between Parliament and Council on the EU's annual budget kicked off on 27 October. The conciliation committee has 21 days to agree on a joint text. If no budget is adopted at the beginning of 2011, a sum equivalent to one twelfth of the 2010 budget may be spent each month until there is an agreement. In its vote on 21 October, Parliament supported an increase of 1.1% in budget commitments, while Council favoured 0.2%. This represents a difference of €1.29 billion in absolute figures. Although the 2011 payments are set to rise by around 6%, this is the result of prior decisions made on commitments. Parliament also wants a wider discussion on the future financing of the EU.
Climate change
Regarding the upcoming UN climate summit in Cancún, Mexico, MEPs have stressed that real progress must be made in critical areas such as forest protection and climate aid to the developing world. A recent resolution by Parliament's Environment Committee, to be voted in plenary in November, said an EU move to a 30% emissions reductions target would be in its own economic interest.
EU-US relations
Data protection has been a difficult area for EU-US relations in recent times, as in the case of bank transfers (SWIFT). An EU-US data protection agreement is now under discussion (on which Parliament has the right of veto), with both sides of the Atlantic stressing that security and civil liberties need not be mutually exclusive. At its next session in Brussels (10-11 November) Parliament will vote on resolutions relating to passenger name records (PNR) and the upcoming EU-US summit.
20101027BKG90496
MEP Sharon Bowles: Parliament will lead call for big and brave reforms of economic governance
In the run-up to the European Council of the 28th and 29th October, Sharon Bowles, chair of the EP's economics committee warned against back room deals on economic governance and reminded that the proposed legislation on the table will see Parliament and Member States negotiating on an equal level, as was the case for the financial supervisory rules.
The full comment follows:
"Now that all three institutions have come forward with how they wish to proceed on Economic Governance, we must get to work. On Monday the Parliament had the first discussion on the Commission's economic governance proposals, which promises to be a highly politically charged co-decision package. It is clear that, just like the financial supervision package, we will need to make big and brave reforms on how we coordinate Europe's finances in order to bring back stability to Europe and the Eurozone in particular, which will be in the interests of all our citizens.
"We are under pressure from the other institutions to work quickly, but this is an issue that citizens will want follow because it intimately involves their quality of life. While each institution weighs up the debate on such sensitive issues as "to sanction or not to sanction" it must be possible for citizens to follow the debate and understand the agreements finally reached.
Ms Merkel may think that Economic Governance hinges upon a Franco-German agreement, yet one crucial institution does not seem to have featured in the discussions so far - the European Parliament will negotiate the proposals on economic governance with the Council. We are not going to put a rubber stamp on any back room deals, and certainly there is very little appetite amongst MEPs for any treaty change."
Parliament braces itself for economic governance debate
26-10-2010
Parliament's rapporteurs on six proposals to beef up economic governance set out their preliminary views in the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee on Tuesday. They stressed the need for Parliament to take a strong, united stance on setting up a deficit surveillance mechanism, debt levels, and economic imbalances in the eurozone.
The six legislative proposals aim, on the one hand, to strengthen the Stability and Growth Pact (SGP), allowing for better surveillance and sanctioning of excessive deficit and debt levels, and, on the other, to lay down rules for identifying and correcting economic imbalances that threaten the stability of the eurozone.
Focus on debt, as well as deficits
Corien Wortman-Kool (EPP, NL), rapporteur on the Commission proposal to strengthen the SGP, said that although Parliament had already touched on this issues in the Feio and Berès reports on economic governance and the economic crisis, the economic governance debate to date had taken too little account of Parliament's views. "We are determined to play our role," she said.
She welcomed the proposed strengthening of the SGP and demanded a strong role for the Commission in applying its rules, which provide inter alia for sanctions against governments that do not abide by the principles of prudent fiscal policy making. "If Member States in the Council decide, the risk is that the debate will be highly politicized", Ms Wortman-Kool warned.
"Reverse majority" is a good idea, said rapporteur on SGP sanctions Sylvie Goulard (ALDE, FR ) , referring to the Commission's suggestion that proposed sanctions should be considered approved unless the Council decides otherwise by a qualified majority. Ms Goulard emphasized that in the context of the "European semester" proposal for EU surveillance of Member States' economic and fiscal policies, the focus on fiscal discipline should be complemented by a focus on jobs and growth. She also called for a cross-border debate on economic governance.
The SGP will focus not just on deficits, but also on debt levels, said rapporteur on the excessive deficit procedure Diogo Feio (EPP, PT). Public debt should not exceed 60% of GDP, but if it does, the government should aim to reduce the overhang at a rate of one-twentieth per year, Mr Feio explained. Many national politicians have strong views on these issues, he pointed out.
Economic imbalances in the spotlight
The excessive imbalance procedure, the other key thrust of the Commission proposals, is an entirely new area, and one in which Parliament must play a substantial role, said rapporteur Elisa Ferreira (S&D, PT).
Ms Ferreira complained that it was not yet known which indicators, to be included in a "scoreboard" proposed by the Commission, would be used to help identify economic imbalances.
Carl Haglund (ALDE, FI), rapporteur on sanctions in the context of the excessive imbalances procedure, pointed out that bilateral deals between Member States on economic governance issues do not enhance Parliament's negotiating position. "People expect us to come up with something ambitious," he said, warning against watering down the Commission's proposals. In his view, the biggest challenge is how to define an "excessive imbalance".
Sunlight is the best disinfectant
The starting point for all efforts in the economic governance field is accurate, accessible data, said rapporteur on national budget standards Vicky Ford (ECR, UK). "Sunlight is the best disinfectant," she said, adding that if such data were available, perhaps the eurozone would not be in so much trouble. Ms Ford welcomed the three-year budget planning horizon that governments should apply in the future, but called for the same standard in the case of the EU budget.
As for taxpayers bailing out financial institutions, Ms Ford thinks that markets should "take some of the pain" and that a crisis resolution system should reflect this. Here she agreed with Sven Giegold (Greens/EFA, DE), that taxpayers should not have to bail out those who gave easy credit to governments.
Mr Giegold also warned that demanding that governments cut their deficits and public debt at a time of crisis could lead to deflation. Liem Hoang Ngoc (S&D, FR), agreed, saying that tightening the SGP could kill off recovery, and push economies back into recession. "Automatic sanctions will not go down well", opined Mr Hoang Ngoc, saying that Parliament should opt for a country-by-country approach.
Next steps
The draft reports are scheduled be presented in committee on 24 and 25 January 2011.
Out of the crisis and towards European economic governance
20-10-2010
The financial crisis laid bare the limits of self-regulation, demonstrating the need for strong EU economic governance, surveillance and policy co-ordination, say two non-legislative resolutions voted by Parliament on Wednesday. As Herman Van Rompuy's economic governance task force unveils its own plans, MEPs approved their own contribution to the EU economic governance debate, which is set to feature high on the October European Council agenda.
In a resolution on measures and initiatives to combat the financial crisis, MEPs call for a strong pan-European and global regulatory and supervisory system which leaves no financial market, instrument or institution off the record book. The resolution on economic governance broadly backs the Commission's legislative proposals, but goes further on, inter alia, a permanent European monetary fund, European bonds, and the need to tackle budget surpluses as well as deficits.
In a debate before the vote, French MEP Pervenche Berès (S&D), who steered the financial crisis resolution through the Parliament, urged the Council and the Commission to "join forces with the European Parliament, because they have collective responsibility" for finding the way out of the crisis. "We have to rely on our own resources," be it in the field on energy or financial resources, she said, defending the idea of introducing a financial transaction tax. She nonetheless admitted that "no reform can be applied against the will of the Member States", called for "serious European mobilisation so that people can once again trust in the European project".
Diogo Feio (EPP, PT), who drafted the economic governance resolution, criticized Member States for so far having given too little attention to Parliament's stance on economic governance. "Be assured that the Parliament will be sticking to its main objectives throughout the negotiations on the six legislative proposals the Commission has proposed for reforming economic governance", he warned. This position was strongly supported by several EP political group leaders in the debate which followed.
Making the Stability and Growth Pact work effectively
The financial crisis resolution stresses the importance of bringing EU Member States' deficits under control, deplores the poor enforcement of the Stability and Growth Pact and calls for more effective incentives and sanctions to ensure compliance.
To spur recovery, the EU should also implement the EU 2020 strategy consistently and complete the single market. Special attention should also be paid in the coming years to projects in areas such as energy, research and innovation or health and education, the resolution goes on to say.
Mr/Ms Euro to chair ECOFIN Council and Eurogroup
Furthermore, to ensure that the EU economic activity is consistent, MEPs propose that responsibility for economic and monetary affairs be entrusted to one of the Commission's Vice-presidents. This "Mr or Ms Euro" should chair the Economic and Financial Affairs Council and the Eurogroup and represent the EU on relevant international bodies. This would allow the European Union to speak with a stronger and more coherent voice on international level, say MEPs.
Financial transaction tax to limit the speculation
Implementing a strong "exit" strategy which also provides the funding necessary for many measures will require appropriate financial resources at EU level, the resolution goes on to note. MEPs therefore call for the introduction of a tax on financial transactions. This would reduce speculation, thus improving the functioning of the market, and revenue from this tax would help to finance global public goods and reduce public deficits. Finally, such a tax ought to apply as broadly as possible, but, failing that, it should, as a first step, be applied at least at EU level.
Competitiveness at the heart of economic governance
The economic governance resolution recommends that countries running large surpluses, and not just those with large deficits, which should be required to make adjustments as a result of the detailed country-by-country surveillance to be established. Furthermore, the excessive debt sanctions system should account of each country's specific circumstances and allow for different debt-recovery timetables, it adds.
Permanent European Monetary Fund
The resolution also calls for a permanent European Monetary Fund to be established, based on a Commission analysis, so as to make the current European Financial Stability Facility permanent. The Commission is also asked to assess the feasibility of a system for issuing European bonds.
Parliament's role in legitimising EU economic co-ordination
Finally, the national budget vetting procedures provides for an enhanced role for the European Parliament in raising awareness, visibility and accountability of steps being taken by EU institutions to better co-ordinate budgetary and economic policies.
The Berès report on the financial crisis was approved with 501 votes in favour, 67 against and 50 abstentions. The Feio report on economic governance was approved with 468 votes in favour, 61 against and 45 abstentions.
Trichet: Parliament must play a central role in forging the new economic governance model
27-09-2010
Parliament will be crucial in avoiding a "lowest common denominator" approach when helping to design the EU's new economic governance architecture, ECB president Jean-Claude Trichet told the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee on Monday.
Mr Trichet admitted that ideally, a treaty change would be needed to allow the most effective model of economic governance to be developed. He nonetheless noted that the current treaty rules do give scope for making substantial progress, and said that Parliament should ensure that this was achieved, in the same way as it had pushed for a true reform of the system of financial supervision.
The debate with MEPs focused on the current economic scenario and economic forecasts, international financial regulation, austerity policies and the sovereign debt crisis.
What sanctions?
José-Manuel Garcia-Margallo (EPP, ES) asked Mr Trichet's opinion on the idea of removing voting rights as part of the stability and growth pact arsenal of sanctions. Again, Mr Trichet observed that although he himself supported the idea of political sanctions, this too would require a change in the treaty. "We can go very far with secondary legislation for developing other incentives and sanctions", he added.
Financial stability mechanism
Pervenche Berès (S&D, FR) asked whether it would not be necessary to develop a permanent financial stability mechanism, like that developed to help Greece. Mr Trichet replied that it was surveillance that had to be strengthened, so as to avoid even getting into another situation like Greece's again. "We must work on ways to prevent rather than on ways to cope", he said in reply to a similar question by Werner Langen (EPP, DE).
Vicky Ford (ECR, UK) suggested that lending under the European Financial Stability Facility conditions would be like "giving someone already in trouble a very expensive credit card". Mr Trichet replied that EFSF rules need to be tough, in order to prevent moral hazard.
Austerity still the right medicine
Sven Giegold (Greens/EFA, DE) challenged the austerity plans being prescribed as the right medicine for the crisis, contending that Ireland's austerity programme had led it to slip back into economic difficulties again. Mr Trichet replied that the general economic outlook was not yet ideal and that Ireland's difficulties stemmed from this, rather than its austerity policies. "The government's decisions will allow Ireland to regain competitiveness", he added.
Jürgen Klute (GUE, DE) also criticised the wave of austerity policies around Europe. "Why should it be citizens who are footing the bill for the crisis? Why is the EU imposing so much austerity?", he asked. Mr Trichet replied that the wave of financial legislative reform would make the financial sector much more resilient in the future. He also added that this was a global crisis and the EU should not be used as a scapegoat.
Global financial regulation
Wolf Klinz (ALDE, DE) raised concerns about considerable differences between the EU and the US on regulating the financial sector. Mr Trichet admitted that some differences did indeed exist, but said that on the whole, both sides were moving in the same direction, adding that regulation at global level was crucial for success.
Economic governance: MEPs asked to fast-track legislative package
16-09-2010
Economic and Monetary Affairs Commissioner Olli Rehn's efforts to "fast-track" the EU economic governance package were welcomed by Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee MEPs at a public hearing on Wednesday. The aim is to have the legislation, which should reinforce fiscal surveillance and management of macro-economic imbalances across the EU, approved before the next summer break.
"I challenge you to get it done", said Mr Rehn, adding that reinforced governance, together with the new financial supervision framework, will lead to "a new era of economic and financial governance and renewed confidence in the EU-economy".
Tackle Eurozone loopholes
Lorenzo Bini Smaghi, of the European Central Bank's the Executive Board, warned that "a crisis can occur again, unless weaknesses are addressed". He expects the Van Rompuy Group to come up with a strong set of proposals by the end of this month. Mr Van Rompuy "has the mandate to tackle the loopholes in the Eurozone. What should be prevented is that problems in one country lead to a problem in the system", said Mr Bini Smaghi, referring to Greece.
The hearing came ahead of the package of legislative proposals to be tabled by the Commission at the end of September. Committee chair Sharon Bowles (ALDE, UK), underlined the importance of the debate for the Committee's own-initiative report on improving economic governance, due in October, which will set out the direction the Parliament wishes to take.
Too little concern for debts
MEPs generally welcomed Mr Rehn's ideas, but had many questions. Rapporteur on economic governance, Diogo Feio (EPP, PT), underlined the need for new legislation to introduce sanctions, but also warned that the attention should not go only to deficits: "There is too little concern for debts", he said. Mr Rehn agreed: "We also want to make the debt criteria real!"
Leonardo Domenici (S&D, IT) suggested establishing a European Debt Agency, to be funded by revenue from a financial transaction tax. Commissioner Rehn did not seem to favour this idea, saying he would first like to see how the European Stability Finance Mechanism will work in practice. Mr Bini Smaghi was also critical: "a transaction tax will not be enough and it might have a distorting effect. If you want to tax, tax profits, not transactions", he said.
Controlling interest rates
Vicky Ford (ECR, UK), asked how anyone can remedy macro-economic imbalances if they no longer control their interest rates. Mr Bini Smaghi replied that "national interest rates can also be controlled by raising capital requirements for banks. And there are other instruments, like taxation policy, regulatory policies or wage policy."
Philippe Lamberts (Greens/EFA, BE) asked what indicators will be used to monitor economic and monetary policies. Commissioner Rehn replied that "we definitely need more than only fiscal indicators. We are thinking of 6 to 8 now, including growth figures, current account balances and unit labour costs."
Elisa Ferreira (S&D, PT) warned that introducing sanctions can be detrimental when not fiscal policy, but labour market or low growth is causing distortions.
Sven Giegold (Greens/EFA, DE) called on the Commission "to act swiftly to widen the economic governance regime", but was wanted to know how 'burden sharing' will look in the event of imbalances: "How will we help indebted countries?", he asked.
EP role in "European Semester" plans
Referring to "European Semester" plans for mutual supervision by Member States of their national spending plans, Commissioner Rehn said he would welcome the Parliament's contribution right at the beginning of the cycle, following the Commission's presentation of the Annual Growth Survey. "We could foresee a Parliamentary Conference, bringing together the European and national parliaments, to discuss challenges and compare perspectives for the coming year", he said, adding that "this could facilitate the emergence of a truly European spirit and democratic dimension in economic policymaking all over the Union, for the benefit of all EU citizens."
Mr Feio's own-initiative report on economic governance, which will ask the Commission to table legislative proposals to regulate governance by law, rather than simply relying on the Member States' resolve, will be put to an Economic Affairs Committee vote on 4 October and a plenary vote is scheduled for the second plenary session in October.
Parliament gives green light to new financial supervision architecture
22-09-2010
Having fought for more than a year in favour of a radical reform of European financial supervision, the European Parliament on Wednesday gave the final seal of approval to a package of reforms which will see a fundamental shift in the way banks, stock markets and insurance companies are policed as of 2011.
Three European supervisory authorities (ESAs) will be established to replace the current supervisory committees. Their powers will stretch much further than the advisory nature of the current system and their potential to gain further competences will be considerable thanks to a strong review clause. A European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) will also be established with the task of monitoring and warning about the general build-up of risk in the EU economy.
This new system should be able to provide better protection from events such as the Fortis bank crisis weekend, Germany's unilateral naked short-selling ban and the losses faced by life insurance policyholders in the UK, Ireland and Germany with the collapse of Equitable Life. It should at the same time strengthen the EU single market for financial services and provide much better investor protection.
Cosmetic or root and branch reform
A number of Member States, particularly those with large financial centres, favoured the limited reform approach. This led to a significant reduction in the scope of the Commission proposals, themselves considered by the EP as not going far enough. Parliament's rapporteurs from the beginning argued that the system needed serious reform so that risk would be better understood, primarily through much improved communication between national supervisors.
The final deal sees the transformation of advisory committees into watchdogs with a bite. The ESAs are set to get tough new powers to settle disputes among national financial supervisors and to impose temporary bans on risky financial products and activities. If national supervisors fail to act, then the authorities may also impose decisions directly on financial institutions, such as banks, so as to remedy breaches of EU law. The daily work of the ESAs will see them drive coordination within the current system of colleges of national supervisors set up to watch over cross-border financial institutions.
ESA firefighting powers
In the event of disagreements between national supervisors, ESAs will be able to impose legally-binding mediation and, if no agreement can be reached within the relevant college of supervisors, to impose supervisory decisions on the financial institution concerned ESAs will be able to intervene as mediators at their own discretion, rather than only at the request of one of the national supervisors.
The ESAs will be able to monitor how national supervisors implement their obligations under EU law. If these obligations are implemented incorrectly, the ESAs may issue instructions to the national supervisor concerned and, if these go unheeded, directly instruct the financial institution to remedy any breach of EU law.
Consumer protection a central goal
In response to the ever more complex world of financial services, MEPs successfully pushed for consumer protection to be at the very heart of the ESAs' work. ESAs will have the power to investigate specific types of financial institution, or financial products such as "toxic" products, or financial activities such as naked short selling, to assess what risks they pose to a financial market and issue warnings where necessary. Where specific financial legislation so provides, ESAs may temporarily prohibit or restrict harmful financial activities or products and may also ask the Commission to introduce legislative acts to prohibit such activities or products permanently.
ESRB: faster and better warning about risk
MEPs inserted provisions to enable the ESRB to communicate rapidly and clearly. The ESRB will develop a common set of indicators to permit uniform ratings of the riskiness of specific cross-border financial institutions and make it easier to identify the types of risks they carry. The ESRB will also be responsible for establishing colour-coded grades to reflect different risk levels. When making warnings or recommendations on risk build-up, the ESRB is to use the colour-grade to indicate the level of risk.
To enhance the ESRB's ability to predict risk build-up, a broader range of skills and experience, including academics, will be represented on its Advisory Scientific Committee. Finally, to improve visibility and credibility from the outset, the ECB President will preside over the ESRB for the first five years.
Powers that may grow
Both the ESAs and the ESRB will be able to grow as events require. Particularly for the ESAs, MEPs ensured that the Commission will report back every three years on whether it is desirable to combine the separate supervision of banking, securities, and insurance on the benefits of having all the ESAs headquartered in one city and on whether the ESAs should be entrusted with further supervisory powers, notably over financial institutions with pan-European reach.
Role of the European Parliament
MEPs also succeeded in improving democratic oversight of the whole supervisory system. The EP will be able to veto the appointment of ESA chairpersons and will have a say in the development of the technical standards and implementing measures. Moreover, the ESRB President will keep the chair and vice-chairs of the EP's Economic Affairs Committee updated on ESRB activities through confidential discussions.
The legislative texts empower the Commission, the ESAs and the ESRB to ask the Council to declare an emergency. But the Parliament will also be able to ask the Council to declare an emergency through resolutions and questions, in the same way as it has a right to make requests to the Council and the Commission in any other matter.
MEPs: financial regulation on track but this is only the beginning
08-09-2010
MEPs on Wednesday welcomed the financial supervision package that was endorsed by the Council on Tuesday but insisted this was the first step towards a regulatory system and not the final product. They also commented on the moves to introduce a "European semester", allowing monitoring of national budgetary and economic policies, and held a lively debate on the idea of a financial transaction tax.
Taking the floor for the Council Presidency and the European Commission respectively, Didier Reynders and Michel Barnier briefed the house on the outcome of the ECOFIN meeting and the steps ahead for financial and economic regulation in Europe. They particularly focused on the state-of-play of the discussion on introducing bank levies and a tax on financial transactions.
Financial supervision
Corien Wortmann-Kool (EPP, NL) and Udo Bullmann (S&D, DE) praised the EP rapporteurs for their persistence in the negotiations and congratulated Mr Reynders and Commissioner Barnier on the result.
Sylvie Goulard (ALDE, FR) insisted the new European supervisory authorities should be given the appropriate room for manoeuvre without introducing too many safeguard clauses for European action, as the Council had so insistently attempted to do previously. "It will be important to ensure that the text's occasionally vague wording does not prevent us from going further", she said. Hans-Peter Martin (NI, AT) criticised the package, comparing it with the American system: "Theirs is stronger!", he said.
Economic policy co-ordination - European Semester
Members broadly agreed on the need for further economic and budgetary co-ordination and applauded the introduction of a "European Semester", which would allow the Commission and Council to monitor national budgets and economic policies in parallel during a six-month period every year. The idea emerged from the Task Force on Economic Governance, chaired by European Council President Herman van Rompuy. Miguel Portas (GUE/NGL, PT), however, warned that this system must not undermine the prerogatives of national parliaments: "That would lead to a situation in which Germany is telling Greece what to do. We can't rob the national members of parliaments of their freedom of choice concerning their budget."
Bank levies and a financial transaction tax
A large number of MEPs welcomed the Commission proposal for a coordinated approach on bank levies so as to avoid competitive distortions between national markets. Even though the G-20 is not ready to adopt such measures, MEPs urged the Commission and Council to take a lead and tackle the issue at EU level.
The introduction of a tax on financial transactions is meeting more resistance. Corien Wortmann-Kool was critical and insisted on having the whole G-20 on board: "Otherwise the disadvantages will outweigh the advantages. Transactions will simply circumvent the EU." Mr Bullmann and Sven Giegold (Greens/EFA, DE) on the other hand said the EU should take the lead and not wait for progress in the G-20. Mr Giegold criticised the Commission for "a cacophony of opinions", with President Barroso and Commissioner Barnier singing from a different hymn sheet than Commissioner Semeta. "Mr Semeta's conclusions have been regularly refuted by leading academics", Mr Giegold said. The main controversy was about how best to allocate the revenues. Kay Swinburne (ECR, UK) stressed that these revenues were not "freely available money". "It will be pensioners and companies who will pay for a financial transaction tax, not the banks" she warned. Moreover, she insisted the money should be spent according to the wishes of Member States and not allocated at EU level.
Parliament sees its priorities through on hedge funds directive
26-10-2010
European Parliament and Council negotiators on Tuesday overcame the final major hurdles to an agreement on the alternative investment fund managers directive. Parliament succeeded in pushing through new chapters on asset stripping and remuneration principles, as well as strongly influencing the rules on the passporting system, depositary liability, capital requirements, and use of leverage.
Over a year in the making, this often-controversial law will impose registration, reporting and initial capital requirements on a financial industry sector which until now has been subject only to "light touch" regulation. Alternative investment funds (AIF), notably hedge funds and private equity, will henceforth be subject to more substantial regulatory oversight, so as to enhance investor protection and financial stability, both key priorities for Parliament all throughout the negotiations.
Three key problems were resolved today, by deals on a passport for non-EU AIF and AIF managers, combating asset stripping, and ensuring tough rules on depositary liability.
A passport for everyone without a free for all culture
Today's agreement will enable non-EU AIF and AIF managers to market to investors across the EU without first having to seek permission from each Member State and comply with different national laws. This was a bone of contention between Parliament and some Member States, with Parliament pushing for a marketing passport to be granted to non-EU players. Parliament allayed these Member States' fears by proposing the provisions now in the text whereby AIF and AIF managers will obtain passports only if the non-EU country they are located in meets minimum regulatory standards and has agreements in place with Member States to allow information sharing.
Initially, only EU AIF and AIF managers will be able to obtain a passport with those based outside the EU having to market through the current national private placement regimes. After an opinion from the European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA) and the adoption of implementing legislation (a delegated act) by the Commission, the passport will then also become available to non-EU AIF and AIF managers. The national private placement regimes will not end automatically by the extension of the passport system however. Instead a period of co-existence will be in place which will only be terminated when the Commission adopts another delegated act to this effect.
Special attention to asset stripping by private equity funds
The initial Commission proposal did not contain rules to deal with asset stripping, and Member States were for a long time reluctant to tackle the issue.
Parliament's negotiators insisted from the outset on the need to combat asset stripping. The Commission's initial proposal did not address this in any way. The agreement now includes a number of provisions to this end, relating primarily to limits on the distribution of capital within the first years that a company is taken over by a private equity investor. This is intended to deter private equity investors from attempting to take control of a company solely in order to make a quick profit.
Parliament's representatives also won strong information and disclosure requirements to be imposed on private equity investors, particularly regarding the information to be provided to employees and their representatives on the planned strategy for the company. Again, the intention is to oblige these investors to develop longer-term strategies for the companies that they take over. The directive includes provisions to ensure that sensitive information which could help competitors to acquire industrial secrets will not be disclosed.
Moreover, the Commission will be tasked with assessing the need to toughen the rules on private equity during its general review of the directive.
Depositary liability
Although the Commission's very first proposal had already dealt with regulating depositaries' liability, MEPs felt that too much leeway was being given to depositaries to delegate this liability. To this end, MEPs inserted a clause stating that if a depositary legally delegates its tasks to others, then it must provide a contract which allows the fund or the fund manager to claim damages against the entity which received the delegation. This should ensure that at no point in the chain will liability be irretrievably lost. MEPs also secured a requirement that the AIF investors concerned must be closely involved with the potential delegation of liability.
This much stricter liability imposed on depositaries had originally been strongly opposed by Member States.
Parliament's mark in other areas
Besides the deals reached on the above three issues, Parliament shaped the requirements on initial capital levels, on prohibiting the delegation of responsibility from the AIF manager to a valuator and won the inclusion of remuneration rules. Remuneration had not been addressed in the Commission's initial proposal, and it was MEPs who pushed for AIF managers to have the same rules as those soon to exist for bank managers so as to remove the incentive for excessive risk taking. MEPs also advocated enabling AIF managers to set their funds' leverage limits based on a list of criteria, with national supervisors and ESMA able to require that these limits be corrected.
Next steps
The agreed text will now be put to a vote of approval at the EP's plenary session on the 11th November. Following the directive's entry into force, Member States will have two years in which to incorporate its rules in their national laws. ESMA and the Commission will also have the considerable task of fleshing out the details of how the directive works, through guidelines and implementing legislation.
Budget 2011: conciliation committee begins work
27-10-2010
EP President Jerzy Buzek and Belgian Prime Minister Yves Leterme opened the first meeting of the conciliation committee for the 2011 budget on Wednesday, a step which highlights the importance of the new budgetary procedure introduced by the Lisbon Treaty. At this first meeting, the parties agreed on a calendar for the coming negotiations, which are due to be completed on Thursday 11 November.
"We are ready to show good will for 2011 and accept a moderate budget“, said Mr Buzek in his opening remarks, adding "In return, we request from the Council an institutional and political commitment on the future financing of EU policies.“ This commitment should be made before the end of the conciliation process.
Mr Buzek, who - like Mr Leterme - was present throughout the meeting, also stressed that Parliament was well aware of the difficult economic situation in the Member States.
Laying down the ground rules
The aim of this first conciliation meeting was to agree on a working method and a calendar for the meetings. Alain Lamassoure, chair of the Budgets Committee, proposed dividing the work into two parts – one to discuss the figures for the 2011 budget and the other to reach a political and legal agreement on the future of the EU budget.
"The EU budget needs more flexibility and we need to find new ways of financing it. In addition, the budget needs to accommodate new competences after 2011, including those stemming from the Lisbon Treaty. We are not going to agree on all this during the conciliation, but we want to agree on a framework and a calendar for our talks“, said Mr Lamassoure.
The budgetary procedure under the Lisbon Treaty puts the Council and the European Parliament on an equal footing for the whole EU budget. Previously, under the Nice Treaty, the Council had the final say on "compulsory expenditure“, mainly related to agriculture, and Parliament the last word on other areas such as cohesion policy.
The conciliation committee is composed of 27 members each from the Parliament and the Council as well as representatives from the Commission, including Budget Commissioner Janusz Lewandowski.
The committee has 21 days to agree on a joint text. If the conciliation succeeds, Parliament and the Council have 14 days to adopt the agreement formally. If no budget is adopted at the beginning of 2011, a sum equivalent to one twelfth of the 2010 budget may be spent each month until there is an agreement.
The next meetings will be:
4 November: trialogue
8 November: trialogue
11 November: final meeting of the conciliation committee
Background on the difference between commitments and payments
27-10-2010
Parliament is raising the EU budget for 2011 by no more than 1.1%. It focuses on "commitments" because these are the real budgetary decisions. Commitments are legal promises to spend money on certain projects, contracts, research, etc - either in the same year as the commitment or later. "Payments" refers to the money that the EU actually expects to pay out in a given year. This background note looks at the implications of cutting payments, as opposed to commitments.
Cutting payments now, while commitments remain the same, would simply mean having to pay the bills later. The European Commission is the institution which is best placed to ascertain which payments are needed a certain year, on the basis of the progress made in the execution of all relevant contracts, projects, etc.
Commitments and payments
The EU budget has two types of budgeting figures, commitments and payments .
The proposed figures for 2011 are, per institution:
2011 budget positions (all figures in million €)
Commission
Council
Parliament
Payments
130,135.9
126,527.1
130,558.9
Commitments
142,565.2
141,777.3
143,069.6
By suggesting a budget only slightly above the Commission's draft budget, Parliament broke with its tradition of proposing a budget above the limits of the long-term budget (also known as the "financial perspective" or multiannual financial framework, MFF), both in total and in all separate headings.
Increase compared to the 2010 budget
The 2010 budget is €141,462.225 million in commitments and €122,946.397 million in payments.
Comparing commitments, the Commission suggested an increase of 0.8%, the Council an increase of 0.2% and Parliament an increase of 1.1%.
All increases are below the EU inflation rate, which was 2.2% in September 2010.
Comparing payments, the Commission suggests an increase of 5.8%, the Council an increase of 2.9% and Parliament an increase of 6.2%.
Which figure should be used - commitments or payments?
Everything that the EU commits itself to do must, sooner or later, be paid for. Payments result directly from commitments. If the EU cuts payments in a given year, it is not cutting costs, but simply removing them from this year's budget. Cutting payments simply postpones costs to a later year, but the bills must still be paid.
If the EU really wants to cut the budget, it needs to reduce commitments - which for instance regulate the contracts the EU signs. If the EU signs contracts worth a reduced amount of money, payments will also be reduced. The Commission calculates an estimate of the payments needed in a given year, based on the commitments for the same year and previous years.
The most important political decisions are one commitments, since they answer the question as to how much the EU should spend. The payments figure answers the question as to in which year a given cost should be paid.
What are the main differences between Parliament and Council?
The Council proposes a series of "cuts" - or rather postponements - of payments in 2011.
Examples (all figures compared to Parliament's reading)
7th framework programme: minus €392.5 million Competitiveness and innovation framework programme: minus €87 million Regional competitiveness and employment objective: minus €742 million Pre-accession instrument for pre-accession: minus €195.9 million Emergency aid reserve: minus €203 million
On commitments, the main differences are about:
research, education and competitiveness: MEPs propose more money for, among other things, lifelong learning (+ €20 million), Erasmus Mundus (+ €22 million) and a series of other posts. To finance this, they want to cut €47 million from the "ITER" fusion energy research project.
agriculture, where MEPs want a dairy fund worth €300 million. The institutions also differ on how much agriculture money Member States will refund to the EU budget during next year. The Commission thinks that this amount will be €72 million, whereas the Council believes it could be as much as €492 million. MEPs believe that the Council estimate is too optimistic and therefore prefer the Commission's more cautious one. The real sum to be paid back to this budget line, called "clearance of accounts", does not depend on the institutions' estimates. However, MEPs prefer to work with a figure that is as realistic as possible, so as to avoid nasty surprises in the end of next year.
foreign affairs, where MEPs want €100 million more for Palestine and the Middle East peace process, €57 million more for the pre-accession instrument and €48 million more for the instrument for co-operation with developed countries. To finance this, MEPs suggest cuts in the Common Foreign and Security Policy (minus €45.7 million), in the instrument for co-operation with industrial countries (minus €23 million) and in the "Banana accompanying measures".
MEPs vote for moderate budget for 2011 but demand negotiations about the future
25-10-2010
The European Parliament is calling for more EU investment in research, innovation, education and energy, as well as increased support for Palestine, but is sticking to a restrictive overall spending level for next year's EU budget. In Wednesday's vote on the 2011 budget, Parliament also demanded negotiations on new sources of financing for the budget as well as pledges to provide sufficient funding for the new tasks and priorities stemming from the Lisbon Treaty.
The vote is important not only for next year's budget but also for future budgets under the current financial perspective (2007-2013) and thereafter.
For 2011, Parliament proposes an increase in commitments of 0.8% as compared to the 2010 budget. MEPs understand the pressures on Member States' budgets and have therefore broken with their tradition of suggesting a notably larger budget than the Commission has proposed. MEPs agreed on a total of €130.56 billion in payments and €143.07 billion in commitments (compared to the Commission's €130.14 billion in payments and €142.56 billion in commitments).
Parliament "understands the concern expressed by some delegations in the Council that the pressures on Member States' budgets are particularly heavy for the financial year 2011 and that savings are all the more necessary", explain MEPs in their resolution.
However, Parliament considers "arbitrary reductions in payment appropriations not to be in line with sound budgeting" and that "arbitrary reductions in commitment appropriations jeopardize the implementation of Union policies and programmes already agreed". This is why MEPs do not support the cuts proposed by the Council.
Mayor increases and cuts per heading
In most budget lines, MEPs restored the Commission's draft budget, after the cuts made by Council. In addition, they adopted other increases and cuts, for example:
1a Competitiveness for growth and employment - MEPs asked for more money for the Lifelong Learning Programme (+€18 million), the Entrepreneurship and Innovation Programme (+€10 million) and Intelligent Energy — Europe programme (+€10 million). To compensate for these increases, MEPs cut the fusion energy research project "ITER" by €47 million.
1b Cohesion for growth and employment - MEPs added a new line, worth €2.5 million, for the Baltic Sea strategy
2 Preservation and management of natural resources - +€300 million for a dairy fund, +€6.7 million for the environment programme Life+ and +€2 million to support for the management of fishery resources
3a Freedom security and justice - +€2.35 million to the Daphne programme for the fight against violence against women and children and +€1 million for prevention of terrorism
3b Citizenship - +€4 million to support the World Special Olympics in Athens and +€3 million to the Youth in Action programme
4 The EU as a global partner - +€100 million to Palestine, the peace process and UNRWA, compensated by cuts in the Banana accompanying measures (-€18 million), in the Cooperation activities other than Official Development Assistance (-€23.5 million) and in the Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP -€45.7 million)
5 Administration - MEPs add money in a reserve, to be paid to employees at the EU institutions in case the Council loses the Court case against the Commission.
All figures are commitments.
Revision of long-term budget framework urgently needed
The resolution points out that the margins in the current long-term budget framework (also called the financial perspective or multiannual financial framework, MFF) are too restrictive. This framework was established for 2007-2013, but does not take account of additional spending as a result of the financial crisis, new policy areas or agreed new tasks stemming from the Lisbon Treaty.
In four new budget lines for "Lisbon mid-term review needs", MEPs ask for a "sufficient level of spending" and "proper involvement of Parliament in the negotiations for a renewed multiannual financial framework".
Opening up discussion on new own resources
Parliament also wants to start talks with the Council about new sources of income for the EU. MEPs ask the Council to open the negotiations on new own resources, adding that this element is a "full part of the overall agreement on the 2011 budget". In addition, they ask the Council and the Commission to "decide on mechanisms to facilitate the transfer of unused appropriations of year N in particular in the context of the revision of the Financial Regulations". Until now, money that is not used has been paid back to the Member States at the end of the year.
Provision for the stability mechanism
The Parliament also wants, by a broad majority, to add two budget lines, one for expenditure and one for revenues, to be created for the EU stabilisation mechanism, which was established by the EU governments after the Greek debt crisis. These lines are still empty, but could be activated if the mechanism is used.
Figures
See link below for table of figures.
Next steps
On 27 October, Parliament and the Council start a conciliation period of 21 days to agree on a joint text. If they can agree, the final budget will be approved in mid-November.
Commitments and payments
For each budget line, there are two different types of budget appropriations: commitments and payments. The commitments refer to how much the EU may commit itself to (e.g. sign a contract or start a tender procedure) in a certain year. The payment level regulates the actual payments being made that year.
There are two budget rapporteurs: Sidonia Jędrzejewska (EPP, PL) is responsible for the European Commission budget, including the EU's operational spending, while Helga Trüpel (Greens/EFA, DE) is leading Parliament's work on the other institutions' budgets.
Climate: 30% emissions target would favour EU economic growth, says Environment Committee
05-10-2010
The EU would be acting in its own economic interest if it raised its 2020 CO2 reduction target to 30%, says Parliament's Environment Committee in a resolution, approved on Tuesday, which also highlights climate aid commitments to developing countries as critical to progress in upcoming international talks in Cancún, Mexico.
The resolution - adopted by the Environment Committee with 35 votes in favour, 20 against and 1 abstention - sets out the committee's position ahead of UN climate talks in Cancún, Mexico (29 November - 10 December). Parliament as a whole is expected to vote on the resolution later this month.
"If the EU is not a leader in climate protection, it will be a loser in economic growth. The EU needs to act in its own interest by stepping up to a 30% reductions target, and in favour of vulnerable developing countries by respecting its financial commitments towards them. Today's Environment Committee resolution points out that a global warming target below 1.5°C, not just below 2°C is needed", said Environment Committee chair Jo Leinen (S&D, DE).
30% less CO 2 = more economic growth
The resolution states that setting a target to reduce CO 2 emissions by 30% by 2020 (based on 1990 levels) is "in the interest of the future economic growth of the European Union". The EU position has hitherto linked a 30% target more closely to conditions (such as an international agreement being in place), than to the benefits that the EU can reap from steering its economy away from fossil fuels and towards green alternatives.
Developing countries
The EU must fulfil its responsibilities, together with the rest of the industrialised world, vis-à-vis developing countries, stress MEPs. On a critical issue for Cancún, MEPs call on EU Member States to make good on their €7.2 billion pledge of "fast-start" financing to help developing countries adapt to - and mitigate - the effects of climate change. By 2020, the EU should contribute €30 billion per year (additional to other overseas development aid) towards a global climate fund, they add.
Forests
Forests are critical to climate because of their capacity to absorb carbon dioxide, say MEPs, who call on the EU to support "REDD+", an update to an initiative that is designed to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation. But tighter definitions of forests are needed to ensure funding is not sidetracked to commercial plantations, they add.
MEPs push for nature reserve protection of 20% of the world's land and seas
27-10-2010
The European Parliament delegation at the biodiversity convention in Nagoya, Japan, is pushing for 20% of the world's land and seas to be protected as nature reserves. MEPs are calling for a comprehensive agreement to be concluded, as the basis for practical measures to be presented at the next convention in two years' time.
The European Parliament delegation at the biodiversity convention in Nagoya, Japan, is pushing for 20% of the world's land and seas to be protected as nature reserves. MEPs are calling for a comprehensive agreement to be concluded, as the basis for practical measures to be presented at the next convention in two years' time.
"We are biting the hand that feeds us if we do not halt the loss of animal and plant species", said delegation leader Jo Leinen (S&D, DE), adding that "equally important as fighting climate change is making sure that stable ecosystems will also exist in future. Biodiversity is not only about protecting tigers, pandas or natural parks but about the livelihood of future generations". He also underlined that the EU and its Member States must lead the fight to protect biodiversity, even given the present economic situation.
Economic value of biodiversity
"I very much welcome that we are now able to quantify the loss of biodiversity. Money is a language which most of us understand well and is a common denominator for all of us. But it is not only about quantifiable values, but about the common global goods which we should not squander", said Mr Leinen. "Let's hope that the TEEB report will make the same for biodiversity as the Stern report did for climate change". The Economics of Ecosystems of Biodiversity, known as the TEEB study, highlights the economic costs of biodiversity loss. For example, insect pollination alone is worth about €1 billion a year.
Global Strategic Plan
Parliament's Nagoya conference resolution says ambitious targets are needed for 2020:
• including the values of biodiversity in national accounts,
• eliminating harmful subsidies for biodiversity (e.g. agriculture, fisheries),
• zero net deforestation,
• halting overfishing and destructive fishing practices, and
• protecting 20% of land, fresh water and sea areas.
Access and benefit sharing (ABS)
"Without a successful conclusion of negotiations on an international regime for access to and sharing the benefits of genetic resources and a wider agreement on the strategy to be followed after 2010, the aims of the Convention may not be achieved", warned MEPs. They insist that the ABS protocol negotiations must lead to clear and transparent rules on access to genetic resources and fair benefits for host countries. They also point out that biodiversity, the preservation of plant and animal species, also helps tackle climate change.
Biofuels
Parliament underlines the need for the Conference of Parties (COP 10) to adopt a recommendation on biofuels, given the extreme importance of assessing the direct and indirect impacts of biofuels on biodiversity and of establishing biofuel certification and sustainability. "Destroying natural habitats and continued logging of rain forests to make way for biofuel crops are definitely not a solution", warn MEPs.
About Parliament's COP-10 delegation
The delegation, in Nagoya from 25 to 27 October, is headed by EP Environment Committee Chair Jo Leinen (S&D, DE). Its members are Richard Seeber (EPP, AT), Esther de Lange (EPP, NL), Bogusław Sonik (EPP, PL), Karin Kadenbach (S&D, AT), Sandrine Belier (Greens/EFA, FR), Kartika Tamara Liotard (GUE/NGL, NL), Anna Rosbach (EFD, DK), Gerben-Jan Gerbrandy (ALDE, NL), Bas Eickhout (Greens/EFA, NL) and Miroslav Ouzky (ECR, CZ).
Data protection: how to bring Americans and Europeans closer together?
26-10-2010
Though the Swift data privacy issue not forgotten, Europeans and Americans are trying to overcome their data protection differences via a possible police and judicial co-operation agreement. At a Civil Liberties Committee hearing on Monday, MEPs debated a draft negotiating brief proposed by the Commission to the Council. Parliament will have a right of veto over the final agreement.
"We would like to adjust the trajectory" with this agreement, said rapporteur Jan-Philipp Albrecht (Greens/EFA, DE), the new text of which "must remedy certain shortcomings which we have identified in recent years". Simon Busuttil (EPP, MT), welcomed a "change of approach" by the US authorities: "one year ago, the United States seemed unaware of the existence of this Parliament" during debates on the Swift agreement. The Americans "will have to be as flexible as possible, because we shall not be easy partners", he warned.
Don't bet security against privacy
Europeans and Americans should not bet security against privacy - "we want both", said US Ambassador to the EU William E. Kennard. "Neither must take precedence", acknowledged Alexander Alvaro (ALDE, DE), who wondered where the dividing line should be drawn between "what is legal and what is legitimate, especially when gathering personal data "becomes an end in itself".
The EU's Belgian Presidency would like the negotiating brief to be approved in December, said current President of the Council Stefaan De Clerck.
For the time being, "a patchwork" of sector-specific deals and "about a hundred" bilateral agreements
"Today we face a patchwork" of cross-Atlantic data exchange deals, "all of which have proven their worth, but the overall result is not very satisfactory", said the European Commission Director-General for justice Françoise Le Bail, justifying the Commission proposal. "It's a real puzzle, which complicates the work of officials and policemen, as well as the exercise of citizens' rights" added Mr De Clerck.
"We have different systems but common values" observed Mr Kennard, expressing concern about certain aspects of the negotiating brief proposed by the Commission. "We fear that a possible retroactive application could compromise the one hundred various agreements already signed. They might have to be reopened and renegotiated", which could take "years, or indeed decades", he said.
"I suppose you have a list" of these agreements, said Stavros Lambrinidis (S&D, EL). "Which of them would pose a problem?" he asked, adding that "if all the bilateral agreements more or less comply with the proposed data protection principles", then "the obstacle should not be too difficult to overcome".
Right of appeal: revise the US Privacy Act?
The agreement as envisaged by the Commission "will guarantee a certain number of basic rights for those whose data is gathered" to enable them to take legal action, in Europe or the USA, against abuses of these rights, explained Ms Le Bail. "A key issue is recognition - or otherwise - that European citizens possess the same rights as Americans under the Privacy Act. And only Congress can change that", observed Rui Tavares (GUE/NGL, PT).
"I don't think that Congress can reopen debate on the Privacy Act. The Obama Adminstration does not want this, and personal view is that it won't happen", replied Mr Kennard. Many other legal remedies could be used to solve the problem, he added.
"Standards first, then co-operation"
"I found the Ambassador's contribution somewhat disappointing, said Douwe Korff, a professor of international law at the London Metropolitan University. "We have common values, but the US rides roughshod over some of them", he observed, noting that "Guantanamo was opened to avoid the protection of US constitutional law". He urged MEPs to "first insist on decent standards - only thereafter will co-operation be possible".
"There are not wicked Americans on one side and good Europeans on the other" said committee chair Sophie in 't Veld (ALDE, NL), noting that on the issue of Guantanamo, "not a single European government justified" its complicity in extraordinary rendition.
EP President Buzek on meeting of political group leaders with Hillary Clinton
14-10-2010
The US Secretary of State, Hillary Clinton, today held an exchange of views with the President of the European Parliament, Jerzy Buzek, and the leaders of the Political Groups in the European Parliament in Brussels.
After the meeting EP President Buzek said: "I was delighted to welcome Secretary Clinton to the European Parliament earlier today for discussions on a broad range of international issues.
Since the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty - which has made the European Parliament a co-equal partner with the Council of Ministers in the EU legislative and budgetary processes - the US Administration has been quick to understand the importance of engaging actively with the Parliament. We greatly welcome their open, engaged approach, of which visits like this are an important example. Mrs Clinton said she was very excited by our joint work in building closer EP links with both the Administration and Congress in Washington.
We all expressed our strong commitment to making the new system of EU diplomacy a success. We discussed the role and potential of the new European External Action Service. Just as it is in Europe's interest to speak with one voice on the international stage, so it is in America's to have a strong, coherent and united transatlantic partner.
We also agreed on the need to address together key challenges, such as the environment and climate change, energy security, terrorism and organised crime, and the search for a peaceful solution in the Middle East. Mrs Clinton expressed strong appreciation for the EU's active leadership role in several fields.
We spoke in depth about the EU's neighbours in the Western Balkans, as well as countries of the Eastern Partnership and Russia. We have a shared vision of the vital role that the EU can play in helping to stabilise the countries of the Western Balkans - where Secretary Clinton had just completed an important visit - by giving them a realistic European perspective. We should fully engage with Russia on common problems, whilst insisting on respect for freedom, human rights and democracy.
We look forward to continuing to deepen the dialogue with our US partners, as we seek solutions together to the many challenges - and indeed opportunities - we face in today's uncertain world."
Talks on anti-counterfeiting agreement must be more transparent, say MEPs
09-09-2010
MEPs have called for more transparency in the ongoing negotiations for a global anti-counterfeiting trade agreement (ACTA) and have asked the Commission to make all related documents public. Parliament insists that ACTA should not restrict access to legal, affordable and safe medicines.
ACTA is a planned new multilateral agreement between the EU and other countries such as the US, Canada, Japan, Australia and Mexico aimed at combating infringements of intellectual property rights, for example the piracy of music, films and clothing.
Full transparency
By Thursday, a majority of MEPs had signed a written declaration calling on the Commission to make all documents relating to the ongoing negotiations publicly available. A declaration supported by more than half the total number of MEPs is deemed to represent the official position of Parliament.
The declaration argues that the agreement should not impose harmonisation of EU copyright, patent or trademark law nor weaken fundamental rights such as freedom of expression and the right to privacy.
Access to safe medicines
It emphasises that economic and innovation risks must be evaluated before introducing criminal sanctions where civil measures are already in place. In addition, ACTA should not harm global access to legal, affordable and safe medicines.
Plenary debate
In the plenary debate on 8 September, Trade Commissioner Karel de Gucht reassured MEPs that ACTA would not be "about checking on the content of travellers’ laptops or computers", and would "not lead to limitation of civil liberties or harassment of consumers".
The agreement "will not change any EU legislation through the back door", he added. Mr De Gucht also said ACTA would not hamper access to generic medicines. As to transparency, he promised that the Commission would continue to keep Parliament abreast of the negotiations.
Background
Parliament adopted a resolution last March calling for the negotiations to be transparent. MEPs demanded then that no personal searches should be conducted at EU borders and that the agreement should not introduce any kind of "three strikes" internet disconnection as a penalty for three online copyright infringements.
The 10th round of ACTA negotiations was held in Washington from 16 to 20 August this year and the next round will take place in Tokyo from 23 September to 1 October.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
