EU-Cuba relations: which way now?
Human rights
Committees Human Rights
2010-11-09 - 13:18
The release of political prisoners by the Cuban government in July evoked differing responses among members of the EP Subcommittee on Human Rights at a meeting with Council on Monday to discuss the EU's next steps.
MEPs were discussing the upcoming review of the EU common position on Cuba in the light of a reflection period launched within the Council to assess the best way forward for EU-Cuban relations following the prisoner release.
Frank Duhamel, the Belgian chair of the Latin America working group of the Council, briefed the MEPs about the incipient reflection process, which for the time being envisages three options towards Cuba: to maintain the unilateral common position dates back to 1996, to make use of all existing bilateral instruments, or to open up the relationship to allow more trade and cooperation.
Renate Weber (ALDE, RO) disagreed with a possible revision of the common position, saying that the recent expulsion of political prisoners in Cuba "cannot be seen as a positive step" nor can its so-called economic liberalisation, which she said was mostly caused by the near-collapse of the Cuban economy.
Raimon Obiols (S&D, ES) believed the Human Rights Subcommittee should be sending out a "weighted and balanced message" as this would increase Parliament's credibility when dealing with human rights. Referring to the release of political prisoners he said that "thanks to dialogue you get results which perhaps are not to be celebrated, but still better than sanctions which have merely consolidated the Castro regime."
José Ignacio Salafranca (EPP, ES) declared that "the Council's common position says two very straightforward things: we have to obtain the unconditional and immediate release of prisoners, which in fact is not "unconditional" because they had to leave their country and it was not "immediate" because the agreement with the Catholic Church provides for the release of the 50 prisoners and the deadline was yesterday and there are still 13 that are not released." "Is this a positive development?" he asked the Council representative.
He also mentioned that the Sakharov Prize for 2010 has been awarded to Cuban political dissident Guillermo Fariñas, who will probably not be allowed to pick up the prize.
Background
On 26 October, the Foreign Affairs Council mandated High Representative Catherine Ashton to explore the possibilities on the way forward for relations with Cuba, and to report back to the Council as soon as possible "within the framework of EU's common position." She is expected to report back in December.
20101108IPR92652 Sakharov Prize Website of Subcommittee on Human Rights
EN
1
LINK
/parliament/public/staticDisplay.do?language=EN&id=42
EN
2
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=DROI
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
