MEPs quiz Commissioner Füle on EU enlargement strategy
Enlargement
Committees Foreign Affairs
2010-11-10 - 11:26
No country will join the European Union before being 100% ready, but the EU itself must be 100% ready before it takes in any new country, EU enlargement Commissioner Stefan Füle told the Foreign Affairs Committee on Tuesday, after the Commission had released its reports on nine EU hopefuls.
Replying to questions raised by José Salafranca (EPP, ES) on Turkey, the Commissioner believed “not many people can be satisfied with the current pace of negotiations” with Turkey. To “avoid losing momentum”, it is urgent that Turkey should implement in a non-discriminatory manner the additional protocol (on trade relations) to its association agreement with the EU, he added.
Mr Füle could not give any guarantee on opening further EU accession negotiating chapters in the near future, but said that “any progress would accelerate the process”. He also said he had been impressed by the openness and enthusiasm on both sides in Cyprus. Mr Füle confirmed that the Commission fully supports efforts under way to reach a settlement on the Cyprus issue.
Several MEPs underlined that Ankara should respect the freedom of expression.
Montenegro
Foreign Affairs Committee Chairman Gabriele Albertini (EPP-ED, IT) together with several other MEPs, expressed support for the Commission recommendation on granting Montenegro EU accession candidate status. "We support it and ask the Council to follow it as soon as possible. Obviously, now Montenegro will have to show its ability to do the necessary reforms," said Mr Albertini, in a separate press statement before the vote.
The date for launching negotiations with Podgorica was now “very much in the hands of Montenegro”, replied Mr Füle.
Croatia
Rapporteur on Croatia Hannes Swoboda (S& D, AT), expressed hope that the country could join during the next EU presidency. Alexander Lambsdorff (ALDE, DE), observed that the EU should not mention any date, in order to restore its credibility. The Commissioner said concluding negotiations with Croatia in the first half of 2011 was “theoretically possible”, but added that “the final leap is sometimes the most difficult”.
Albania
Eduard Kukan (EPP, SK), chair of the EP Delegation for Relations with Albania, appreciated "several positive moments that took place over the last year, such as visa liberalization which brought free travel through Europe for most people of the Western Balkans. This trend should go further and include the whole region," he said.
Most MEPs agreed with the Commissioner that the political stalemate in Albania had been hampering the country’s efforts to become a candidate for EU membership.
FYROM
Several MEPs raised the issue of the name of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (FYROM). Mr Füle expressed hope that the current negotiations between Greece and FYROM might lead to a solution. The Commissioner believed “both Prime Ministers realize what is at stake”.
Serbia and Kosovo
Mr Füle praised Serbia's progress towards meeting the political criteria for membership. However, as two key war fugitives remain at large, “full cooperation with war crimes tribunal in The Hague (ICTY), remains an essential condition for the membership in the EU,” he said, adding that it is also “urgent” for Serbia to demonstrate a “constructive attitude” towards Kosovo’s participation in regional trade and co-operation.
Responding to his call on Serbia to strengthen its cooperation with the EULEX rule of law mission with respect to the north of Kosovo, Parliament's rapporteur on Kosovo Ulrike Lunacek (Greens/EFA, AT), reiterated that to succeed, this mission needs more judges from the Member States.
Mr Füle also said the Commission had undertaken that after the expected visa liberalization for Albanian and Bosnian citizens, negotiations on visa-free travel for Kosovo could follow suit.
Iceland
Finally, the Commissioner underlined that substantial efforts were needed to inform Icelandic citizens about what EU membership entails.
Next steps
Foreign Affairs Committee MEPs will now consider the Commission reports in depth. Positive developments and remaining shortcomings in each candidate or aspiring country will be reflected in annual progress reports that the Parliament’s standing rapporteurs will prepare for approval early next year.
Foreign Affairs Committee rapporteurs
Doris Pack (EPP, DE), for Bosnia and Herzegovina
Cristian Dan Preda (EPP, RO), for Iceland
Ria Oomen Ruijten (EPP, NL), for Turkey
Hannes Swoboda (S&D, AT), for Croatia
Zoran Thaler (S&D, SI), for the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (FYROM)
Jelko Kacin (ALDE, SI), for Serbia
Ulrike Lunacek (Greens/EFA, AT) for Kosovo
Charles Tannock (ECR, UK), for Montenegro
Nikolaos Chountis (GUE/NGL, EL), for Albania
In the chair: Gabriele Albertini (EPP, IT)
20101108IPR92635 Foreign Affairs Committee
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=AFET
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
