Stepping up the fight against people trafficking
Human rights
2010-12-13 - 11:07
Silhouette of a woman ©BELGA European Parliament and European governments moving towards agreement on tougher rules Differences between countries rules make trafficking easier Traffickers could face up to 10 years in prison Some MEPs want those who buy services from trafficked women punished Every year several hundred thousand people are believed to be trafficked into the EU or within the Union itself. To come to terms with this serious crime and gross violation of human rights, members of the Civil Liberties' and Women's Rights committees on 29 November backed an agreement with European governments on new tougher rules. The whole European Parliament will now debate and vote on these rules.
The aim is to create a more hostile environment for the human traffickers, stronger protection for the victims and more rigorous prevention.
Many of the victims - mainly women and girls - are exploited for prostitution (an estimated 40%), or for menial labour - about a third.
Ahead of the debate Swedish Social Democrat Anna Hedh who acted as rapporteur for the Civil Liberties Committee says the agreement is "much better than what I ever believed we would get".
She added, "we have managed to strengthen the protection for victims with a clear focus on rights, extra protection for children and added a clear gender perspective."
"The important thing is the will to tackle this issue, so that people are not shutting their eyes to this violation of human rights and are creating a moral expectation to punish the offenders and help the victims," according to Slovak centre right MEP Edit Bauer (EPP), the rapporteur for the Women's Rights Committee.
Ms Bauer was keen to advocate the importance of help for the victims: "Assistance and support should be provided to victims before, during and for an appropriate time after criminal proceeding," she told us, adding that it should not to be "made conditional on the victim's willingness to cooperate in the criminal investigation, prosecution and trial."
A requirement not to prosecute or impose penalties on victims is explicitly stated in the text.
A grimly lucrative trade in misery
Human beings are trafficked for many reasons. Sexual exploitation, forced labour, begging, removal of organs and illegal adoption are some examples covered by the new rules.
This grim business is highly lucrative, the second most "well paid" illegal crime after weapons and before drugs, and so far the risk for people involved have been fairly low.
"The new rules will hurt a bit more," said Ms Hedh. "The rules are much better than before. On the one hand the level of sanctions is higher; on the other hand we have the confiscation of assets".
Ms Bauer explained that "Member States are encouraged to spend these assets on assistance and protection of victims, including the compensation of victims and EU trans-border law enforcement counter trafficking activities."
Individual traffickers can face up to 10 years in prison. Currently levels of sanctions vary between Member States.
Punishing those who buy services
For Ms Hedh a key element is the discouragement of demand - and punishment not only for the trafficker but also the person who buys a service from a trafficked person. "When I started to work on this proposal one of the most important issues was to tackle demand. Demand is the root of evil".
She managed to get a majority of MEPs on board to make it a criminal offence to knowingly use the services of a trafficked person. However the final text agreed with Member States (and adopted Monday 29 November in Committee) is less tough: it "encourages" making it a crime.
What happens next?
The new Directive will replace current rules dating from 2002. EU countries will have two years to transpose the rules. Denmark and the UK have opt outs, although the latter can still opt-in at a later stage.
20101129STO01989 Newsletter Watch live Press release 29.11.2010
EN
1
PHOTO
20101126PHT01605.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/en/pressroom/content/20101206NEW06929/3/html/Tougher-rules-to-combat-human-trafficking
EN
3
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/frd/live/live-video?language=en
EN
4
LINK
/en/pressroom/content/20101129IPR02528
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
