Clearer rights for European families
Judicial cooperation
Committees Legal Affairs
2010-11-30 - 19:26
Twelve million Europeans live in a Member State other than their own. When starting a family, ending a marriage or planning their inheritance, they face all kinds of legal and administrative obstacles. These issues were discussed on Tuesday at the European Parliament by MEPs, national MPs and experts.
Greater legal certainty in cross-border family law and inheritance, the protection of children of international couples and the recognition of civil status in cross-border situations were among the matters explored at the meeting.
“As legislators we can make life easier for European citizens”, said Legal Affairs Committee chair Klaus-Heiner Lehne (EPP, DE). “Life in a mobile Europe is not as simple as it should be”, argued Diana Wallis (ALDE, UK). “If we simplify all the legal issues and more citizens take up the offer of free movement, this may benefit Europe’s economic capacity”, she added.
Belgian minister Melchior Wathelet explained what the Belgian EU Presidency had achieved on cross-border divorce, inheritance law and child abduction. Commissioner Viviane Reding announced there would be new legislation on matrimonial property rights (in early 2011), the recognition of civil status documents (2013) and the recognition and enforcement of decisions on parental responsibility.
Family law
Cross-border divorce, property rules for marriages, the mutual recognition of same-sex marriages and family mediation in Europe were the first topics discussed. Parliament’s rapporteur on a draft regulation on cross-border divorce, Tadeusz Zwiefka (EPP, PL), pointed out that family law “is an extremely sensitive and delicate area” and called for “clear definitions”. There were more than one million divorces in the EU in 2007, of which 140,000 (13 %) were international.
Experts concluded that more legal certainty was needed in cross-border situations. Recognising other Member States’ rules should help tackle this situation. Arcadio Díaz Tejera, from the Spanish Senate, suggested moving forward this way.
Cross-border inheritance
Cross-border inheritance cases could be simplified by the European Succession Certificate being proposed by the Commission and currently under discussion in Parliament and Council. The MEP responsible, Kurt Lechner (EPP, DE), explained that it “would have positive implications for the internal market”. Although discussions were difficult, he was confident that “a successful result will be reached”. Almost 450,000 inheritance cases in the EU have a cross-border dimension.
Lord Bowness, of the House of Lords, recalled that the UK government had not opted in to this proposal because of its “complexities”. “We do see the need for some change but we believe that with this solution there is a clear danger of complicating things more than they are now”, contended Lord Bowness.
Parental responsibility and protection of children
Parental responsibility, child custody, visiting rights in cross-border separations and child abduction were the issues discussed in the third session. “We must accept these new challenges and remove barriers for EU citizens”, said Alexandra Thein (ALDE, DE) of the EP Legal Affairs Committee. She also wanted to “close the legal loopholes” remaining in child abduction cases. Experts and national MPs agreed on the need to improve recognition and enforcement of national court decisions. They also called for quicker and simpler judgment procedures.
Recognition of civil status
The last session focused on the recognition of civil status documents. “We need to ensure that people’s dignity is respected”, said Luigi Berlinguer (S&D, IT), Vice-Chair of the EP Legal Affairs Committee, adding that “identity has to be recognised in each Member State”. According to Mr Berlinguer, “58% of EU citizens believe there is a need for better instruments for recognising civil status”.
In the chair: Klaus-Heiner LEHNE (EPP, DE)
30.11.2010
20101129IPR02749 Legal Affairs Committee Watch the meeting
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=JURI
EN
2
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/frd/vod/search-committees?language=en
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
