EP President Jerzy Buzek on first anniversary of the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty
Treaties
General
2010-12-01 - 18:35
"In this short time, the Treaty has brought major and very positive changes to the way that the European Union conducts its business. Embodying the most important set of changes, Lisbon has established a new balance of power within and between the EU's institutions - one which allows us to function more efficiently, more transparently and be more accountable."
Jerzy Buzek, President of the European Parliament made the following statement on the 1st anniversary of the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty - 1 December 2010:
"The new Treaty of Lisbon has now been in force for one year. Like a new born child first learns to walk, before it is ready to set to travel the world, the European institutions and member states are learning to operate in a new Lisbon environment.
In this short time, the Treaty has brought major and very positive changes to the way that the European Union conducts its business. Embodying the most important set of changes, Lisbon has established a new balance of power within and between the EU's institutions - one which allows us to function more efficiently, more transparently and be more accountable.
The current economic and financial crisis has from the outset challenged the European Union and the Treaty provisions. The more our European response is based on the "community method" the more effective it will be. The Union must emerge from the crisis strengthened.
The role of the European Parliament has significantly increased. After Lisbon, the Parliament now enjoys co-decision in even more policy fields - notably agriculture, fisheries, justice and home affairs, and external trade policy. Even in the external field, it now has a veto over nearly all international agreements. Lisbon also finally makes the Parliament co-equal with the Council on all aspects of the annual EU Budget and gives it a right of veto over future financing - the Multiannual Financial Framework.
The European Parliament takes advantage of the new competences in a very serious, responsible and constructive manner. This is particularly clear lately during the negotiations on the 2011 EU budget. We are the guardians of sound European finances. The coherence of new tasks entrusted to the EU and the way they will be financed is of paramount importance for us.
No treaty itself guarantees European solidarity. Solidarity needs to derive from our convictions and actions. A strong Europe based on the principle of solidarity is the only possible solution. If that is not the case, then our integration project is doomed to fail. We need solidarity today in a time of crisis, much more than ever before".
20101201IPR04648 President's web pages
EN
1
LINK
/president/view/en/the_president.html;jsessionid=DD8C43B8293FFEAA2D4C50B542B0DE34
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
