Serbia's EU membership path
External relations
Committees Foreign Affairs
2010-12-01 - 19:33
Serbia's progress on reform, and the Council's recent request that the Commission examine its EU membership application, were welcomed in a Foreign Affairs Committee resolution approved on Wednesday. However, "full cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia" - including delivering the last two fugitives to The Hague - "is a fundamental condition for Serbia to progress on the path to EU membership", it adds.
"This is an important moment for the integration of the Western Balkan countries to the EU. Croatia is winding up its accession negotiations, and Montenegro will become a candidate country this month. This is a very positive development for the whole region, which creates a momentum that Serbia should take advantage of", said Parliament's standing rapporteur on Serbia, Jelko Kacin (ALDE, SL) ahead of the Foreign Affairs Committee vote (51 in favour, 3 against and 2 abstentions).
Dialogue with Kosovo: commitment and readiness to compromise
Urging that talks with Kosovo start "without delay", MEPs welcome Serbia's willingness to engage in dialogue within the EU framework, underlining that the commitment and readiness of both sides to compromise is needed for long-term stability and for improving people's wellbeing. No abuse of visa liberalisation
Since December 2009, Serbian nationals may travel visa-free in the Schengen area while EU citizens may travel to Serbia with an ID card. The Serbian authorities should "adopt adequate measure and make full efforts in order to limit possibilities to abuse the visa free regime, in particular to ensure that Serbian citizens are properly informed about their rights and obligations stemming from the visa free regime", say MEPs. Press freedom
A strong and independent media is important and there should no political pressures or other influences which could obstruct its independence, say MEPs, who condemn attacks on and threats against Serbian journalists and call on the authorities to investigate them fully and bring the perpetrators to justice. Internally displaced persons and Roma
Serbia is the country with the highest number of refugees and internally displaced persons in Europe, facing housing problems and poverty. More progress must be made towards a durable solution to refugee problems throughout the region, say MEPs. Furthermore, as a result of the readmission agreements with EU countries, up to 150,000 returnees are foreseen and their "successful reintegration will require thorough preparations, particularly on the level of local authorities", adds the text. Roma people encounter multiple discriminations, including forceful relocation and lack of access to the labour market - only 5% of them have a permanent job. They should be provided with ID cards, should have better access to housing, education and healthcare, say MEPs. Economic criteria
Serbia faces structural economic shortcomings, such as the existence of monopolies and delays in privatisation, which "severely hamper the development of a fully functioning market economy", say MEPs. Swift ratification of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement
As well as the resolution on Serbia's EU integration process, MEPs also approved the EU-Serbia Stabilisation and Association Agreement, which needs Parliament's consent to enter into force. EU Member States began ratifying this agreement in June 2010, and 11 have completed the process so far. MEPs call on the remaining Member States "to swiftly proceed with the ratification procedure."
“I would like to reiterate the importance of this Agreement for the process for the accession of the Western Balkans countries. It provides the EU and aspirant countries with a political and legal framework for mutual relations, which has contributed much to the stability of the region. It has made EU prospects tangible and brought accession negotiations within reach", said Mr Kacin.
Both resolutions are to be put to a plenary vote at the January 2011 session. Background
Following Serbia's EU membership application, submitted in December 2009, on 25 October 2010 the Council asked the European Commission to launch preparatory work with a view to issuing in autumn 2011 an opinion on Serbia's membership prospects. In the chair: Gabriele Albertini (EPP, IT)
20101129IPR02768 Foreign Affairs Committee Watch webstreaming live
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=AFET
EN
2
LINK
/eng-internet-publisher/eplive/public/default.do?language=en
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
