Illegal logging: MEPs give green light for agreements with Congo and Cameroun
External/international trade
Committees International Trade
2010-12-02 - 14:54
In a bid to fight the trade in illegally-harvested timber, the EP International Trade Committee gave the go-ahead on Wednesday for the Commission to conclude voluntary partnership agreements with Congo and Cameroon aimed at stopping illegal logging, which is said to be the main cause of deforestation in the world.
Voluntary partnership agreements between the EU and wood exporting countries are the cornerstone of the EU 2003 Action Plan for Forest Law Enforcement, Governance and Trade (FLEGT). They seek to combat the bad governance practices and corruption from which the illegal trade stems and also provide for import controls at EU borders.
In two reports drafted by Yannick Jadot (Greens/EFA, FR), MEPs nevertheless voiced reservations about the implementation of the accords, and made suggestions about deforestation, environmental protection and the need for more technical and financial resources.
Environment protection and deforestation
MEPs point out that Cameroon and Congo are not only among the largest exporters of hardwoods to Europe but are also the source of a large part of the illegally-harvested timber. Political and regulatory reforms made under the agreements are intended to ensure that all timber products exported from these countries to European markets are legal and thus help protect the environment by fighting climate change and biodiversity loss.
MEPs urge the Commission to see that the agreements do not encourage "expansion of the industrial exploitation of forests in the intact forest zones that are carbon-rich and in other forests that play a valuable role in conserving biodiversity".
Technical and financial resources needed
The agreements stress that technical and financial resources will be needed to support a system for verifying the legality of timber. However, in formal terms, the accords have no direct financial impact on the EU budget. MEPs therefore urge the European Union to “think about substantial financial support” for the implementation of the agreements. MEPs ask the Commission to estimate, in the next EU annual budget, the level of financial aid needed to ensure proper implementation of such accords.
The Commission will also present an assessment, within six months, of the “real contributions” of the agreements to sustainable management of biodiversity resources, the fight against climate change and the reduction of deforestation and forest degradation.
Next steps
Under the Lisbon Treaty, Parliament's consent is required for agreements of this kind, although MEPs cannot amend the legislation. However, to make their voice heard, MEPs are drafting a motion for resolution and an oral question on the voluntary partnership agreements to be discussed with the Commission and adopted at the plenary session in January, when the final vote takes place.
The first FLEGT licences issued only for timber exported to the EU are expected by 2011 (Congo) and 2012 (Cameroon).
01/12/2010 In the chair: Vital Moreira (S&D, PT)
20101129IPR02828 Committee on International Trade Watch webstreaming live
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=INTA
EN
2
LINK
/eng-internet-publisher/eplive/public/default.do?language=en
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
