Parliament calls for regional policy with more local involvement
Regional policy
Plenary sittings
2010-12-14 - 14:00
Greater involvement of regional and local stakeholders, transparent decentralised management and more effective monitoring must be at the heart of the EU's future regional cohesion policy, says the European Parliament. In two resolutions adopted on Tuesday, MEPs set out pointers for the improved use of structural funds on the basis of partnership and good governance at European, national and local level.
The Commission must beef up its monitoring role so as to reduce the rate of error highlighted in the recent report by the Court of Auditors, argues the first resolution, by Ramona Manescu (ALDE, RO). The Commission should strengthen its supervisory role to reduce the level of error, improve the control system and increase assistance to sub-national authorities and beneficiaries.
"Local and regional authorities must also be consulted and involved in all stages of legislation relating to the regions, to make them more accountable", stressed the rapporteur during the plenary debate in Strasbourg on Monday evening. Such an approach will lead in the long term to a more result-oriented policy, she believes.
Encouraging cooperation between regions
The resolution, which was approved by 615 votes to 15 with 39 abstentions, urges the Commission "to develop a guide for public and private actors on how to implement in practice the principles of multi-level governance and the integrated approach". Better cooperation could be encouraged between regions in different Member States, for example through European Groupings of Territorial Cooperation.
Improving quality rather than quantity of controls
"A stronger role for the regional and local level must correspond to a strengthened supervisory role for the Commission", says the resolution, which advocates "focusing on checking audit systems rather than single projects" and calls for "an EU certification system for national audit bodies".
In this way, Parliament underlines "its commitment to a strong and properly funded cohesion policy that ensures that all European Union regions develop harmoniously". MEPs also call for "the budget for the policy to be maintained after 2013 and for any attempt to renationalise it to be rejected".
Investing in innovation and infrastructure
In presenting his report titled "Achieving real territorial, social and economic cohesion within the EU - a sine qua non for global competitiveness", Petru Luhan (EPP, RO) emphasises the need to increase synergy between the structural funds and European funding measures for innovation, research and development to sustain regional competitiveness. Alongside large-scale transport and energy infrastructure projects, Mr Luhan calls for simpler procedures, in particular with a view to "facilitating access to funding, especially for SMEs, introducing innovative incentive mechanisms based on achieving objectives linked to intelligent, sustainable and integrative growth". Mr Luhan's resolution was approved by 491 votes to 117 with 13 abstentions.
20101213IPR09429 Texts of reports as adopted will be available here (click on 14 December) Profile of rapporteur Ramona Manescu (ALDE, RO) Profile of rapporteur Petru Luhan (EPP, RO)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do;jsessionid=500E41D3B1FCB6BBEF55327AE0DD70A4.node1?language=EN
EN
2
LINK
/members/archive/alphaOrder/view.do?language=EN&id=39717
EN
3
LINK
/members/archive/alphaOrder/view.do?language=EN&id=96823
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
