Parliament backs European heritage logo
Culture
Plenary sittings
2010-12-16 - 13:03
Monuments and sites of natural, archaeological, urban or cultural value could be awarded a European Heritage Label, after the European Parliament gave its backing on Thursday to plans put forward by the Commission.
The aims include raising young people’s awareness of their common cultural heritage, enhancing their sense of European identity and promoting sites as tourist destinations.
A label could also be awarded to places of remembrance, to "intangible heritage" associated with a place and even to "contemporary heritage". However, in its amendments, Parliament stresses that "the attribution of the European label shall not entail any obligation of an urban planning, judicial, landscaping, mobility or architectural nature".
Nevertheless, Member States would be obliged to monitor labelled sites and ensure access to them for the widest possible public, including internet access, with special attention to elderly and disabled people. Although the label would normally be awarded permanently, it could under certain circumstances be withdrawn by the Commission or by countries themselves.
A new scheme
The new EU programme would supersede an intergovernmental heritage scheme dating from 2006 which has no European-level supervision. Parliament voted not to integrate in the new programme the 67 sites that already have a label under the existing scheme. The new programme should initially only involve EU Member States, say MEPs, although in future it could include non-EU countries.
Under a Parliament amendment, each Member State would pre-select up to two sites every two years, instead of annually as proposed by the Commission. One site per country would then be chosen by the Commission, with the help of a geographically balanced panel of 13 independent experts nominated by Parliament, the Council, the Commission and the Committee of the Regions. Countries could also nominate sites jointly.
The legislation is being piloted through Parliament by Chrystoula Paliadeli (S&D, EL), whose report was adopted today by 497 votes to 18 with 41 abstentions. Following Parliament's first-reading vote, the legislation now goes to the Council of Ministers.
20101215IPR10448 Adopted text will be available here (click on 16 December) Profile of rapporteur Chrysoula PALIADELI (S&D, EL)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
2
LINK
/members/expert/alphaOrder/view.do?language=EN&id=97007
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
