Côte d'Ivoire: EP backs EU sanctions and calls on Gbagbo to step down
External relations
Plenary sittings
2010-12-16 - 14:00
Parliament backs the EU decision to impose sanctions against Laurent Gbagbo, and calls on foreign affairs High Representative Ashton to table a new initiative in support of Côte d'Ivoire's democratically-elected President Alassane Ouattara, in a resolution by all political groups and approved by a show of hands in plenary on Thursday.
MEPs call upon Mr Gbagbo to step down and hand over power to Mr Ouattara, and upon all other parties involved "to avoid any risk of an escalation of tension and to prevent any confrontation".
Confusion over the 28 November presidential election outcome left Côte d'Ivoire with two would-be presidents and two rival cabinets. MEPs - like other EU institutions, the UN Security Council and many western countries - have thrown their support behind Mr Ouattara, since initial results issued by the Independent Electoral Commission gave him a clear eight-point victory over Mr Gbagbo. But these results were later overturned by the country's Constitutional Council, which instead awarded victory to the incumbent President, Mr Gbagbo.
MEPs and African, Caribbean and Pacific MPs refused, in an EU-ACP Parliamentary Assembly Declaration on 3 December, to recognize the results published by the Constitutional Council, which would hand power to Mr Gbagbo.
EU sanctions
MEPs support the EU decisions to impose sanctions against Mr Gbagbo and take targeted measures "against those who are obstructing the process of peace" and "jeopardising the outcome of the electoral process". At the same time, they call on EU Foreign Affairs High Representative Catherine Asthon to present as soon as possible new initiatives to support the democratically-elected authorities in the country.
MEPs also strongly condemn all acts of intimidation directed against the European Union's election observers, which forced them to withdraw for security reasons.
Finally, the decision by both the African Union and the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) to suspend Côte d'Ivoire from all participation in their activities until Mr Ouattara actually exercises power was very much welcomed by MEPs.
Note to editors
As this report was being approved in plenary session (Thursday 16), political tension in Côte d'Ivoire was becoming ever more acute. Supporters of the EU-backed Mr Ouattara planned street protest to force Mr Gbagbo to step down. Mr Ouattara had urged his backers to march through the commercial capital, Abidjan, over the next two days, whereas the army, backing Mr Gbagbo, had reinforced its positions at the national broadcasting and presidency buildings.
Mr Ouattara, 68, backed by the US, the EU and the African Union, was staying at a hotel under the protection of UN peacekeepers, while Mr Gbabgo, 65, held the presidency building.
Côte d'Ivoire is the world’s top cocoa producer.
20101215IPR10428 Adopted text will be available here (click on 16 December)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
