Sudan referendum: voting "smooth and calm" so far, but crucial part is yet to come, say MEP observers
External relations
General
2011-01-12 - 15:09
A six-member European Parliament delegation is now in Sudan to observe the southern Sudan independence referendum, with voting taking place between 9 and 15 January. Delegation leader Mariya Nedelcheva (EPP, BG) confirmed on Wednesday that the poll has so far been conducted in a peaceful atmosphere, but she added that ensuring that the result is respected by all parties, whatever the outcome, will be crucial.
"We hope that the peaceful atmosphere observed during the first days of the referendum in most parts of Sudan will continue throughout the whole process", said Ms Nedelcheva. "In order to facilitate good relations between the north and southern Sudan in the future, it is important that this referendum is carried out in a credible manner".
"It is also essential to the future development of the two parts of the country, that the outcome of the referendum is respected. The north and southern Sudan are interdependent and whatever the outcome is, it will be vital to maintain open channels of dialogue and a cooperative relationship - for the sake of all the people of Sudan", she added.
The delegation also includes Boguslaw Sonik (EPP, PL), Joachim Zeller (EPP, DE), John Attard-Montaldo (S&D, MT), Edward Scicluna (S&D, MT), and Martin Ehrenhauser (NI, AT). As part of the EU Election Observation Mission, headed by Chief Observer Veronique De Keyser (S&D, BE), it will contribute to the EU EOM preliminary statement assessing the referendum process, to be delivered at a press conference shortly after voting closes.
"We urge the people to be patient"
Chief Observer Ms De Keyser agreed that “So far, polling has been proceeding quite smoothly, in an atmosphere of peace and calm in most of the south and northern Sudan". " The process is still ongoing and the EU Election Observation Mission (EOM) has not completed its observation yet – the crucial process of counting, aggregating results and processing complaints and appeals is still to come. The political, media and legal environment is also still being assessed. We urge people to be patient and allow the Sudanese referendum process to play out to its conclusion”, she said.
20110112IPR11607 EU Election Observation Mission in Sudan web site
EN
1
LINK
http://www.eueom.eu/sudan2011
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
