Tunisia Anno 2011: the start of a democratic era in the Maghreb?
External relations
2011-01-25 - 17:13
A popular uprising led to the fall of President Ben Ali in Tunisia and the Provisional government is still being challenged by demonstrators as some former ministers from Ben Ali stayed at their posts. What will happen next - contagion in North Africa? We spoke to Green MEP Malika Benarab-Attou and Antonio Panzeri (S&D) head of the EP's delegation with the Maghreb.
We asked them why the EU has signed an Association Agreement with Tunisia in 1995 under the Ben Ali regime, and that there had been no sanctions against the regime?
Ms Benarab-Attou (of Franco-Algerian background) regretted it but thinks this is due to trade relations and economic strength. "Lots of people did not want to see the situation as they had houses, shops, and businesses". She said these economic interests have taken precedence over democratic values.
Antonio Panzeri advocated the nuance that perhaps the EU had looked more to the East than the South because of enlargement issues: "The EU supported those governments if they in return cooperated in combating terrorism and fundamentalism and helped controlling the migration process." However, this kind of compromise shouldn't be done in the future, he said.
Awaiting a fluid situation
There was no Parliamentary resolution on Tunisia last week although the Greens and the GUE/NGL wanted one. Ms Benarab-Attou said the Socialists have refused.
Mr Panzeri however, justified it with the continuously changing situation: "We don't know future developments. To make a resolution we need to have our ideas clear in mind about the perspectives that we want to give to our political action towards Tunisia and the whole Maghreb."
A good background to develop democracy in Tunisia
Lot of people fear a widespread chaos in Tunisia but in reality the country has some assets to rely on.
Ms Benarab-Attou noted that education in Tunisia is very developed (90% of people went to school). She also said she opposition figures went to Europe and came back, bringing with them human rights values they wanted to fight for.
Mr Panzeri noted there is "a predisposition for economic and social reforms, as well as democratic reforms". He went on: Tunisia has a strong culture, and "this needs to be preserved".
The question is now: who will govern the country? Should some ex-ministers of Ben Ali be included or not? Benarab-Attou told us that "Tunisians have to decide".
The Union for the Mediterranean, an interesting framework for the Maghreb?
If the EU does nothing in the Maghreb region, others will take over a leadership role as the US is already doing so. Mrs Benarab-Attou said the United States reacted faster than the EU was able to cope with the Tunisian question.
In fact, some EU instruments are already in place to support the democratic transition, e.g. European Neighbourhood Policy, Union for the Mediterranean. This last one could be of crucial importance. "If Europe goes next to a Mediterranean Union strong, it will have no place as an actor in this polarized world" says Benarab-Attou.
However, the Union for the Mediterranean "is simply a reality written on paper, but in these times it has not acted at all. However, those instruments are in place and we must try to bring them back to life again. We have to make them capable of establishing the right policies needed towards the Maghreb and all North African countries. We have to get completely rid of those late-colonial policies that some countries still maintained "according to Panzeri.
A Tunisian flashes victory signs as he faces two soldiers during a protest to demand a new government free of officials of the ousted regime of former president Zine el Abidine Ben Ali, in central Tunis, Tunisia, 23 January 2011. ©BELGA_EPA_STR 20110121STO12288 Debate in Plenary Tunisia on Facebook Tunisia: EP Maghreb delegation calls for independent inquiry into deadly riots (PR) Union for the Mediterranean (EC)
EN
1
PHOTO
20110120PHT12123.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/frd/vod/player;jsessionid=0719FB7B74DA1423C682FCA5B5FF5773?askedDiscussionNumber=5&date=20110117&language=en
EN
3
LINK
http://www.facebook.com/europeanparliament#!/europeanparliament/posts/118838881521710
EN
5
LINK
http://eeas.europa.eu/euromed/index_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20110111IPR11537 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
