European Police College discharge: Budgetary Control Committee closes 2008 accounts
Budgetary control
Committees Budgetary Control
2011-01-27 - 17:21
Parliament's Budgetary Control Committee voted on Thursday to close the financial accounts of the European Police College (CEPOL) for 2008. The closure of accounts is the last step in finalising the discharge procedure for financial 2008.
The decision, which was taken unanimously in committee but still has to be confirmed by Parliament as a whole, does not imply that MEPs are satisfied with the way in which CEPOL handled severe shortcomings in its financial management in 2008 and before. "This decision should not be considered as an approval", underlined Jean-Pierre Audy (EPP, FR), before the vote.
The European Parliament's refusal to grant discharge to CEPOL, in October 2010, was unique. No EU agency had ever been refused a budgetary discharge before. The underlying reason why was that MEPs found it unacceptable that CEPOL - established as an agency in 2006 - had not yet met the standards of good administration and that at least four more years (until 2014), were deemed necessary to get there.
"Regain trust of Parliament"
Thursday's committee vote followed a discussion on Monday with CEPOL's new Director, Ferenc Bánfi, and the Chairman of its Supervisory Board, Jozsef Boda. This meeting was the fourth of its kind. Mr Bánfi, who replaced the previous director after his resignation in mid-2009, said "the heritage is difficult, but it is not a mission impossible". He explained the measures taken to remedy the deplorable state of management at the college and assured the committee that by the end of 2010, the backlog from 2008 and 2009 had been gone. "My greatest challenge now is to regain the trust of your Parliament", he concluded.
Better supervision needed
CEPOL discharge rapporteur Véronique Mathieu (EPP, FR), agreed that the new director had inherited a difficult situation, posing a real challenge to the new management. But she questioned the functioning of the board. "Why did it take two years to react when a director is ineffective? I regret there were no other powers to watch over CEPOL", she said, adding that in her view, it would be better if the European Commission were to have voting rights as well.
Christofer Fjellner (EPP, SE), wondered whether the College was not just too small to function individually, given the complex rules that it has to comply with as an agency. He suggested it be merged with a bigger one. Mr Jens Geier (S&D, DE), criticised the European Commission for not drawing conclusions and leaving it up to the Parliament.
Working group to help small agencies
Head of the Commission's Internal Audit Service Brian Gray, assured MEPs that the Commission was monitoring progress closely. "It is a small agency. They only have a staff of 25 and you can ask if that is efficient. But they must respect the rules", he said. Mr Gray agreed that the Commission's role on the CEPOL board is limited, but disagreed with the criticism that the Commission not being effective. "We decided to only transfer the necessary financial instalments, based on forecasts and obligations", he explained. He also acknowledged the difficulties generally encountered by the growing number of small agencies. "We have set-up a Working Group to help these agencies reach their objectives", he said.
The plenary vote is likely to take place in February. Exact date to be confirmed.
In the chair: Bart Staes (Greens/AEFA, BE)
20110124IPR12362 Website of the budgetary control committee Watch the meeting
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/membersCom.do?language=EN&body=CONT
EN
2
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/frd/vod/search-committees?language=en
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
