2-3 February 2011 - Brussels plenary session
Institutions
2011-02-01 - 14:06
The seating plan - left to right - of the Parliament's Chamber in Brussels EU energy summit under the spotlight Better management of e-waste Parliament looks into rising food prices Europe's energy figured highly during the two day Parliamentary session being held in Brussels on Wednesday and Thursday as MEPs debated energy priorities ahead of a EU summit on the issue. In addition the House will put to a vote new plans to deal with the growing mountain of electrical waste in Europe to allow greater recycling (Thursday).
Turing outside Europe, events in the Middle East fell under the spotlight in debates on Egypt and Tunisia as will the fate of Southern Sudan after its recent historic vote for independence.
MEPs will also be asking the European Commission (which manages Europe's Common Agricultural Policy) and representatives of European governments what can be done about the worrying recent spike in global food prices. You can follow all the debates live online from Brussels here on the Parliament's website.
20110131FCS12843
Newsletter - 2-3 February 2011 - Brussels plenary session
MEPs rise their hands to vote EU energy summit under the spotlight Parliament to look into rising food prices EU energy summit under the spotlight
Ahead of the European Council meeting of 4 February, which will focus on energy and innovation, MEPs in Brussels this week will debate the EU's energy strategy priorities with the Council and the Commission. The discussion is scheduled for Wednesday.
Better management of e-waste
From broken fridges to unwanted phones, the volume of Europe's electric and electrical waste is growing rapidly. Parliament will vote on Thursday on updated rules to improve collection and recycling and stop the illegal export of such waste.
Tunisia: MEPs to discuss Jasmine Revolution
MEPs will discuss the political situation in Tunisia and vote on a resolution on the outlook for its relations with the EU. The vote (Thursday) will be preceded by a debate with EU Foreign Affairs High Representative Catherine Ashton (Wednesday).
South Sudan after the referendum
Following the recent referendum on the future status of Southern Sudan, MEPs will discuss the situation with High Representative Catherine Ashton.
EU recognition of Roma genocide in World War II
At the opening of the session, Parliament's President Jerzy Buzek will make a statement on the EU's recognition of the Roma genocide in World War II. This will be followed by contributions from the political group representatives.
Parliament to look into rising food prices
Since 2009, food commodities prices around the world have risen and become extremely volatile, affecting producers and consumers in the EU and developing countries. MEPs will ask the Council and Commission about ways to tackle the issue, such as combating speculation in commodity derivatives and guaranteeing easier access to food.
Democratic oversight of development and human rights funding
MEPs are expected to stick to their demand for better parliamentary scrutiny of EU funding for development, democracy and human rights projects in third countries when they vote at second reading on the revision of EU external financing instruments.
Also on the agenda:
Sixteen-year banana war to end
Waste crisis in Campania: Parliament takes a stand
Tuberculosis vaccine initiative
European Police College: MEPs expected to close the 2008 accounts
Press service Live online EuroparlTV Agenda
Opening of the session: Tunisia, Egypt and commemoration of Roma genocide
EP President Jerzy Buzek issued a call for the EU to give official recognition to the genocide of Roma during WW II. Call for Roma victims of genocide to be properly remembered Buzek statement on ongoing crises in Tunisia and Egypt Killing of gay rights activist David Kato in Uganda condemned At the opening of this week's Brussels plenary session, EP President Jerzy Buzek made statements about the ongoing crises in Tunisia and Egypt, Latvia's Bloody Sunday anniversary, the recent hanging of Sahra Bahrami in Iran, the killing of gay rights activist David Kato in Uganda and the genocide of Roma people during World War II.
"The situation in the Mediterranean is changing as we speak", noted Mr Buzek, adding that Parliament is "happy to see the movement for democratic change initiated by our neighbours" in Tunisia.
In Egypt, by contrast, the situation was different, and "the movement may lose momentum", he continued, stressing that political reform was a prerequisite for economic and social reform and that elections must be held to respond to the desire for democracy. "The EU considers democracy as important as stability" for our Mediterranean neighbours, he added.
Mr Buzek next noted that 20 January was the 20th anniversary of Latvia's "Bloody Sunday", when pro-Soviet troops attacked strategic buildings in the capital of the newly reborn state, killing and injuring many citizens.
He next called on the Iranian authorities to explain the charges against Sahra Bahrami, whom they had hanged on 29 January, for alleged drug-trafficking. Ms Bahrami had been arrested in the wake of the December 2009 Ashura protests.
Mr Buzek also called on the Ugandan authorities to investigate the murder of David Kato in Uganda on 26 January. He deplored the fact that homosexuals are treated as criminals in Uganda.
Lastly, he announced that an extraordinary meeting of the Conference of Presidents, open to all MEPs, would be held on 8 February to debate the outcome of the 4 February European summit. European Council President Hermann von Rompuy would be invited to take part and report on the summit's conclusions, as provided for in the Lisbon Treaty, he added.
Call for EU recognition of Roma genocide in World War II
Prompted by the 66th anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz-Birkenau extermination camp on 27 January, Mr Buzek issued a call for the European Union to give official recognition to the genocide of Roma people perpetrated in World War II by the Nazis and their allies.
"Today we remember our Roma brothers and sisters", said Mr Buzek. "The Roma are the largest ethnic minority in the EU and have also been the most oppressed for the longest time", he pointed out. Only some EU Member States had so far recognised the extermination of the Roma as genocide. "It is time to acknowledge this", urged the EP President, calling for better understanding of their situation and saying we can fight discrimination through education.
Agenda changes
The House approved the following changes to this week' plenary agenda.
Wednesday 2 February
The statement by the President on EU recognition of the Roma genocide during World War II will be followed by a statement by the Commission and a round of political group speakers.
The title of the debate on Tunisia will now be "Statement by the Vice-President of the Commission/High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy on the situation in the Mediterranean, notably Tunisia and Egypt".
The votes on the motions for resolutions on Tunisia will take place on Thursday 3 February, as scheduled. Motions for resolutions on Egypt will be put to the vote at the February II plenary session in Strasbourg.
The debate on Council and Commission statements on the rise in food prices is postponed to the February II plenary session. It is replaced on this week's agenda by Council and Commission statements on the appointments of senior executives of the European Supervisory Authorities, followed by a round of political group speakers (possibly with a vote on Thursday).
Thursday 3 February
The report by Francesco Speroni (EFD, IT) on the request for waiver of the parliamentary immunity of Mr Tamás Deutsch (EPP, HU) will be put to the vote directly at voting time on Thursday.
Jerzy Buzek
MEPs call for existing commitments to be enforced ahead of Friday EU energy summit
José Manuel Barroso, head of the EU's executive said that in Tunisia, Egypt and Belarus human rights, the rule of law and democracy were the only way forward. Ahead of a European summit on energy and innovation Friday MEPs debated outstanding energy issues. Many MEPs called for existing agreements on energy cooperation should be adhered to whilst stressing the job creation potential of modernisation of infrastructure and energy efficiency. At the same time, many MEPs took the opportunity to address the situation in north Africa, calling for the EU to mobilise itself to help democracy in its neighbourhood.
Enikő Győri for the Hungarian Presidency of the Council of Ministers said that integrating the energy market and more research and developments. She particularly stressed the importance of renewable and expanding the European Research Area.
José Manuel Barroso, head of the EU's executive said that in Tunisia, Egypt and Belarus human rights, the rule of law and democracy were the only way forward. On energy he stressed the importance of enforcing existing agreements. He said the Commission would set a deadline of 2014 for tight internal market in energy to be completed and 2011 for electric cars.
Joseph Daul for the centre right EPP said the public didn't want to see another "sad spectacle" of disagreement at the summit. He called for the EU to help mobilise democracy on its borders and said he wanted more Europe and less divergence. Enacting existing laws on the energy internal market was vital to worth, job creation and efficiency. Turning to the euro he said he wanted consolidation of stability mechanisms in place and more financial discipline.
Martin Schulz for the Socialist and Democrats called the meeting on Friday "a crisis summit" - the last moment to push forward member states for commitment to 20/20/20 energy goals and a chance to deal with "energy poverty" in the EU. "We see people are putting on jumpers rather than heating their houses because it is so expensive" he said. Turning to Tunisia and Egypt Schulz said he was shocked by the absence of EU leaders in Tunisia and Egypt. "No one is there talking to the people who are out fighting for their democracy."
Swedish MEP Lena Ek (ALDE) said that in times of crisis, two strategies are necessary, to stop the eminent threat and take the opportunity to move forward. "The Council's response is disappointing. The US is investing huge amounts of money in renewables. President Obama announced incentives in his state of the Union address last week. Where is the emphasis on the possibilities of new technologies, this generations' Sputnik moment?" she asked.
German Green MEP Rebecca Harms said that on Egypt she appealed to heads of governments to react immediately on unrest in Egypt. "It would be shameful if we just wait and see what happed in Egypt" she said. Turning to energy - she was discouraging from fostering relations with certain regimes (Iraq, Georgia.) because "energy diversification can not mean getting involved with countries racked by crisis and despots".
Czech MEP Jan Zahradil (ECR) told the House "energy security is an area where the EU should be more engaged and should be as united as possible". He said that ECR supports the creation of the common energy market. Mr Zahradil compared the situation in Egypt and Tunisia to the events of 1989-90 in Eastern Europe. "We welcome democratisation in this area" he said.
Portuguese MEP Marisa Matias (GUE/NGL) said that energy is a crucial sector for creating new jobs, a key word in the forthcoming Council. "We need real investment to offset energy inefficiencies. Member States with high levels of unemployment are offered only old solutions; we need an energy revolution, we should be trying to harness new energy sources."
Greek Member Niki Tzavela (EFD) said we should be aware of possibility to lose Suez which could mean rising oil prises. She urged Mr Barroso to appeal to member states to evaluate EU resources and exploitation possibilities. "Europe has to look into its resources and sources. It's about time we put exploitation and extraction into the agenda" she said.
European Council
MEPs debate antigovernment protests in Egypt and Tunisian Jasmine Revolution
Egyptians shout slogans as they gather in Cairo's Tahrir Square heeding a call by the opposition for a "march of a million" to mark a week of protests demanding for the ouster of Hosni Mubarak's long term regime, on February 1, 2011. ©BELGA/AFP/MARCO LONGARI In a debate on Egypt and Tunisia with Catherine Ashton on Wednesday, a majority of Parliament's political groups criticised both the lack of a unified European voice in reacting to the protests taking place in the two countries as well as the ambivalence of Europe's support for the protesters and their cause. MEPs called for a review of the EU's neighbourhood policy towards the Mediterranean, in the light of its perceived failure to promote reform.
High Representative Catherine Ashton started by expressing her admiration for the dignity and courage of the protesters, adding that in both Tunisia and Egypt, events had reached "a point of no return."
On Egypt, the High Representative deplored the fact that the peaceful protests were turning violent and expressed concern about rumours that live ammunition may have been used today. She called on the Egyptian government to free all detained protesters and restore access to communication networks. "For me, politics is about changing things, about helping people improve their lives," she said, adding that "the time has come for an orderly transition."
On Tunisia, she informed the Parliament that she had met the country's new foreign minister and had agreed to provide assistance to the new government - both technical and legal assistance for the transition - as well as help to civil society. The Council would review its priorities "so we can adapt our assistance to Tunisians' societal needs". She also welcomed Parliament's decision to send a delegation to the country, saying it was "important for Tunisians to see our commitment to their democratic transition". She also announced that she would travel to Tunisia the week after next.
On behalf of the EPP group, José Ignacio Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra (ES) deplored the fact that the EU "was caught wrong-footed" by the current crisis. His main conclusions were that the EU needs a higher profile and to speak with one voice, and that "we have not learned the lessons of cosying up to the enemies of democracy". Finally, beside the short-term goal of supporting the democratic transition, in the medium term, he said "the EU has to deeply consider reviewing its neighbourhood policy in the Mediterranean."
Adrian Severin (S&D, RO) warned that although "social upheaval is a guarantee for change, it is no guarantee for change for the better". He called for a deep analysis of the situation, to avoid a shift toward another type of totalitarianism. He supported the High Representative in her strategy of emphasising both reform and stability but cautioned that "the devil is in the detail".
Guy Verhofstadt (BE), in the name of the ALDE group , drawing a parallel to the 1989 events in Europe, expressed disappointment that Europe had "failed to give support to the people in the street." Europe had made two errors: "We haven't really taken measure of this historic moment in time and we have failed to analyse the situation properly", he said. He called on the High Representative to change the EU's position. "The EU should stand 100% behind the Egyptian people and its demands. Mubarak should leave his country to democracy," he concluded.
For the Group of the Greens/EFA, Daniel Cohn-Bendit (FR) criticised High Representative Ashton for calling for calm in Egypt, saying "there will only be calm if Mubarak leaves". He also stressed that in any upcoming election, the EU should ensure that all sides have equal access to means of campaigning, given the wide gulf in resources among the various political forces in Egypt.
Charles Tannock (ECR, UK), referring to the "hurricane of change" in North of Africa, drew attention to the worrying trend towards violence and declared that President Mubarak "can only play a role in transition by stepping down." "I do not want a secular tyranny or an Islamist theocracy," said Mr Tannock, adding that the EU should support a liberal democracy, based on stability, peace and democracy.
Marie-Christine Vergiat (GUE/NGL, FR) warned against meddling in the internal affairs of Tunisia and Egypt. She noted that the Tunisians had achieved their aims by themselves and the EU should let them "do their jobs". At the same time, she found it in bad taste to talk about opening markets at this juncture, as the EU's role in the liberalisation of the economy in Tunisia had profited former President Ben Ali and his family.
Fiorello Provera (EFD, IT) drew attention to the risks of the current situation: the possible Islamisation of these countries, in the mould of the Iranian revolution, and a worsening of the economic situation, leading to higher unemployment and larger migratory flows towards Europe.
Nikki Sinclaire (Non attached, UK) noted that the Egyptian people now expected aid without strings from the European Union. She also expressed dissatisfaction with the use of EU funds in Tunisia. "If the money had been used for reforms, the people would not have revolted," she said, and asked the High Representative for truthful answers about where EU had funds ended up.
The vote on the joint motion for resolution on Tunisia will be adopted tomorrow and there will be a vote in the February II plenary session on motions for resolutions on Egypt .
Watch the recording of the debate
Dealing with Europe's growing mountain of electrical waste
Mobile phone components from disassembled phones ©BELGA Mobile phones, computers, TVs - Europe's growing pile of waste Problems of waste being shipped outside Europe Mobile phones, computers, TVs - we like them but where do they go when we are finished with them? In the worst case they can be dismantled by hand for scrap by children in developing countries. This can expose them to potentially fatal chemicals. New legislation, scheduled to be voted this Thursday (3 Feb 2011) at around 1100 CET, aims to toughen existing rules on collection and treatment so that within six years 85% of all waste will be recovered and treated.
The proposals for this legislation, drafted by Karl-Heinz Florenz (EPP, Germany), were backed by the Environment Committee on 22 June 2010. Political groups are expected to agree on the bulk of the proposals in the report.
Karl-Heinz Florenz told us, "we lose a lot of raw material because a lot of electronic waste is illegally shipped out of Europe. For example, 1 million mobiles contain: 250 kg silver, 24 kg gold, 9 kg palladium, and 9 tonnes of copper".
Over 8 million tonnes of e-waste
This type of waste is one of the fastest growing waste streams in the EU (over 8 million tonnes and growing) and poses a series of challenges such as health problems if the waste is not properly treated and a loss of raw materials if there is no recycling.
According to national reports, only 33% of the waste is currently collected and properly treated.
Setting ambitious and fair targets
The current collection target is 4 kg per year per person, but it doesn't reflect the different circumstances of each country. Some states already exceeded this amount, others fell short of it.
The EP Environment Committee has recommended that Member States should collect 85% of WEEE by 2016 and recycle 50-75% (depending on the category).
Mr. Florenz said, "we suggested collecting 85% of the waste that arises in the Member State. It is a challenging but realistic and important target."
In the meanwhile, an interim target (4 kg or the amount collected in 2010, whichever is greater) will be set, to facilitate gradual improvement towards the final target.
"Another change will be the establishment of European-wide standards for collection, treatment and recycling of waste. The current situation shows a quite different quality of these operations in Europe," said Mr Florenz.
Illegal shipment
Karl-Heinz Florenz was clear about the present situation: "At the moment a very big amount of waste is illegally shipped out of Europe. Every Member State, specifically the customs officers have to prove that the exported product is not functioning and therefore not allowed to be shipped".
He added: "we will shift the burden of proof: now it is on the exporter. Furthermore, we established clear criteria to distinguish between waste and used but functioning products. This will help the custom services to control the exporters".
Consumer responsibility
Consumers can already turn their electronic waste in to dedicated facilities, but things will be easier now: "consumers will now be able to deposit very small appliances like mobile phones, shavers etc at any retail shop, without the requirement to buy a new product. These small products often end up in the waste bin, because consumers are not willing to go to a collection point just for an MP3 Player," Mr Florenz said.
Karl-Heinz Florenz Press release Environment, Public Health and Food Safety Report - Waste electrical and electronic equipment WEEE
MEPs offer solidarity with Tunisian protesters but question EU foreign policy
Tunisian students shout slogans during a demonstration in solidarity with Egyptian protesters on January 31, 2011 on Habib Bourguiba Avenue in Tunis. ©BELGA MEPs on Thursday expressed solidarity with the protests that are "enabling the Tunisian people to regain their freedom and bring down the regime" of former President Ben Ali. At the same time, they criticised the European Union for being "unable to develop a genuine foreign policy that is consistent and effective vis-à-vis its partners."
After Wednesday's debate with EU High Representative Catherine Ashton on the Jasmine Revolution in Tunisia and the situation in Egypt, the House today approved a resolution expressing its "solidarity with the Tunisian people," whose protests against the government have "brought their country to a political watershed." Parliament condemned the repressive measures and disproportionate force used by the security forces, while supporting all measures that are creating the conditions for the holding of elections.
Tunisia: a lesson to the EU about its foreign policy failures
MEPs note that the case of Tunisia is a clear example of the shortcomings of the EU's foreign policy. They emphasise the urgent need to review the EU's Neighbourhood Policy and to revise the "democracy and human rights support policy so as to create an implementation mechanism for the human rights clause in all agreements with third countries."
In concrete terms, the Parliament demands that the EU implement the decisions to freeze the assets of the former President and his family, that the High Representative involve Parliament in concrete plans for assisting Tunisia's democratic process and that the Union send an election observation mission to the country. MEPs also urge a more flexible and effective use of the EU's various financial instruments in order to assist Tunisia, while also calling on the Commission to encourage European civil society to provide support and assistance.
European Parliament delegation to travel to Tunis
The European Parliament is sending a 12-Member delegation to Tunisia from 3 to 6 February, to assess the current political situation and hold talks with representatives of the provisional government and members of civil society. The ad-hoc delegation will be led by José Ignacio Salafranca (EPP, ES) and Pier Antonio Panzeri (S&D, IT), who chairs Parliament's standing delegation for relations with the Maghreb (for more information, see link below) .
Parliament will adopt a resolution on the situation in Egypt during its next plenary session in Strasbourg, from 14-17 February.
Adopted text will be available here (click on 3 February 2011) EP Delegation
MEPs demand better e-waste management
German MEP Karl-Heinz Florenz (EPP) steered the draft legislation through Parliament Parliament wants tighter rules for the EU's growing output of waste electronic and electrical equipment (WEEE) MEPs proposed new targets for collecting, recycling and re-using waste Parliament wants tighter rules for the EU's growing output of waste electronic and electrical equipment (WEEE), while cutting red tape for companies. In a plenary vote on Thursday, MEPs proposed new targets for collecting, recycling and re-using waste. They also recommended tougher measures to prevent the export of e-waste to developing countries, where it can pose a health and environment hazard.
Voting on a draft update to 2003 rules, Parliament adopted its recommended changes by 580 votes to 37 with 22 abstentions. Council will now consider EP's position ahead of a possible second reading. Karl-Heinz Florenz (EPP, DE), who steered the draft legislation through Parliament, commented that "we can no longer afford to waste our waste. Parliament has sent a strong message that public authorities, manufacturers and consumers all need to play their part to ensure we collect and recycle more of our electrical and electronic goods. We have also set out stricter rules to stop potentially harmful waste being illegally shipped to developing countries."
Collection targets
Parliament says that Member States should collect 85% of the e-waste they produce from 2016. It also proposes a 2012 target: Member States should collect 4 kg of e-waste per inhabitant (as under existing rules) or the weight of e-waste collected in 2010, whichever is greater.
Stop wasting the waste
As well as yielding health and environmental benefits, proper treatment of e-waste can help reclaim valuable raw materials. MEPs recommend a 50-75% recycling target (depending on category) and support a new 5% re-use goal.
Scope and solar panels
All types of e-waste should be covered, except for listed exceptions, such as large installations and tools, military equipment and vehicles. MEPs say rules should also be waived for photovoltaic cells used in solar panels, subject to review, since disposal is performed by professionals and industry-set targets are in place.
Producer and consumer responsibilities
MEPs underline that standardising registration and reporting is needed to lighten the administrative burden and costs on companies. They suggest reducing the number of electrical equipment categories to further simplify matters.
Producers of e-goods pay towards treatment and can also make a positive impact by respecting eco-design rules and creating products that are easier to repair or recycle.
Consumers should dispose of e-waste legally, as they are already entitled to do free of charge at treatment centres. MEPs add that consumers should also be able to return very small items to retailers. Very small shops should be exempt but distance sellers included.
Illegal exports
Large volumes of e-waste are being falsely declared as "reusable" and illegally exported for treatment in developing countries, where they are often processed in unsafe conditions, even by children. As well as supporting Commission proposals for stricter inspections of shipments, Parliament further clarifies that the exporter should carry the burden of proof that goods are reusable.
Adopted text will be available here (click on 2 February) Profile of rapporteur Karl-Heinz Florenz (EPP, DE)
EN
1
PHOTO
20110127PHT12614.jpg
EN
2
PHOTO
20110127PHT12612.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/en/pressroom/
EN
4
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/frd/live/live-video?language=en
EN
5
LINK
http://www.europarltv.europa.eu/en/home.aspx
EN
6
LINK
/activities/plenary/home.do?language=en
EN
7
PHOTO
20110202PHT13070.jpg
EN
8
LINK
/president/view/en/the_president/latest_news.html
EN
9
PHOTO
20110202PHT13064.jpg
EN
10
LINK
http://www.european-council.europa.eu/home-page/highlights/european-summit-on-energy-and-innovation.aspx?lang=en
EN
11
PHOTO
20110202PHT13068.jpg
EN
12
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/frd/vod/player?session=last&currentSei=SEI3&language=en
EN
13
PHOTO
20100624PHT76646.jpg
EN
14
LINK
/members/archive/alphaOrder/view.do?language=EN&id=1038
EN
16
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=ENVI
EN
17
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5723502
EN
18
PHOTO
20110202PHT13062.jpg
EN
19
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
20
LINK
/en/pressroom/agenda/2011-W5/delegations
EN
21
PHOTO
20110202PHT13072.jpg
EN
22
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
23
LINK
/members/expert/committees/view.do?id=1038
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20100621IPR76418 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
