Iran: fresh EU sanctions needed to combat human rights abuses
External relations
Committees Foreign Affairs
2011-02-01 - 17:49
Iran's execution of Dutch-Iranian citizen Sarah Bahrami was firmly condemned by Foreign Affairs Committee MEPs in a resolution voted on Tuesday. Future EU relations with Iran - including possible further sanctions - should focus not only on the nuclear dispute but also on human rights abuses since the 2009 presidential elections, they added.
Firmly condemning the execution of Dutch-Iranian national Zahra Bahrami in Tehran on 29 January, MEPs are "dismayed that the Iranian authorities denied consular access to Ms Bahrami and did not ensure a transparent and fair judicial process", says the resolution drafted by Bastiaan Belder (EFD, NL). They also call on EU Foreign Affairs High Representative Catherine Ashton to raise the cases of Sakineh Mohammadi Ashtiani and Zahra Bahrami with the Iranian authorities.
Foreign Affairs Committee MEPs believe that the time has come for the EU to devise a new, broader, strategy towards Iran, which goes beyond the nuclear issue and addresses Iran's human rights record and regional role. They call on EU foreign ministers to impose sanctions targeting Iranian officials responsible for serious human rights abuses since the disputed presidential election of June 2009, in line with similar measures taken by the USA last September.
Iranian nuclear threat
Given Iran's continuing refusal to co-operate with the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), MEPs consider that "additional sanctions have become the logical consequence". However, they also wish to ensure that Ms Ashton assesses the impact and effectiveness of all EU restrictive measures, in order to prevent Iran from evading the sanctions. Sanctions are meant to hit the blacklisted officials, not the Iran population as a whole, they warn.
Death penalty: a sad record
The Foreign Affairs Committee deeply regrets that the number of executions in Iran in 2009 was the highest in the past ten years, making Iran the country with the highest number of executions per capita in the world. MEPs demand official statistics on the executions carried out and call on the government to impose a moratorium on these executions and also to abolish the execution of minors under 18 years old.
Social unrest
MEPs note the popular discontent that followed the 2009 presidential elections and the Iranian people's growing aspirations for democratic change. Iran's domestic problems continue to deteriorate, despite burgeoning oil prices, say MEPs, while President Ahmadinejad continues to embrace a radical anti-Western, anti-Israel agenda. MEPs are concerned that the growing military, political and economic role of the Iranian Revolutionary Guard Corps in Iranian society is fuelling fears of a further militarization of the state, which in turn could lead to an escalation of violence and oppression of political opposition.
More grassroots support for civil society
Representatives of EU institutions should develop contacts with representatives of a broad range of Iranian political and social life, including prominent Iranian human rights defenders, says the resolution, adding that more support should be given to grassroots activities and people-to-people contacts.
The resolution, approved in committee with 62 votes in favour, 3 against and 2 abstentions, is to be put to a plenary vote at the March plenary session in Strasbourg.
In the Chair: Gabriele ALBERTINI (EPP, IT)
Procedure : resolution in the name of the Committee on Foreign Affairs
Plenary vote : March I (to be confirmed)
20110131IPR12827 Committee on Foreign Affairs Delegation for relations with Iran Profile of rapporteur Bastiaan Belder (EFD, NL) Watch webstreaming live
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=AFET
EN
2
LINK
/activities/delegations/homeDel.do?language=EN&body=D-IR
EN
3
LINK
/members/public/yourMep/view.do?name=BELDER&partNumber=1&language=EN&id=4507
EN
4
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/frd/live/live-video;jsessionid=19EAF2B28284CBB765CE77DAB50E40FD?language=en
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
