MEPs offer solidarity with Tunisian protesters but question EU foreign policy
External relations
Plenary sittings
2011-02-03 - 12:20
MEPs on Thursday expressed solidarity with the protests that are "enabling the Tunisian people to regain their freedom and bring down the regime" of former President Ben Ali. At the same time, they criticised the European Union for being "unable to develop a genuine foreign policy that is consistent and effective vis-à-vis its partners."
After Wednesday's debate with EU High Representative Catherine Ashton on the Jasmine Revolution in Tunisia and the situation in Egypt, the House today approved a resolution expressing its "solidarity with the Tunisian people," whose protests against the government have "brought their country to a political watershed." Parliament condemned the repressive measures and disproportionate force used by the security forces, while supporting all measures that are creating the conditions for the holding of elections.
Tunisia: a lesson to the EU about its foreign policy failures
MEPs note that the case of Tunisia is a clear example of the shortcomings of the EU's foreign policy. They emphasise the urgent need to review the EU's Neighbourhood Policy and to revise the "democracy and human rights support policy so as to create an implementation mechanism for the human rights clause in all agreements with third countries."
In concrete terms, the Parliament demands that the EU implement the decisions to freeze the assets of the former President and his family, that the High Representative involve Parliament in concrete plans for assisting Tunisia's democratic process and that the Union send an election observation mission to the country. MEPs also urge a more flexible and effective use of the EU's various financial instruments in order to assist Tunisia, while also calling on the Commission to encourage European civil society to provide support and assistance.
European Parliament delegation to travel to Tunis
The European Parliament is sending a 12-Member delegation to Tunisia from 3 to 6 February, to assess the current political situation and hold talks with representatives of the provisional government and members of civil society. The ad-hoc delegation will be led by José Ignacio Salafranca (EPP, ES) and Pier Antonio Panzeri (S&D, IT), who chairs Parliament's standing delegation for relations with the Maghreb (for more information, see link below).
Parliament will adopt a resolution on the situation in Egypt during its next plenary session in Strasbourg, from 14-17 February.
20110203IPR13099 Press Release about upcoming EP delegation to Tunisia Adopted text will be available here (click on 3 February 2011)
EN
1
LINK
/en/pressroom/agenda/2011-W5/delegations
EN
2
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
