MEPs question President Herman Van Rompuy on the outcome of EU summit
Energy
2011-02-08 - 17:56
President of the European Council Herman Van Rompuy prepares to debate the Summits outcome with MEPs MEPs discuss impact of recent EU summit Meeting discussed energy plans, economy and turmoil in Egypt President of the European Council Herman Van Rompuy attended today (8 February) a special meeting with the leaders of the political groups open to all MEPs as he reported the outcome of Friday's EU summit. Attention focused on EU efforts in the areas of energy and innovation, the economic outlook and the situation in Egypt.
The President of the European Council Herman Van Rompuy said on Egypt that "we call on the Egyptian authorities to meet the aspirations of the Egyptian people with reform, not with repression. We are determined to give the Union's full support to a democratic transition. The final message of member states was consolidated in a declaration adopted on 4 February."
Turing to energy he said "we are lagging behind as far as energy efficiency is concerned compared to our target of 20% for 2020. The same is true as far as R&D is concerned, compared to US and soon even to China".
On the economy he said "the outlook of the European economy has substantially improved. Business indicators show confidence and optimism. There is still a lot of homework to do. There is no time for complacency; we will draw lessons from the crisis. We must pull in the same direction." He didn't mention the Competitiveness act.
Maroš Šefčovič (Vice President of the Commission) speaking on the economy welcomed the European Council's commitment to support more economic convergence and said that the Commission is determined to act to reinforce economic governance in the EU. On energy he welcomed the European Council's decision to step up in gear in order to reach the energy and climate policy objectives.
Joseph Daul of the EPP Group said that on energy none of the EU 27 should see its energy security threatened by the lack of connections. " The solution is not less but more Europe" he said.
On Egypt he said "Europe, the first donor, cannot speak with one voice. We have a High Representative but it is the member states who continue to communicate with different messages. Again, the solution is not less but more Europe. A Europe that speaks of a united and strong. "
On the economy he said: " The topic of governance and fiscal convergence tax and social needs to be addressed , debated and resolved in a purely national context , not purely intergovernmental but by the Community method. The solution to our problems does not go through more confrontation between m ember states but more common solutions .
For the Socialists Martin Schulz (S&D) said that on Egypt he was dissatisfied with the member states tendency to comment individually on the events instead of following a common European approach under the framework of the EEAS. "Egypt is a neighbouring state to the European Union, not to the USA. I had expected Catherine Ashton to be there and actually talk the players locally".
On the economy he saw the Franco-German "competitiveness pact" approved by the Council as an attempt to export the German budget cutting approach to the rest of Europe, which according to Schultz, would mean further crisis for many States.
Leader of the Liberals Guy Verhofstadt (ALDE) spoke about the economy and expressed his concerns about the way the French and German governments proposed the Competiveness Pact and criticised the intergovernmental approach as not working for the EU. He said he was concerned that the European Council is making the EU into an international organisation of European nation states. "That is not my Union, my Union is a real community working for the community matters."
Rebecca Harms (Greens) said that a fter every summit - irrespective of the result - we have feedback, which gives the impression that everything went "swimmingly good" and that everything was achieved. "In the future I think we should get more honest reports from the European Council", she said.
She called the EU's policy towards Egypt a "disgrace" and criticized the fact that the EU hadn't been more active and more united in its response to events.
British MEP Timothy Kirkhope (ECR) speaking on Egypt he said the ECR group supported the declaration adopted by European Council which highlighted the necessity for slow and careful steps. "Careful progress is our hope for people of Egypt, Middle East and beyond" he opined.
On the economy he welcomed the idea of expanding the creation of single market in the area of innovation and research as well as energy but warned not to intervene on the markets and impose regulations.
Portuguese MEP Marisa Matias (GUE/NGL) said she was disappointed that the European Council was used as pretext to discuss security not energy. Instead of "lofty statements" to promote sustainable growth and job creation "you can not reduce debt if you don't create economic growth".
British MEP Nigel Farage (EFD) thinks that establishing a permanent stability mechanism is "reinforcing failure and delaying the inevitable break up of the euro."
20110204STO13207 Summit conclusions Full support for a democratic transition in Egypt and the region Conference of presidents Flickr photos from the session
EN
1
PHOTO
20110207PHT13257.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://consilium.europa.eu/uedocs/cms_data/docs/pressdata/en/ec/119175.pdf
EN
3
LINK
http://www.european-council.europa.eu/home-page/highlights/full-support-to-a-democratic-transition-in-egypt-and-the-region.aspx?lang=en
EN
4
LINK
/parliament/expert/staticDisplay.do?id=53&pageRank=2&language=EN
EN
5
LINK
http://www.flickr.com/photos/european_parliament/sets/72157625879372099/show/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
