Arab revolutions put EU's immigration and asylum capacity to test
External relations
2011-03-03 - 15:16
Popular uprisings in the Arab world are sending ripples across the Mediterranean forcing the EU to re-think its immigration and asylum policy. In an extraordinary meeting of 1 March Civil Liberties Committee questioned the Council Presidency, the Commission, the European External Action Service and EU border agency Frontex on the EU's ability to cope with possible huge waves of refugees and immigrants from southern neighbourhood who are fleeing persecution and poverty.
The fear is that Asylum systems of European countries could be overwhelmed by possible mass influx of migrants from and via northern Africa as people try to flee instability.
Frontex is conducting "Operation Hermes 2011" to assist Italian authorities in Lampedusa with the Tunisian influx.
The EU has already mobilised a €25 million emergency fund and allocated €3 million to help to Egyptian and Tunisian authorities to meet the immediate humanitarian needs of refugees fleeing Libya at the Tunisian and Egyptian borders. Fast-track EU sanctions against Libya have already been enforce since February 28.
In the Hearing most MEPs welcomed steps taken by Hungarian Presidency, the European Commission, the EU border Agency Frontex and Member states in dealing with the emergency in Lampedusa (Italy) that saw the influx of Tunisians. They demanded more contingency funding than the current €25 million.
MEPs sounded concerns on lack of longer term planning in view of possible mass migration and over common asylum legislation blocked in the Council. Speakers urged the reinforcement of Frontex, ensure burden sharing in resettlement, assist democracy building and uphold the human dignity of asylum seekers.
Operation Hermes in Italian Island of Lampedusa
The Executive Director of Frontex (EU border security agency) Ilkka Laitinen said there had been no new arrivals on Lampedusa since 26 February recalling that Operation Hermes 2011 was launched over a week ago to assist Italian authorities with the Tunisian influx to Lampedusa. He said Hermes could be extended to help Malta.
Responding to MEPs’ worries on the role of Europol, he explained that its officials make sure international criminals and terrorists do not exploit the situation. The Commissioner for Home Affairs Cecilia Malmström warned that some people may try to enter EU for purely economic reasons by exploiting the chaotic situation.
Evacuation of EU citizens from Libya reaches final phase
With over 80% of EU citizens already evacuated from Libya, evacuation continues in a coordinated way, explained Permanent representative Peter Györkös (Hungarian Presidency). Commissioner Malmström reminded people that some 1,200 EU nationals are still in Libya. The Executive Secretary General of EEAS Pierre Vimont underlined that some people with dual citizenship might not want to leave.
Asylum, relocation and solidarity
"Malta took 12,000 evacuees from Libya. Would member states have sent planes to take them if they were Libyan rather their own nationals?" said Maltese MEP Simon Busuttil (EPP) who underlining that "appetite for intra-EU relocation is not big".
EP Maghreb delegation chair Pier Antonio Panzeri (S&D, Italy) thinks the EU needs proper relocation policy. Portuguese member Rui Tavares (GUE/NGL) agreed that "resettlement is crucial" and criticised "dependency on dictators to keep our unrealistic immigration policy".
Italian Mario Borghezio (EFD) called for real solidarity and responsibility sharing: "Malta and Italy can’t be left to deal with the situation alone".
MEPs think that the €25 million in EU emergency fund aid will not be enough to cope with possible mass inflow of migrants. They urged the Council to "wake up" and adopt asylum legislation.
British MEP Claude Moraes (S&D) asked the Council to have the sense of urgency and unblock tools envisaged in asylum package. Greek MEP Stavros Lambrinidis (S&D): urged an end to playing "ping-pong of responsibly" and said simply giving financial aid will not help border states.
Helping the helpless
Ilkka Laitinen said under all scenarios of possible migration flows Frontex will need Member states that will act as hosts and contributing participants, as Frontex only co-ordinates their efforts. If “alert situation” persists, additional budget and personnel will be needed.
Romanian Renate Weber (ALDE) regretted that EU was caught by surprise and reminded people there were many voices saying that EU was late with reaction.
"What is our priority, keeping people out or facilitating humanitarian assistance?", asked Parliament's rapporteur on Libya Ana Gomes (S&D, Portugal ).
Dutch Liberal Sophie in 't Veld (ALDE) remarked: "We used to be countries of origin, our people were not treated as criminals, but welcomed abroad. Hungarian MEP Krisztina Morvai (NI) suggested assistance should be provided from the money stolen by dictators from their own people.
Next steps:
March plenary: Libya debate and resolution
Parliamentary Assembly of the Union for the Mediterranean on 3-4 March in Rome
Extraordinary European Council on March 11
Review of Neighbourhood policy by EC in April
April plenary: Migration flows arising from instability: EU foreign policy
EU Council estimates creation of EU asylum system should be finalised by 2012
20110228STO14485 Press release "Base foreign policy on values" - Buzek in North Africa debate with Ashton & group leaders PA-UfM EU asylum system: MEPs debate with Commissioner Malmström Draft report on migration flows arising from instability Frontex? International Organization for Migration
EN
1
LINK
/en/pressroom/content/20110228IPR14453/html/Mediterranean-migrants-coping-with-influx-and-backing-future-democracies
EN
2
LINK
/en/pressroom/content/20110302IPR14718/html/Base-foreign-policy-on-values-Buzek-in-debate-with-Ashton-group-chairs
EN
4
LINK
/lt/pressroom/content/20110215IPR13705/html/EU-asylum-system-MEPs-debate-with-Commissioner-Malmstr%C3%B6m
EN
5
LINK
/sides/getDoc.do?type=COMPARL&mode=XML&language=EN&reference=PE454.355
EN
6
LINK
http://www.frontex.europa.eu/
EN
7
LINK
http://www.iom.int/jahia/jsp/index.jsp
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20110228STO14484 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
