Doris Pack MEP: "teachers need more training to reduce early school leaving"
Education
2011-03-14 - 12:34
Ex-teacher turned MEP Doris Pack is worried about high levels of early school leavers Chair of Culture and Education Committee discusses ways to keep children at school Some six million young people drop out of school each year, about 14% of all pupils The European Commission launched a plan in February to tackle early school leaving which stresses that it is important as part of the EU's "2020 Strategy" to reduce early school leavers to 10%. We spoke to German MEP Doris Pack (EPP) who Chairs Parliament's Culture and Education Committee and who is an ex-teacher herself. She told us that "a Europe that wants to compete in future economic and social demands needs more qualified graduates."
"Early school leavers", are defined by the European Commission as "18 to 24 years-olds who have left school with a lower secondary education or less". Today, some six million young people drop out of school each year, about 14% of all pupils.
Why do so many children leave school so early?
DP: Some children don't get chances to good education because of their family background; they don't have anyone to say they have to go to school. This is due to several factors, some parents are unemployed for a long time or they have there other problems. If children do not have others to take care of them, they will soon lack motivation to go to school.
On the other hand I am sure that not all schools are capable of finding out what the weaknesses of their pupils are. I was a teacher and I think that if teachers do not pay attention to the capacities, which are very different in each child, they will be less motivated to go to school.
For example you have children who are dyslexic; they can't write really well, this is not a problem of cleverness, they just need to find their specific talents and teachers need to be able to exploit them. If nobody tells a child "I see you can paint very well", they will never get the impulses they need to create confidence, even if it is in a little field. We now have an average of 15% early school leavers; in 2020 we want to have less than 10%.
What are the consequences for the society and economy?
DP: We have to handle the problem at the beginning. If children do not get educated properly, we leave them without jobs, skills and the will to become somebody in society. We should pay much more attention to training teachers. They need to look at each child with the respect he or she deserves. We also need more teachers, smaller classes and more input. Also a social worker in school, who makes efforts in sports and other activities can be beneficial. We have fewer and fewer kids, so we need more good and skilled teachers. Losing 15% of them is a shame.
Education is mainly a national issue, what can the European Parliament do to help solve the issue?
DP: Neither the EU, neither the Parliament can oblige countries to do something, the treaty only allows us to do things under the "Damocles sword" of subsidiarity. The only thing we can do is give input. We are discussing, with the help of experts in the parliament and in the EU and asking: 'What should be done to come down from 15 to 10 percent?'
The Council of Ministers is the place where it needs to be discussed, but it is our job, the Commission and us, to put it on the table. Also it is important that we keep looking in to it and ask what progress has been made. It should be clear that these meetings are not just to say the good things, but that we reach to results, on regional and national level.
20110311STO15409 Keeping kids in school (EC) Doris Pack
EN
1
PHOTO
20110304PHT14845.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/news/culture/110202_en.htm#top
EN
3
LINK
/members/expert/committees/view.do?language=EN&id=1191
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
