Chair of Trade Committee Vital Moreira: "Europe could not live without trade"
External/international trade
2011-03-21 - 17:20
The Chair of the Parliament's International Trade Committee, Portuguese Socialist Vital Moreira. The EU is the world's largest trading bloc but the economic crisis has put strains on the international system. Are open markets still a key to wellbeing? Does multilateralism remain on the agenda - or should it seek more bilateral openings for trade? While 18 MEPs head to Geneva for a Parliamentary Conference on the World Trade Organisation (21-22 March), we spoke with the Chair of the International Trade Committee, Portuguese Socialist Vital Moreira.
After the economic crisis, is there still a consensus that global open markets are good for Europe?
Definitely, that is the major difference between the global crisis we are coming out of and the global crisis we had after the New York crash of 1929. Of course there was a decline in trade as well as a number of protectionist initiatives, but on the whole we have been quite successful in avoiding the surge of protectionism and in keeping the global rules-based trade system working.
For the European Union open trade opening is crucial. For us trade is the condition to enhance growth, create jobs, increase the consumers' welfare and take advantage of our competitiveness in many areas - in industry, services and so on. We could not live without trade.
Today, production chains are fragmented - we no longer have any goods or services produced in one single country, but components coming from many countries. In order to export we need to import. Open trade is a condition to exploring our potential as technological and serviced-based innovation economies. Open global trade should of course come together with the other values of the European Union - development, labour rights, combating climate change and so on.
The European Parliament recently endorsed the European Union's Free Trade Agreement with South Korea. Are such bilateral agreements an alternative to a global trade deal?
We have also concluded bilateral agreements with Columbia, Peru and Central America. We are also well advanced with Canada, India and we are in various stages of negotiations with Singapore, Malaysia and Ukraine. We have just re-launched the negotiations with Mercosur. These are not isolated pieces of trade negotiations - this is a strategy.
They (the agreements) started in 2006 with the "Global Europe" initiative and with the new "EU 2020 Strategy". External trade is an essential dimension of the EU's economic growth in this decade. I think we should have a global and comprehensive view about trade policy. As multilateral trade talks have been somewhat stalled, in a way bilateral agreements are an alternative. But on the other hand bilateral agreements are not a substitute to a global trade deal because they don't have the same scope.
Bilateral trade agreements have brought about added value to open trade that would not have been achievable in the Doha round. Take for example the trade agreement with South Korea: what we have there is a very wide, comprehensive, ambitious trade agreement in goods, services and so on. We have a very good chapter on sustainable development, labour standards and environmental standards. We have very good solutions for government procurement, intellectual property rights - this we could not have in the Doha round. I tend to challenge the idea that we have either or multilateral or bilateral - I think we can have a "win win" situation on both.
What can the EU - and the Parliament - do to help revitalize multilateral trade talks and re-launch reform of the World Trade Organisation (WTO)?
I think the EU is quite committed to both - to conclude the Doha development round and second to reform the WTO. However, let's concentrate our efforts in concluding the Doha round that has been sort of frozen since 2008. Now there is a little window of opportunity and we should try to use it to conclude the round. Reconciling trade and development, having preferences for developing countries and at the same time opening trade for everybody is still what we are aiming at in Doha negotiations. We need an ambitious and comprehensive trade deal.
Regarding WTO reform we think it is the most advanced body regarding global governance, and we should enhance its capacity. We should look into the WTO decision making procedure and the enforcement mechanism, so that we could put fresh power into it.
Trade is in the exclusive competence of the EU ( in other words the countries of the European Union delegate negotiations to the European Commission after having set certain parameters), so we are represented in Geneva by the Commission. However, the Parliament has a very strong role as the elected body of the Union, the body that brings popular legitimacy. We are holding a sitting of the interparliamentary conference on the WTO in Geneva - for the first time at the WTO premises. This is a step forward in acknowledging that the parliamentary dimension is an important way of enhancing the legitimacy of the WTO.
Can EU farm policy be reconciled with the needs of a new world trade deal if the deal means large tariff cuts for agricultural imports?
Both policies can, should and must be reconciled. Trade deals are about concessions, compromises. You make concessions in order to get something and you cannot exclude this sector from the idea. The only way to evaluate trade agreements is globally - only globally they bring advantages to EU economy, not only industry, services, but also agriculture. I am fully aware of difficulties but we need to have a balanced and a holistic approach to trade.
***
The Parliament's delegation will be headed by EP Vice President Stavros Lambrinidis (S&D, Greece).
Parliamentary Conference on the WTO
A joint undertaking of the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU) and the EP
Objective: to enhance transparency and accountability of the WTO
Involves MPs, MEPs, Governments, civil society, WTO officials
20110321STO15973 WTO Parliamentary conference Vital Moreira EU - South Korea free trade agreement: green light Negotiating trade agreements must not jeopardise EU's agriculture Eurobarometer on international trade Trade Department of the European Commission
EN
1
PHOTO
20110304PHT14849.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.ipu.org/splz-e/trade11.htm
EN
3
LINK
/members/public/yourMep/view.do?name=moreira&partNumber=1&language=EN&id=96930
EN
5
LINK
/de/pressroom/content/20110308IPR15030/html/Negotiating-trade-agreements-must-not-jeopardise-EU's-agriculture
EN
6
LINK
http://trade.ec.europa.eu/doclib/docs/2010/november/tradoc_146948.pdf
EN
7
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/trade/
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20110207FCS13232 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
