Seismologist & MEP George Stavrakakis on the lessons of Earthquakes
Environment
2011-03-22 - 16:02
MEP, Geophysicist and seismologist George Stavrakakis Wave reached the shore within just 15 minutes, racing at speeds of up to 700 kph. "Every earthquake has a lesson to teach us" With the threat of nuclear disaster still not entirely gone, the 11 March Japanese Earthquake and tsunami have awakened our darkest nightmares, reminding how vulnerable mankind can be when nature unleashes its fury. Greek Socialist MEP, geophysicist and seismologist George Stavrakakis, former director of the Institute of Geodynamics of the Athens Observatory, answered our questions.
What exactly happened in Japan?
George Stavrakakis: The Earthquake that struck Japan on the 11th of March occurred at an area in the north-east of the country where the Pacific and North American tectonic plates meet, moving at what is, by geological standards, the vast speed of 8 mm a year and it follows that the forces generated are equally vast.
This isn’t the first time an Earthquake of such magnitude has struck Japan but what was unprecedented was that the disaster was not so much caused by the earthquake itself as by its secondary effect, the tsunami. It is important to note that Japan's Tsunami Early Warning System, one of the best in the world, worked perfectly well, providing an alert within three minutes of the main shock. However, the wave reached the shore within just 15 minutes, racing at speeds of up to 700 kph.
Also, we now know that there were at least four foreshocks of more than 6 on the Richter scale two days before the main shock, but science has, today, no way of predicting if such quakes are, indeed foreshocks.
Was it a one-off, is there more to come and, could there be a connection with the recent earthquake in New Zealand.
GS: First of all when speaking of quakes as strong as this one, it is no longer a question of a single epicentre but rather of a "rupture zone" extending, in this case, over an area of 300 by 100 kilometres. This is also where all aftershocks will be produced over the coming months and some might be extremely powerful.
As for possible links to other, previous or future earthquakes, science recognises what we call seismic "fault interaction" where the pressure released by an earthquake actually increases the pressure exerted on a different fault-line, leading to earthquakes there, as well as similar phenomena such as the "migration" of an epicentre along the same fault. However this understanding is also something that has not yet led to accurate prediction of where and above all when an Earthquake might strike.
And here in Europe? Should we be worried?
GS: Things are not quite as bad here, although this doesn’t mean there is any room for complacency, or indeed for panic. Every earthquake has a lesson to teach us.
It has to be noted however that in Europe the speed at which plates collide is far lower than they are in the area that produced the 11 March earthquake. In the southeast Mediterranean, in Greece and Italy which are Europe's most seismically active area, tremors of a magnitude higher than 6 or 7 on the Richter scale are extremely rare. One should note however that Kobe, which was destroyed in 1995, was also considered a low risk area and that is why low risk areas should also be monitored by scientists.
In any case, although when dealing with nature there can be no absolute certainty, we have to be realists and everything we know indicates an extremely low probability of a major quake in Europe.
The danger posed by Europe's nuclear plants in the event of something of this scale happening over here has been on everyone's mind lately…
GS: Every case is different. In Turkey for example (which is planning to build a nuclear plant) a powerful Earthquake can most certainly not be excluded, but in Germany? A major event there would totally change our interpretation of Earth's seismic history. Every country has to be prepared to deal with the particular challenges it faces.
20110321STO15983 George Stavrakakis Stress tests for Europe's atomic power plants after nuclear scare in Japan Hans van Baalen on Japan: "No one knows where it will end" Jerzy Buzek: Solidarity with Japanese people
EN
1
PHOTO
20110318PHT15829.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/members/public/geoSearch/view.do?country=GR&partNumber=1&language=EN&id=97008
EN
3
LINK
/en/pressroom/content/20110316IPR15723/html/Stress-tests-for-Europe%27s-atomic-power-plants-after-nuclear-scare-in-Japan
EN
5
LINK
/president/view/en/press/press_release/2011/2011-March/press_release-2011-March-17.html
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20110314STO15458 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
