Safeguards for workers and environment as transatlantic aviation market opens up
Transport
Plenary sittings
2011-03-24 - 11:57
An updated EU-US agreement on air transport received the backing of the European Parliament on Thursday. It commits both sides to environmental and social standards in aviation and also provides for further liberalisation of market access, although only if both sides make certain changes to their legislation.
The EU and US aviation markets currently account for about 60% of world air traffic. The first EU-US air transport agreement, signed on 30 April 2007 and effective from 30 March 2008, allowed any EU or US airline to fly between any points in the EU and the US. This led to an increase in services and competition. A second agreement was signed on 24 June 2010 and has been provisionally applied since then, even though after the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon, Parliament’s consent is required for the conclusion of international air transport agreements, including this one, which was approved on Thursday by show of hands.
Commitments to environmental and social standards
In the updated agreement, both parties declare an intention to work together to limit or reduce, "in an economically reasonable manner", the impact of international aviation on the environment. In the attached joint statement, both parties commit to try to limit or reduce aircraft noise; limit or reduce the impact of aviation emissions on air quality and the global climate; foster research and development of environmentally friendly aviation technology; facilitate air traffic management innovations; and develop sustainable alternative aviation fuels.
For the first time, the agreement also commits both the EU and the US to the preservation of social rights of aviation employees. "The opportunities created by the Agreement are not intended to undermine labour standards or the labour- related rights and principles contained in the Parties’ respective laws", states the document.
The accord extends the role of the EU-US Joint Committee, the body that oversees implementation of the agreement. The Joint Committee will be able to recommend new initiatives, such as new security procedures, and evaluate the effects of existing legislation, including social legislation.
Further market opening depends on legislative changes
As soon as the US laws permit majority ownership of its airlines by EU nationals, the EU will allow the same for US nationals, states the new agreement. In addition, from that moment US passenger airlines will have the right to fly direct between the EU and five other countries without serving the US. Those countries will be determined later by the Joint Committee, which may enlarge the list.
Before any imposition of new mandatory noise-based operating restrictions at larger airports, the views of the interested parties have to be considered, and at least 150 days prior notice should be given to the other party, under the agreement. Meanwhile, once the Commission has gained legal powers to review noise-based airport operating restrictions, EU passenger airlines will be allowed to fly direct between the US and five non-EU countries. These will be determined later by the Joint Committee, which may enlarge the list.
EU airlines also gained the right to transport passengers and cargo for a US government civilian department or agency. In addition, the agreement will promote mutual acceptance of security measures and coordinated responses to security threats.
Passenger rights among issues still pending
Parliament's rapporteur Artur Zasada (EPP, PL) pointed out that a number of issues still remain to be resolved in the future agreements, such as further liberalisation of traffic rights, additional foreign investment opportunities, and better coordination of passenger rights policies. "Consistent standards of passenger rights, including those for people of reduced mobility, are of particular importance so as to avoid travellers facing inconsistent treatment during what they would see as a single trip but which involves segments that are currently subject to different rules. It would also settle the question of who is responsible should there be problems during a trip which involves changing planes at one or more hub airports", said Mr Zasada.
Air transport agreements with Canada and Vietnam were also approved by Parliament on Thursday, in both cases by show of hands.
Procedure: Consent
20110323IPR16183 Adopted texts will be available here (click on 24 March 2011) Watch the recording of the debate (click on 24 March 2011) EU-US: Rapporteur Artur Zasada (EPP, PL) EU-Canada: Rapporteur Silvia-Adriana Ţicău (S&D, RO) EU-Vietnam: Rapporteur Dominique Riquet (EPP, FR)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
2
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/frd/vod/research-by-date?language=en
EN
3
LINK
/members/expert/committees/view.do?language=EN&id=96778
EN
4
LINK
/members/expert/committees/view.do?language=EN&id=36281
EN
5
LINK
/members/public/geoSearch/view.do?language=EN&partNumber=1&country=FR&id=96885
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
