EP delegation to join UN Conference on the world's poorest countries
Development and cooperation
2011-04-07 - 09:57
MEPs looking for concrete solutions from UN conference 48 least developed countries 4th UN Conference on LCDs 9-13 May, Istanbul "Trade, not aid" will pull the world's least developed countries out of poverty, says British Conservative Nirj Deva, who will lead Parliament's delegation to the UN Conference on LDCs in May. As the EP prepares its formal position, we spoke to Mr Deva and fellow delegate, Romanian Socialist Corina Creţu about how the world can help its poorest nations.
Some 48 countries are on the UN's list of "least developed countries" and on 9-13 May a special UN Conference in Istanbul will address their problems. MEPs are set to decide their position on LDCs 7 April. The EU has observer status within the UN.
Since 1971 the number of LDCs has increased from 25 to 48, while only 3 countries - the Maldives, Botswana and Cape Verde - have moved out of the category. Both Mr Deva and Ms Creţu want the conference to come up with concrete methods to help LDCs move up over the next few years.
Focus should be on results
"As the last three Conferences focused mainly on principles, I expect governments and others in Istanbul to focus more on results," Ms Creţu said."We will have to formulate clear principles to reduce by half the number of LDCs by 2020...We are looking forward to hearing the views of LDCs themselves".
"The only thing that developing countries have that they can export is agricultural products. They don't have factories, they don't have manufacturing...So it's through trade, not aid, that we actually increase sustainable development," Mr Deva said.
What can the EU do?
Mr Deva said, "LDCs are the most vulnerable to climate change, to the shortage of clean water and to disease. This hits the weakest in society, especially the children. We need to be sensitive about that, and to avoid enriching the top of the pyramid in these countries, with the middle and upper middle classes getting better off and a mass of slum dwellers and very poor people at the bottom seeing no difference. We need to be conscious of that and ensure a trickle-down effect is there."
"We must give priority to food security, building productive capacity in agriculture, industry, the service sector and infrastructure, Ms Creţu said."The EU and other developed countries should remove the structural obstacles that impede LDCs in realising basic sustainable development needs."
Why hasn't the situation of LDCs improved?
"Because we are addressing the wrong problem," Mr Deva said. "We want these countries to access EU markets. We have given the EU Trade Commissioner €2 billion to help these countries trade with us, but LDCs don't get that money...they don't export their fruit to us because they don't have factories. They don't have facilities to freeze goods or the capacity to sell them quickly. If we are serious about these countries progressing to a higher category of development, we need to create that infrastructure."
Ms Creţu sees faults on both sides. "A long list of priorities was set, but not enough attention was given to the feasibility of implementing them. At the same time, developing countries themselves have to create a favourable environment for sustainable development which includes good governance, democracy and the respect of human rights."
LDCs
"poorest and weakest segment" of the international community
33 in Africa, 14 in Asia, 1 in Latin America
combined population over 800 million
20110401STO16789 UN site about the LDC Conference More information about LDCs
EN
1
PHOTO
20110401PHT16846.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.un-ngls.org/spip.php?page=ldc4
EN
3
LINK
http://www.unohrlls.org/en/ldc/25/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
