Parliament praises Iceland's progress towards EU membership
Enlargement
Plenary sittings
2011-04-07 - 13:01
In its first annual report on Iceland since the start of its EU membership negotiations last year, Parliament welcomes the prospect of bringing on board one of Europe's oldest democracies with its well-functioning market economy. However, some sensitive issues remain, such as the Icesave dispute, whale hunting (banned in the EU) and Iceland's desire to protect its fisheries and farm produce markets.
Iceland began talks on joining the EU in July 2010 from a favorable position, as it was already a member of the European Economic Area (EEA), which covers 10 out of 33 chapters of requirements that candidate countries must meet to join the EU, while partially covering another 18. However, further progress is needed in some areas, mainly fisheries, agriculture and rural development, says the resolution, prepared by Cristian Dan Preda (EPP, RO) and passed with 544 votes in favour, 29 against and 41 abstentions.
Fisheries: mackerel and whale hunting
MEPs urge Iceland and the EU to find a way forward in talks on mackerel quotas, an issue which became especially sensitive after the parties failed to reach agreement during the seventh round of EU negotiations with Iceland and Norway on the management of mackerel resources on 11 March.
Parliament also stresses the need for Iceland to bring its fisheries laws into line with EU internal market rules as regards the right of establishment, freedom to provide services and free movement of capital in the fisheries production and processing sectors. Iceland, whose economy is heavily dependent on fisheries, has already stated in its general position on accession that it wishes to maintain some control of fisheries management in its exclusive economic zone.
"Serious divergences" remain on whale hunting, add MEPs, stressing that the ban on whaling is part of the EU acquis (the existing body of laws and regulations that all new Member States must take on). They call for broader discussions on the abolition of both whale hunting and the trade in whale products.
Icesave
MEPs were also glad that a new agreement on compensation for depositors in the failed Icelandic bank Icesave had been reached between Iceland, the UK and the Netherlands. They welcomed the approval by a three-quarters majority of the agreement by the Icelandic Parliament (17 February 2011) and hoped that the new public referendum on the agreement, scheduled for 9 April, would have a positive result.
Opinion polls suggest the Icelanders could endorse the agreement this time, even though 93% voted against the proposal in a similar referendum held a year ago.
Public opinion in Iceland
Rapporteur Dan Preda was pleased to note that recent opinion polls had shown an increase in public support in Iceland for pursuing negotiations and that a majority of Icelanders trust the European Parliament. Parliament nonetheless believes that substantial efforts are still needed to inform Iceland's citizens what EU membership entails. They urge the government to broaden the public debate, which should be based on clear, factual information on the consequences of EU membership, so that the public "can make an informed choice in the future referendum on accession".
Procedure: Council and Commission statements + resolution
20110407IPR17168 Adopted text will be available here (click on 07.04.2011) Watch recording of debate (click on 06.04.2011)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
2
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/frd/vod/research-by-date?language=en
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
