Things we learned in plenary
Institutions
2011-04-08 - 09:38
Bill Gates was in the Development Committee to talk aid Migration from North Africa, nuclear energy, the Ivory Coast and the Roma strategy were among the main points during the April plenary session in Strasbourg. On the sidelines, the Development Committee welcomed special guest Bill Gates, who spoke about the fight against poverty and disease. Read more about the highlights of the session.
Bill Gates in the EP
Bill Gates was in the EP, not to talk about Microsoft, but about how to save lives through development aid to help farmers and improve health. "Millions of lives can be saved each year," the founder of the Gates Foundation told MEPs.
Ivory Coast
The European Parliament strongly condemned the violence against civilians in the Ivory Coast Thursday and said no efforts should be spared to identify and bring to justice all those responsible for crimes against the civilian population, including at international level. It urged the EU to support any inquiries.
New Roma strategy
The European Commission Tuesday presented its strategy for better integration of Europe's 10-12 million Roma people. MEPs stressed the need for binding EU-targets for housing, education, employment and health care.
Migration
Over the past few weeks thousands of immigrants have flooded into Lampedusa in Italy due to the unrest in the Southern Mediterranean. Monday MEPs discussed how to deal with the increased migration waves hitting Italy, Malta and Spain. They called for more solidarity between member states in handling the influx.
Nuclear energy and stress tests
MEP debated what steps should be taken regarding stress tests for nuclear stations and the EU's energy mix with the Council and Commission Wednesday. The Commission is currently drafting a list of criteria that will be sent to the EP and made public by the end of May. EP Facebook fans had the opportunity to chat about nuclear energy with Energy Committee Chair Herbert Reul Thursday. On Thursday MEPs rejected a resolution on nuclear safety in Europe, due to disagreement between the political groups.
European parties
The European Parliament voted a non-binding resolution to give EU-level political parties a legal personality. If transformed into binding law one day that would mean greater flexibility in financing, a higher ceiling for donations and the right to take part in referendum campaigns concerning the EU.
European Statistics on tourism
The European tourism industry generates over 5% of EU gross domestic product and the EU is the world's No 1 tourist destination, with 40% of global visitors. We only know this because of statistics and MEPs backed a new regulation on European Statistics on tourism to bring them more up to date with new trends, the increase in internet bookings and short-stay trips.
Enlargement
MEPs said they hoped soon to welcome Iceland as a new EU member state following the resolution of some last outstanding issues like banking, agriculture and fisheries. A report adopted on the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia recommends opening accession negotiations immediately.
Fisheries
Fisheries was in the spotlight with the approval of four texts: the renewal of a fisheries protocol with the Comoros, new rules on imports of fishery products from Greenland, a regulation extending existing transitional technical measures for the conservation of fishery resources and the adaption of a regulation on financial measures for the EU fisheries policy.
Fight against fraud in EU
Every year the Commission prepares a report on the fight against EU budget fraud. In a resolution, the EP criticises the Commission's 2009 report for providing too little information on fraud and irregularities. It says large amounts of EU funds are still spent incorrectly more information is needed from member states.
Resolution on EU framework to fight violence against women
All EU countries should recognise rape and sexual violence against women as crimes, including within marriage and informal intimate relationships, Parliament said in a resolution. It calls on member states to ensure that such offences result in automatic prosecution.
20110401STO16790 Latest press releases Slideshow on Flickr
EN
1
PHOTO
20110408PHT17304.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/en/pressroom/
EN
3
LINK
http://www.flickr.com/photos/european_parliament/sets/72157626303136619/show/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
