Open Days 2011: Welcome to the engine room of Europe
Institutions
General
2011-04-29 - 10:45
Each year tens of thousands people visit the Open Days of the European Parliament and other EU institutions in Brussels, Strasbourg and Luxembourg. The Open Days mark the anniversary of the declaration on 9 May 1950 by Robert Schuman, which proposed the creation of a European community. This year, it is also the 25th anniversary of the European flag as the banner of the European Union.
In Brussels , on Saturday 7 May, visitors can stroll among hundreds of stands, find information, ask questions or participate in debates in and outside the EU’s buildings between Rond Point Schuman and Place de Luxembourg. Or they can relax, taste regional dishes, sing karaoke or participate in a quiz.
Subjects in the news will form part of the event with the following main themes: economic recovery, innovation in energy and volunteering.
Visitors are welcome between 10am and 6pm in each of the European institutions to see what they do: at the Parliament (between rue Wiertz and place de Luxembourg), at the Committees (Committee of the Regions, European Economic and Social Committee) in the rue Belliard nearby, at the European Council and the Council (between the rue Belliard and the Rond Point Schuman) and at the Commission (in the Berlaymont building at the Rond Point Schuman). Entrance is free.
In Strasbourg , on Sunday 8 May, the Parliament's building will host numerous information stands set up by the political groups, Parliament's administration, the Hungarian presidency, other EU countries and a number of cross-border organisations.
In the chamber a debate will take place between MEPs on the European Year of Volunteering and an exhibition called "Figure de l'Europe" will be opened.
In the evening, the winner of Parliament's 2010 Lux Prize, "Die Fremde" will be shown at the “L’Odysée” cinema in the city centre, followed by a debate. Similar special showings of the film are taking place in cities around Europe in the week ahead.
In Luxembourg on Saturday 7 May, there will be stands in Place Clairefontaine inthe city centre, with public debates, concerts and dancing – and an enormous cake.
20110429IPR18410 A full programme of all activities in Brussels
EN
1
LINK
http://www.festivalofeurope.europa.eu
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
