Schengen, foreign policy dominate May Strasbourg plenary
Institutions
2011-05-13 - 08:01
EP celebrated Europe Day 9 May While Europe celebrated its 61st birthday this week, MEPs recalled that "Europe is not a given", but a task ahead of us. They criticised the possible reintroduction of border checks in the Schengen area and asked for a stronger European voice on the international scene. Also this week, Formula 1's Michael Schumacher was in Parliament to champion road safety, there was a musical celebration of Europe day and an unprecedented spam attack on Parliament’s Facebook page.
Europe Day On 9 May, Europe celebrated the anniversary of the signature of the Schuman Declaration in 1950 that laid the foundations of the EU. This year is also the 25th anniversary of two EU symbols - the flag and anthem. A piano concert and traditional flag raising ceremony in Strasbourg marked the event.
On Tuesday, MEPs signed off on 2009 EU spending in the so-called ' budget discharge procedure', but postponed the discharge for the Council of Ministers, the European Medicine Agency and the European Police College. The EP is the EU's budget discharge authority, which means that once annual accounts are finalised, it is up to MEPs to give political endorsement to EU expenditure.
MEPs discussed the future of the Schengen agreement and French and Italian calls for the temporary reintroduction of border controls inside the Schengen area. Most speakers criticised the proposition, but some called for better control of immigrant flows.
Consumers suffering from allergies may be the main beneficiaries of the new textile labelling scheme, which stipulates product labels must clearly indicate if textiles contain real fur or leather, both of which can be a health hazard to allergy sufferers.
High-speed broadband for all EU citizens by 2020? Unused or newly-freed frequency bands could be made available for the provision of new digital services, including mobile internet. This is particularly welcome news for rural areas due to the long distances such technology can cover.
The EP's facebook page was spammed with thousands of Syrian pro-government messages Tuesday and Wednesday night. At the same time the plenary asked for tougher sanctions against the Assad regime.
The EP reasserted its commitment to combating discrimination based on sexual orientation. "A person has the right to be different," said Jerzy Buzek at the opening of an exhibition on the freedom of assembly and expression celebrating the 7th anniversary of the International Day against Homophobia .
Road safety Ambassador and F1 world champion Michael Schumacher entered the EP at the "speed of light" to launch the UN Decade of Action on Road Safety campaign. He called on members to make sure that in future eSafety systems are available in all new cars.
Sarajevo - third European Capital of Culture in 2014? On Thursday MEPs suggested considering a bid by Sarajevo to be European Capital of Culture in 2014, on an exceptional basis. Despite tragic events in the 20th century, Sarajevo maintains its intercultural character. This title could help "bury the ghosts of past European divisions".
So-called cloned and other no vel food will not be labelled in Europe for now, after conciliation talks between the EP and Council failed. MEPs called on the Commission to come up with new proposals as soon as possible.
20110506STO18870 EP FB Flickr - May session
EN
1
PHOTO
20110502PHT18566.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.facebook.com/europeanparliament
EN
3
LINK
http://www.flickr.com/photos/european_parliament/sets/72157626702859284/show/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
