UK nominations for the EP prize for journalism 2011
Information
United Kingdom
2011-05-18 - 11:42
The UK nominations for the EP Prize for Journalism have been selected and will now compete for the €5,000 prizes against entries from other EU Member States. The radio category winner was Chris Bowlby, for a piece broadcast on BBC Radio 4, while the written press category winner was Ewan Pate for a piece written for the Scottish regional paper The Courier.
This is the fourth year the Prize has been awarded. Entries this year had to have been published or broadcast between 1 April 2010 and 31 march 2011. The overall winner in each of the four categories (TV, radio, internet, written press) has to have made an outstanding contribution to clarifying major issues at European level or have promoted a better understanding of EU institutions or policies. Altogether there were some 355 applications EU-wide.
Radio
The first of a two-part series for BBC Radio 4, entitled: "Europe: Driving on the Right" won the nomination in the radio category. Radio 4 is the main speech and news network in the UK, with a weekly reach of ten million listeners. In this series presenter Chris Bowlby investigated how the far right is influencing mainstream European politics. For this first episode he travelled to Scandinavia where anti-immigration parties are increasingly powerful.
The judging panel felt that report did a very useful job in bringing up an issue largely ignored by the British media and praised the programme for its strong interviews and its very topical feel.
Written Press
Ewan Paton's opinion piece, "Visit to the European Parliament brings it all home", appeared in a regular slot entitled "A farmer's View", following a visit to the Parliament building in Brussels to attend a meeting on CAP reform. The judging panel was moved by Mr. Pate's well written and moving description of the personal revelation he experienced about Europe and its significance, on what should have been a rather prosaic trip.
The UK judging panel
There were three members of the UK judging panel, one from the Reuters Institute for the Study of Journalism, a former BBC European affairs presenter, and a freelance legal journalist.
All nominees will be invited to the award ceremony in Brussels in mid-October.
20110518IPR19522
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
