Parliament's working group on codes of conduct for MEPs and lobbyists
Institutions
Parliament's Rules of Procedure
2011-05-25 - 14:19
Parliament has established, at the initiative of President Jerzy Buzek, a working group on codes of conduct for MEPs themselves and for representatives of outside interests. The group was established following media allegations of misconduct against a small number of MEPs. This background note brings together the various press releases and other details that Parliament has published so far about the working group and its proposals.
Members from all of the political groups in Parliament are represented on the group, which is chaired by President Buzek himself, with vice-chairs Diana Wallis (ALDE, UK) and Stavros Lambrinidis (S&D, EL).
The group has met on an almost weekly basis since its creation and plans to submit proposals by the end of June to the Bureau (made up of the President, the Vice-Presidents and the Quaestors) and Conference of Presidents (made up of the leaders of the political groups and chaired by the President).
On the basis of the decisions of those political bodies, the Constitutional Affairs Committee will look at what changes to the Parliament's Rules of Procedure are required.
20110523BKG20013
Creation of the working group
EP President Jerzy Buzek said on 23 March opening a plenary session in Brussels: "I can speak on behalf of the Bureau - and I am sure I am speaking on behalf of the majority of you, colleagues - when I say that we are determined to pursue a zero tolerance policy towards for the kind of behaviour that has led to the resignation of our colleagues. As President, I am determined to protect and safeguard the integrity of this House."
Parliament’s political leadership decided to overhaul rules governing the access and behaviour of lobbyists and to tighten the code of conduct for MEPs. At a meeting on 31 March, between President Jerzy Buzek and the leaders of the political groups in the Conference of Presidents, it was agreed to set up a working group of MEPs to elaborate a new set of rules.
On 7 April, having reviewed an official proposal for the creation of a working group under the chairmanship of President Buzek, the political leadership of Parliament gave it a formal endorsement. The Conference of Presidents said the group should act quickly and complete its work before the summer recess. President's Statement to plenary on Zero Tolerance - 23 March Proposal to set up the Working Group - 31 March 2011 Agreement to set up the working group - 7 April 2011
Members of the working group
The working group is made up as follows:
Chair: Jerzy Buzek, EP President
Vice-Chairs: Diana Wallis (ALDE, UK) Stavros Lambrinidis (S&D, UK)
Other members:
Jan Zahradil (ECR, CZ);
Claude Turmes (Greens/EFA, LU)
Alejo Vidal-Quadras (EPP, ES)
Francesco Speroni (EFD, IT);
Cornelis (Dennis) de Jong (GUE/NGL, NL)
Manfred Weber (EPP, DE)
Maria Badia i Cutchet (S&D, ES)
President Buzek gives update on rules reform for MEPs and lobbyists
"It is vital we consider adopting a Code of Conduct for Members of the European Parliament", President Jerzy Buzek told the Constitutional Affairs Committee on Monday 23 May 2011. The EP group working on new and stricter rules both for MEPs and lobbyists aimed to finalise its work by the end of June, he said.
Parliament's political leaders set up a 10-strong working group in April to prepare tighter codes of conduct for both MEPs and lobbyists after allegations of misconduct against four MEPs. President Buzek, chair of the working group, briefed Constitutional Affairs Committee MEPs on the work of the group.
"Our aim is to see what can be done on the code of conduct for outside interests – how rules could be strengthened on certain aspects, for instance regarding access to the EP", the President said.
New code of conduct for MEPs
Besides new rules for the lobbyists, MEPs themselves are set to have a stronger code of conduct. "Whilst most national parliaments have a code of conduct for Members or even more binding rules, the European Parliament has no such comprehensive framework", President Buzek pointed out, adding that "it is vital we consider also adopting a Code of Conduct for Members of the European Parliament."
The President told the committee that the working group is looking at the codes of conduct of national parliaments in eight EU Member States. The group has drawn up a comparative table setting out the relevant rules according to their strength, and will use this as a basis for adapting a first draft code of conduct for MEPs.
On the working methods of the group, President Buzek explained that the whole group is working on both sets of the new rules. The group meets once a week and works for 2 to 3 hours at a time. Ahead of each meeting, the President meets with the two Vice-Chairs, Diana Wallis (ALDE, UK) and Stavros Lambrinidis (S&D, EL).
Work to be finalised by June
Next week the working group will have an exchange of views with representatives of civil society institutions to gain further input for their work. "We would like to conclude our work by the end of June", President Buzek told the MEPs.
After this, the draft proposals would be submitted to Parliament's Bureau (the President and 14 Vice-Presidents) and the Conference of Presidents (leaders of Parliament's political groups). Once endorsed by these bodies, the proposals would be transmitted to the Constitutional Affairs Committee ahead of a final decision by the full Parliament.
President Buzek concluded his briefing by noting that he is "convinced that clearer guidelines for Members will help us all to better fulfil our obligations and will strengthen the confidence among citizens in our institution". Original version of this press release
EN
1
LINK
/president/view/en/press/press_release/2011/2011-March/press_release-2011-March-32.html
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20110331IPR16697 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20110407IPR17241 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20110523IPR19945 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
