Nuclear waste: exports to non-EU countries should be banned, say MEPs
Energy
Plenary sittings
2011-06-23 - 14:02
Nuclear waste exports to countries outside the EU should be prohibited, unless exported for recycling and imported back into the EU, and even within the EU should be permitted only when governed by bilateral agreements, said Parliament on Thursday. MEPs also backed stricter rules for protecting and training workers, called for stronger investigatory powers for national authorities, and said research on alternatives to burying the waste deep underground should be stepped up.
Under the proposed directive, each Member State would have to devise policies and programmes to ensure that spent fuel and radioactive waste is processed and disposed of safely. National policies would have to include inventories and management plans for all facilities, even after they close down.
Romana Jordan Cizelj (EPP, SL), who drafted the resolution, said during yesterday's debate that "The European Parliament has several times called for a directive on the processing of radioactive waste and spent fuel and events in Fukushima showed we were right to do so. We are positive about the idea of a directive and we want this directive to be stronger and clearer". The resolution was passed with 489 votes in favour, 52 against and 75 abstentions.
Banning exports to non-EU countries
One of the most contentious issues for MEPs was whether to allow exports of nuclear waste to countries outside the EU. In they vote, they eventually backed the option of banning exports to non-EU countries, contrary to what was initially proposed by the Energy Committee. The committee's amendment was rejected with 311 votes in favour, 328 against and 7 abstentions.
Two political groups (S&D, ALDE) wanted to stick to the Commission's initial proposal that each Member State would be responsible for disposing of the waste it produces and permitted to export it to another EU Member State only by bilateral agreement.
In plenary, Parliament backed the S&D proposal to allow waste exports only for recycling and only on condition that it is then imported back into the EU. The Greens suggested allowing exports only within the EU and only of small amounts of waste, whilst the GUE/EFA Group wanted to ban exports even within the EU.
Worker safety and stronger investigatory powers for national authorities
Workers involved in managing radioactive waste, from generation to disposal, must receive proper protection and training, insisted MEPs, who also advocated stepping up the investigatory powers of the competent authorities. National authorities should have the power to carry out regular "nuclear safety assessments, investigations and controls" and "where necessary" to take enforcement actions, they said.
Research on alternative options for highly-radioactive waste
Parliament backed the idea of stepping up research into alternatives to burying the waste deep underground, contrary to the Commission proposal, which lists "deep geological disposal" as the safest option for highly radioactive waste.
The Commission's initial proposal was presented in November 2010. The directive is based on the Euratom Treaty and comes under the consultation procedure. The Council will take a final decision only after it has received Parliament's position.
Procedure: Consultation
Debate: 22.06.2011
Vote: 23.06.2011
20110622IPR22334 Adopted text will be available here (click on 23.06.2011) Video recording of debate in plenary (22.06.2011) Press Release on Committee vote (26.05.2011) Profile of rapporteur Romana JORDAN CIZELJ (EPP, SL)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
2
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/frd/vod/research-by-date?language=en
EN
4
LINK
/members/expert/alphaOrder/view.do?language=EN&id=28291
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20110523IPR20015 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
