Heritage Label to promote common European identity
Culture
Committees Culture and Education
2011-10-05 - 12:16
Cornelia GUSA BXL (+32) 2 28 32601 STR (+33) 3 881 73784 EMAIL cult-press@europarl.europa.eu Symbolic sites for Europe's history or integration will be eligible for a voluntary European heritage label under a deal with EU Member States endorsed by the Culture and Education Committee on Wednesday. The scheme aims to promote educational activities and to raise young people's awareness of Europe's common heritage and identity. Special attention will go to "transnational" sites of pan-European importance.
The committee approved a resolution endorsing a deal with EU Member States to create the label.
Clear and transparent procedures
The text lays down clear and and transparent common procedures for granting this quality label, from 2013, to selected sites such as monuments, natural, submerged, archeological, industrial or urban sites, cultural landscapes, places of remembrance, cultural goods and objects or "intangible heritage" associated with a place.
Contemporary heritage will also be eligible for the label, not on architectural or aesthetic grounds, but rather those of its relevance to Europe's common history and heritage.
Participation will be entirely voluntary. Every two years, Member States will be able to propose up to two candidate sites, from which the jury of 13 independent experts will chose a maximum of one.
"Transnational" and thematic sites
Particular attention will be given to "transnational" sites, given their special symbolism for Europe's common history. MEPs nonetheless ask that these sites should meet specific conditions: each site should meet the criteria for granting a label, and a site co-ordinator will be the Commission's sole interlocutor.
Member States may also apply for a label for several national sites linked by a common theme.
Towards uniform heritage labels
The European heritage label scheme builds on an intergovernmental one of the same name, started in 2006. Sites that have been awarded labels since 2006 under the old scheme may apply for labels under the new one. Within six years of the new scheme's entry into effect, a decision should be taken on whether European third countries may also take part.
Managing, protecting and promoting the sites will remain the responsibility of Member States. The European Commission will run communication and awareness-raising work such as creating a specific internet site for the label and encouraging promotional activities that network labelled sites.
Next steps
The committee vote was unanimous. Parliament will put the proposal to a plenary vote in November, and will then need to be formally approved by the Council.
In the chair: Doris Pack (EPP, DE)
20111003IPR28104 Culture and Education Committee
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=CULT
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
