Bank capital rules: stakeholders state their views
Economic and monetary affairs
Committees Economic and Monetary Affairs
2011-10-12 - 12:31
John SCHRANZ BXL (+32) 2 28 44264 STR (+33) 3 881 74076 PORT (+32) 498 98 14 02 EMAIL econ-press@europarl.europa.eu With EU banks caught in the eye of the Eurozone sovereign debt crisis, on Tuesday Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee MEPs discussed the best design for the latest rules regulating bank capital requirements with industry representatives, academics, the Chair of the European banking watchdog, and the head of the recently founded counter-finance lobby group Finance Watch.
The European Parliament has joint power with Member States to translate into EU law the Basel agreement, reached earlier this year, to raise global standards for the amounts of good quality capital banks must set aside for rainy days and to limit the amount of borrowed money (leverage) that banks use for their trading activities.
In the discussion, rapporteur Othmar Karras (EPP, AT), stressed the need to develop legislation not just in reaction to the crisis, and which would be useful only in times of stress, but which would also produce benefits in normal times. He also underlined the importance of developing a level playing field environment which did not leave smaller players in a worse position than larger ones.
Clash on costs to the real economy
Banking industry representatives painted a predictably dire picture of the increased costs that they would have to pass on to businesses as a result of the new rules. They argued that borrowing costs could grow by up to 1% and that banks' reluctance to lend would make it harder for businesses to get finance. Moreover, companies in other continents applying the rules less severely would be handed a competitive advantage due to their easier and cheaper access to finance, they added.
Finance Watch Secretary General Thierry Phillipponnat categorically rejected all these claims, arguing that there was no empirical evidence available to show that borrowing would become more difficult and more expensive. He criticized the Commission's current legislative proposals, arguing that the better capital ratios alone would not cure the ills. This was shown by the fate shared by Lehman Brothers and Dexia, despite the fact that both had held more than double the capital that the Commission proposal would have required, he said. Mr Phillipponnat also asked that borrowing limits be lowered.
Sven Giegold (Greens, DE) challenged all parties making claims about the cost or non-cost of the legislation to present lawmakers with written proof of their assertions. Tübingen University Professor Claudia Buch said that costs to lenders would be very small and that any cost they did bear should be compared to the huge cost of the financial crisis.
Beyond Basel
The meeting also discussed the potential benefits to the EU of developing variants to the rules agreed by the Basel committee. European Banking Authority chair Andrea Enria argued that this could be considered, but only in order to take account of the specificities of the EU banking sector, rather than to allow certain banks to circumvent the rules. Andreas Treichl from Erste Bank argued against any deviation from the Basel rules.
Next steps
The draft report amending the Commission's proposals is expected to be presented by the rapporteur, Othmar Karras (EPP, AT), late in January 2012, with a vote in the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee expected for the end of April. After that, negotiations begin with the Member States, in the hope that a deal can be reached by the summer.
In the Chair: Sharon Bowles (ALDE, UK)
20111010IPR28786 Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee See the debate
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=ECON
EN
2
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/frd/vod/player?eventCode=20111011-1500-COMMITTEE-ECON&language=en&byLeftMenu=researchcommittee&category=COMMITTEE&format=wmv#anchor1
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
