Internet journalism prize winner - at some point, EU constitution will come
Institutions
2011-10-19 - 11:57
EP internet Journalism Prize winner Massimilano Nespola Italian blogger Massimiliano Nespola has won the EP's 2011 internet Journalism Prize for his article: "We do not know when, but a European constitution will come". All four winners were announced by EP President Jerzy Buzek at a ceremony in Brussels 19 October.
The jury said "the blogger skillfully depicted the EU as an institution-in-progress, representing not just economic interest groups but all Europe's citizens". We spoke to Nespola ahead of the award ceremony.
You blog about Europe, why did you decide to write about European integration?
I’ve studied the subject since 2004 when I wrote my first thesis on the European Parliament election campaign in Italy. Afterwards I continued with studies on the European constitution, enlargement and EU legal cooperation.
Your article was inspired by the book "Europa 2.0 Prospects and evolution of European dream", how?
It’s a synthesis. The book combines ideas from different disciplines into a whole. It talks about European integration without limiting itself to one specific branch of knowledge, for example law or sociology.
You need this kind of approach to make anthropologists, sociologists, lawyers and political scientists understand each other when discussing Europe. This was very important for me. I also liked the political debate and emotionally rich presentation in the book.
You argue for a European constitution and more Europe to effectively respond to the challenges of globalisation. What do you say to eurosceptics who claim the EU lacks legitimacy, having been built from the top, without consulting the people?
It’s a sensitive issue. You can't expect people to always be enthusiastic. The EU is young and needs time to win legitimacy. To this end a correct reporting on European issues by journalists is very important.
Do you consider yourself a federalist ?
Yes, if we speak about the importance of subsidiarity - it is fundamental to federalism. However, I do not know whether the EU will end up with exactly the same form of government as the US. European integration should progress slowly and carefully.
Is there a final destination for European integration?
No. We can say our destination is more legitimacy and we can make progress in this direction. But we can’t have a final point, as every ending is a new beginning.
What is the role of the media in engaging citizens with the European project?
The European media is too focused on high-level politics in Brussels and Strasbourg. We need to pay more attention to the point of view of citizens and put them centre stage. Let the people speak and say freely what they think and want. We need more from citizens, not just statistics.
What does this prize mean to you?
It’s a new starting point to continue research and communicating on Europe.
2011 Journalism prize winners Press: Romain Gubert (Le Point, France) Internet: Massimiliano Nespola (Italian blogger) TV: Tero Koskinen (YLE, Finland) Radio: Steffen Wurzel (SWR, Germany) 20111014STO29287 Press release about the winners Nespola’s article Journalism Prize website
EN
1
PHOTO
20111012PHT29066.jpg
EN
3
LINK
http://www.comuniclab.it/79579/non-si-sa-quando-ma-la-costituzione-europea-arriver
EN
4
LINK
http://www.eppj.eu/view/en/index.html
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20111017IPR29432 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
