Budget, social issues centre stage October Strasbourg plenary
Institutions
2011-10-21 - 12:21
Maternity, child protection on agenda The EU's 2012 budget was centre stage 26 October, when MEPs debated and approved a common position on next year's spending, marking the starting point of negotiations with EU ministers in the Council. On Thursday morning MEPs debated the outcome of Wednesday's EU summit on the euro crisis with EU Council President Herman Van Rompuy and Commission President José Manuel Barroso.
Also on the agenda this week were rules aimed at cracking down on child abusers and web pornography, proposals to help single mothers back to work and a question about the status of legislation on maternity leave.
Outside of the plenary, group leaders decided on the winner of this year's winner of the Sakharov Prize for freedom of thought. The prize goes to 5 Arab Spring activists.
20111014FCS29306
Newsletter- 24-27 October 2011 - Strasbourg plenary session
Question time with the Commission on single market Parliament to assess European Council conclusions
The outcome of the 23 October summit of EU heads of state and government will be debated in Parliament on Thursday, with Council and Commission presidents Herman Van Rompuy and José Manuel Barroso.
EU budget 2012
Parliament debates and votes its stance on next year's EU budget on Wednesday. The outcome will be the starting point for Parliament's 2012 budget negotiations with the Council (EU finance ministers) during a 21-day conciliation period.
New rules to crack down on child abusers and web pornography
Child abusers and viewers of child sex images on the web would face tough penalties and porn web pages would have to be deleted across the EU, under new rules to be voted on Thursday. The draft directive agreed by Parliament and Council also aims to step up prevention and help for victims.
Sakharov Prize 2011 winner to be chosen
The winner of this year's Sakharov Prize, Parliament's award for the freedom of thought, will be chosen by President Jerzy Buzek and political group leaders on Thursday.
Using the single market better to exit the crisis
On Tuesday, MEPs will quiz Commissioners Barnier, Dalli and Kroes on the spring 2011 Single Market Act and how to reap the full benefits of the EU single market. Making full use of the single market could potentially produce growth of about 4% of EU GDP over the next 10 years and so help Member States to exit the current economic crisis.
Easier access to public procurement for small and medium-sized firms
EU rules should be simplified to make it easier for small and medium-sized firms to bid for public contracts, say MEPs in a draft resolution to be voted on Tuesday.
Blocking mafia access to public funds
The EU needs stricter rules to prevent mafia-style organisations from getting access to public funds, says a draft resolution to be voted on Tuesday. MEPs also call for new laws to prevent firms linked to organised crime from bidding for public procurement contracts. Parliament should set up a special committee to investigate infiltration of the public sector and legal economy by criminal organisations, they add.
Asylum: levelling up the rights of people in need of protection in EU countries
Third country nationals who are at risk of serious harm in their home countries, such as torture or execution, but who do not qualify as refugees, would nonetheless get the same rights as refugees to work, vocational training, education, health care and accommodation in the EU, under revised asylum rules to be voted on Thursday.
Opening up EU labour markets to Bulgarian and Romanian citizens
A draft resolution calling on EU Member States to allow Bulgarians and Romanians onto the EU labour market by the end of 2011 will be put to a vote on Tuesday.
Other items on the agenda:
Ombudsman's work under the spotlight
Global economic governance in need of an overhaul
MEPs to call for more support for single mothers
EP set to approve Police College and Medicines Agency budget management for 2009
Air passenger data transfers to Australia
Human rights and democracy resolutions EuroparlTV European Parliament Audiovisual website
Steps towards more inclusive society
Ádám Kósa signing during a plenary session People with disabilities have poor access to the labour market and services in Europe. Improving their chances would benefit society and the economy, according to a report by Hungarian Christian Democrat Ádám Kósa, which proposes a route forward. It was discussed on Monday and voted in Tuesday's plenary.
"To achieve our goals, the rights of people with disabilities must be strengthened," Mr Kósa, who is himself deaf, said, ahead of the debate. "Sign languages and special communication techniques, including ICT-based solutions, are key to providing accessible services and solutions, that would enable us to communicate, live and work with the rest of the society."
Only 30-40% of disabled people work
Mr Kósa's own-initiative report notes that while there are 80 million people with disabilities living in Europe, only 30‑40% of them is in work because of limited access to the labour market.
Employment is vital because people with disabilities are in greater danger of falling into poverty - the OECD says one in four lives in poverty - and small and medium sized companies could play a key role in boosting employment of those with disabilities, the report says.
Better focus in education
Education is another area where improvements need to be made, it says, as only 5% of people with disabilities have a higher-education qualification. It calls for more attention to be focused on the needs of the disabled from an early age, including extra help for parents.
In addition, access to services and products, for example, braille pricing on products for the blind, should be improved and people with disabilities should be encouraged to take an active role in public life through voting or taking office, according to the report.
The report also urges member states to sign and ratify the UN Convention on the Rights of the Disabled and develop national strategies in line with the European Disability Strategy and the EU2020 strategy. Kósa report Interview with Mr Kósa European Disability Strategy
Tax breaks, company incentives could help improve lot of single parents
Measures are needed to improve the situation of single parent households ©Belga/Belpress There are an increasing number of single parent households in the EU and they are almost three times more likely to be at risk of poverty and social exclusion than couples with children. A report by Italian EPP member Barbara Matera suggests tax breaks and incentives for companies could help.
The own-initiative report, which was discussed Monday evening and voted on Tuesday, suggests "tax breaks and incentives to companies that provide training and on-site day care and nursery facilities," and the provision of education, training and housing support.
According to data from 2006, 32% of single-parent households in 25 EU countries were at risk of poverty compared to 12% of couples with children.
In the report, Matera says that 5% of women in the EU are single mothers, but she also wants any initiatives to be extended to single fathers. Single parents* 85% of single parents in 2001 were women aged 25-65 statistically less educated then married counterparts high levels of unemployment available jobs often part-time, underpaid often suffer bad health, stress * details from explanatory statement in the report Matera report
Opening of the session - debate on euro-crisis added Tuesday, key EU decisions, Tunisia, Libya, ETA and Turkey
New item on the agenda: debate on the euro crisis summits Parliament added a debate on the euro crisis summits to the agenda for Tuesday afternoon. President Jerzy Buzek highlighted Wednesday's votes on the EU's 2012 budget. He also welcomed Tunisia's first free election, the end of Colonel Gaddafi's 40-year rule in Libya, and ETA's renunciation of violence. Finally, he voiced Parliament's sympathy with those close to the 200 victims of Sunday's catastrophic earthquake in Turkey.
The Eurogroup and the European Council need to take decisions in the coming weeks to satisfy citizens and markets that an exit will be made from the euro crisis, said Mr Buzek, noting that European Council President Herman Van Rompuy will be in Parliament Thursday to report on progress. Parliament will discuss the summits on Tuesday, at 1500 CET, based on Council and Commission statements on the economic crisis. This debate will last 45 minutes, and the day's remaining agenda items will therefore each start 45 minutes later.
The EU budget, on which Parliament votes Wednesday, must be an investment in growth and job creation, he continued, thanking MEPs who had contributed to the success of the previous week's high-level conference on the EU's multiannual financial framework.
Tunisia and Libya
Mr Buzek welcomed Tunisia's first free election, held the previous Sunday, noting that it had passed off peacefully, there had been a 90% turnout of registered voters, and people had voted "responsibly". He also welcomed the fact that Colonel Gaddafi's death meant his 40-year dictatorial rule over Libya was finally over, and it could set off on the road to democracy.
ETA
The renunciation of violence by Spanish terrorist organisation ETA the previous week was also welcomed by the President, who stressed that ETA must now "disarm and dissolve". He paid tribute to Spain's counter-terrorism services, and paid tribute to ETA's 829 victims over four decades.
Turkey
Finally, the President extended Parliament's sympathy to those close to the 200 victims of the earthquake that hit Turkey on Sunday. "We share the pain of the Turkish nation," he said.
Other announcements
Kent Johansson (ALDE, SE) has replaced Lena Ek (ALDE, SE). Final draft agenda Plenary Newsletter
Opening up EU labour markets to Bulgarian and Romanian citizens
Markets should be open by end of this year ©Belga/EFP All EU Member States should allow Bulgarians and Romanians onto their labour markets by the end of 2011, says a resolution passed on Tuesday.
No negative effects have been reported in those Member States that have allowed workers from Member States that joined the EU in 2004 and 2007 onto their labour markets, notes the resolution, which was drafted by Traian Ungureanu (EPP, RO) and passed by a show of hands.
"Official figures, including figures from the Commission, proved that workers from Eastern Europe did not generate unemployment and did not put pressure on the social welfare systems. On the contrary, the influx brought economic growth in the destination countries evaluated at around 1% of the GDP," said the rapporteur in Monday's debate.
MEPs call on Member States to review their rules on transitional periods and urge those Member States that still impose restrictions on Bulgarian and Romanian citizens to remove them by the end of 2011, before the final deadline of 2013 laid down in the EU accession treaty.
In the long run, these restrictions can have a detrimental impact on fundamental values and rights enshrined in the EU treaties, such as free movement, non-discrimination, solidarity and equal rights, they say.
MEPs also deplore recent legislative proposals in some Member States to reimpose labour market access restrictions on citizens from some other Member States and call on the Commission to investigate whether such policies infringe EU law.
Workers have the right to free movement
MEPs expressed concern about EU Member States' poor transposition into national law and enforcement of EU legislation on the free movement of workers and especially Directive 2004/38/EC on the right of citizens and their family members to move and reside freely in the EU. If necessary, the Commission should exercise its right to initiate infringements against non-compliant Member States, they said.
Recognising professional qualifications
Current procedures for recognising professional qualifications are another big obstacle to workers' mobility in the EU, notes the resolution, which calls on the Commission to reform current EU rules in this area.
Procedure: Non-legislative resolution Profile of rapporteur Traian Ungureanu (EPP, RO)
Balzani: 2012 budget should be development-oriented
Focus should be on growth and jobs Wednesday's vote on the EU 2012 budget marks the beginning of the last phase of the budget negotiations between the Parliament and member states. Italian Socialist Francesca Balzani, one of the draftsmen of the EP's position on the budget, says it should promote growth and the creation of high-quality jobs in line with the EU's 2020 strategy. The Council should finance the latter in a proper way, despite calls for austerity, she says.
What is the main point of contention between the EP and Council?
The promotion of a smart, sustainable and inclusive economy, which creates growth and high-quality employment by delivering on the Europe 2020 strategy goals has been endorsed by all 27 member states and the EU institutions, but while the Council recognises its importance, because of austerity constraints, it is not prepared to finance the EU2020 strategy in a proper way.
The EU 2020 strategy aims to establish the conditions for economic recovery. The EP believes that investments must be made now and not delayed any further. We think some actions are underfunded and are asking for implementation of the strategy to be speeded up.
How far apart are the Council and EP? How many billions are we talking about?
The difference between the EP's position and Council's position is €1.5 billion in commitments and €4 billion in payments. The EP is talking about €147.766 billion in commitments and €133.143 billion in payments, while the Council wants to limit commitments to €146.254 billion and payments to €129.088 billion.
In July the Council went for a budget freeze, allowing only increases in line with inflation. Does the EP think increases are warranted at times of austerity?
The EU budget for each year is a part of a 7-year financial framework which estimates how much money EU programmes will need. The EP's proposal for next year's budget addresses the need to respect existing commitments and to speed up programmes that are running out. The EP thinks inflation is not a good benchmark, especially not two years before the end of the financial framework.
The EU's role increased under the Lisbon Treaty, but it seems member states want more done with less money. Are there enough of reserves to manage that?
Great efforts will be needed from all institutions to save money as well as the redistribution of money from old to new actions. Nevertheless, the EP will try to secure financing for the priorities of the 2020 Strategy for more and better jobs in EU. Article following committee vote (6 October) Report
Parliament votes growth-stimulating budget for 2012
Parliament voted its position on next year's budget on Wednesday Parliament aimed for a 2012 budget for growth, employment and innovation in the Union and for supporting development and democracy in neighbouring countries, when it voted its position on next year's budget on Wednesday.
In general, MEPs sought to restore the draft budget proposed by the Commission, which the Council cut in July. Parliament's position implies an increase in payments of 5.2% as compared to this year's budget, resulting in a budget of €133.1 billion. The budget resolution was adopted with 431 votes in favour, 120 against and 124 abstentions.
A 21-day conciliation period starts in November, with meetings foreseen on 8 and 18 November. Furthermore, there are budget trilogues foreseen on 3, 10 and 14 November. If Parliament and Council can agree, the final budget could be approved at the December session in Brussels.
Investments in R&D, cohesion and structural funds on track
The spending categories that see the biggest increases in payments are Research and Development (10.35%) and Cohesion and Structural funds (8.8%). This is because these policies in fact consist of long-term investment projects which now, in the fifth year of the current multiannual financial framework (MFF), are up to full speed and for which money committed earlier now needs to be paid out.
Another category that sees a significant increase is Freedom, Security and Justice (6.84%), due to growing needs to manage refugee and migration flows and step up maritime surveillance in the Mediterranean.
By contrast, in category 1A, "Competitiveness for growth and employment" and category 4, "the EU as a global player", Parliament wants to spend only slightly more than the Commission originally proposed.
Several MEPs criticised the Council for inconsistencies in its position on the Commission's Draft Budget. The budgets for the new European financial supervision bodies and Frontex are deemed insufficient for them to function properly, whereas their work is considered a top priority.
Research, innovation and education (heading 1A)
Francesca Balzani (S&D, IT), who is steering the budget through Parliament, stressed that investments are needed to secure future growth and employment. Parliament followed her proposals to increase spending on programmes related to the EU2020 strategy
Parliament does not agree to funding the EU's nuclear fusion programme ITER with money allocated for R&D under the 7th Research and Development Framework Programme, as the Commission and Council propose. As the idea for this mega-project was mooted during the current MFF period, MEPs feel it should be financed with fresh money, and not by funding taken from other research projects.
Cohesion policy (heading 1B)
On the policy for greater cohesion between the EU's regions, MEPs restored the Commission's draft budget proposal, which Member States had sought to cut.
Agriculture and environment (heading 2)
Parliament agreed to add €250 million to emergency funds for fruit and vegetable producers. This money is meant to prevent future crises like the EHEC-bacteria outbreak earlier this year and to compensate farmers for the financial consequences of further crises.
MEPs strongly defended the EU's "food-for-the-needy" scheme, which provides food to food banks, for which Council is blocking a new legal basis.
Freedom, security, justice and citizenship (headings 3a and 3b)
Parliament disagreed with cuts proposed by the Council on the EU Refugee Fund, Return Fund and External Border Fund (€45 million). The budget for the EU border agency Frontex should be increased by a reserve of €25 million, they said, because this money might be needed for maritime border controls in the Mediterranean and for stepping up surveillance at the Greek-Turkish border. Just last month extra money was added to the 2011 budget for these purposes and MEPs feel that matters may not improve by the end of the year.
Foreign affairs (heading 4)
MEPs approved an increase of €100 million in aid to Palestine, the Middle East Peace process and the United Nations Relief and Works Agency for Palestine Refugees (UNRWA). They also approved €27 million for the development co-operation instrument for Asia and Latin America, and added €3 million for election observation missions and €3 million for the Turkish-Cypriot Community. To fund this, MEPs cut other lines, such as the EU Police Mission in Afghanistan and the line for emergency measures under the common foreign and security policy (CFSP).
Administration (heading 5)
The rapporteur for the EP budget and those of the other institutions, Mr José Manuel Fernandes (EPP, PT) proposed further cuts to Parliament's budget. Parliament opted for a below-inflation increase of 1.44%, while doing significantly more with the money. The proposal now includes the accommodation of 18 extra MEPs as a result of the Lisbon Treaty. If these costs were excluded, the increase would amount to only 0.8%. To bring expenses down, MEPs intend to save money on translation and interpretation, by making organisational changes, and voted for a 5% cut in travel expenses, for example by reducing the number of business flights. All allowances will be frozen at 2011 levels. Commission's Draft Budget 2012: Webtool: the EU budget in your country Ten facts about the EU Budget EP Rapporteur for Budget 2012: Francesca Balzani (S&D; IT): EP Rapporteur for other sections: José Manuel Fernandes (EPP, PT):
Maternity leave revisions continue to split EP and Council
Maternity leave proposals look set to remain blocked ©Belga/Monkey Business It has been a year since the EP called for an extension to maternity leave to 20 weeks on full pay and on Tuesday Portuguese Socialist Edite Estrela asked a representative of the Polish presidency of the Council why no progress has been made on revising the rules.
Radosław Mleczko, Vice Minister for Labour and Social Policy said that it would be difficult to reach a compromise on revising maternity leave rules based on the EP's amendments extending leave for mothers and fathers, given the backdrop of a struggling world economy. The EP proposed giving fathers 2 weeks paternity leave with full pay.
Maternity a service not a burden
During the debate Estrela pressed for a rethink of the role of mothers in our society. "Maternity should not be seen as a burden on the economy but rather as a service provided to society.".
In her question, she said that in order to reach the 75% employment rate for women set out in the EU 2020 strategy, further measures to facilitate the reconciliation of work and family life must be implemented. She urged the Council to reach a formal position so that discussions on finding a compromise can begin with the EP.
Minister urges EP to think again
"Each party has the same goal (parent friendly regulation) but each party is looking in a different direction," Mr Mleczko said. "We have to say frankly that in the face of the crisis and solutions already in place the Council cannot accept 20 fully paid weeks of leave."
He encouraged the EP to reconsider its position and "bear in mind the traditions and experiences of our Member States."
Current maternity leave is a minimum of 14 weeks and the Commission's proposal was to extend leave to 18 weeks. Maternity leave varies across the EU as does the amount of pay received.
What's next?
The EP and Council are co-legislators for the dossier. The EP adopted it's first reading on the Commission's proposal and it is now up to the member states to react to the EP's amendments before the proposal can move on. So for the time being the current legislation remains in force and the new proposals remain frozen. Oral question Interview with Edite Estrela (2010) OEIL links to various dossiers linked to the legislative proposal
European Council eurozone deal: MEPs relieved, yet wary of the future
Hair cut might not be sufficient - MEPs MEPs Thursday morning welcomed the deal on saving the euro agreed by EU leaders only six hours earlier, but warned that this is only the first step and that much still needs to be done to exit the crisis. While most political group leaders called for deeper economic integration within the EU, others doubted that today's deal will make a real difference.
"We are witnessing a historical moment in the EU," EP President Jerzy Buzek said as he opened the debate.
European Council President Herman Van Rompuy summarised the main points of the agreement: a write down of 50% of Greece's debt (a so-called hair cut), increased firepower for the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) to prevent contagion, bank recapitalisation to establish trust in the EU banking system, fiscal consolidation and structural reform and measures to stimulate the growth in the EU. "Last night we took crucial political steps," he said.
Europe is closer to resolving the crisis, European Commission president Jose Manuel Barroso said. The European Council conclusions recognise the importance of further deepening economic integration, especially in the euro area, he said. "The Commission is committed to a true economic union."
He reiterated that the Commission plans to propose a financial transaction tax. This is the kind of action people expect, a contribution of the financial sector to society, he said, referring to recent protests around the globe.
"We need to adopt a new model of economic governance: the euro won't work durably without it," EPP leader Joseph Daul said. "We need budget, fiscal and social integration in the countries of the eurozone, in the countries that would like to join. This integration, this political Europe, is an absolute must."
"This was progress but without final solutions," said Socialist leader Martin Schulz . But, he added, these decisions should have been taken a year ago. He called for measures against tax evasion and a swift introduction of a financial transaction tax.
Liberal leader Guy Verhofstadt welcomed the European Council agreement, but warned that a strong and stable euro in the medium- and long-term can only be guaranteed by establishing economic and fiscal union alongside monetary union.
Jan Zahradil for the ECR group was less optimistic. "My feeling is that the eurozone is serving just a few countries and not the 27...We must not let the single market down".
While expressing relief about the summit results, Greens leader Rebecca Harms was sceptical that the bank recapitalisation and "hair-cut" of Greek debt would be enough. She also doubted market reaction to leverge of the EFSF, which she said was insufficient.
Lothar Bisky for the GUE/NGL group welcomed the hair-cut imposed on banks holding Greek debt, but had doubts whether this would attenuate the catastrophic social situation being endured by the Greeks. How long can the government act against the majority of people, he asked, referring to conditions imposed on Greece by the EU and IMF.
"This crisis touches the very foundations of European stability," Bastisaan Belder said for the EFD. "We need to restore market confidence." Summit conclusions Private banks holding Greek government debt asked to write off 50%, about €100 mln EFSF bail out fund raised to €1 trln Banks to raise capital quotas to 9% by 2012 Main results of the Summit
Child sex crimes: Parliament backs tougher penalties and EU-wide deletion of porn web pages
Child porn web pages must go ©Belga/ANP Child abusers and viewers of child sex images on the web will face tough penalties in the EU, under new rules approved by Parliament on Thursday. The directive will also require EU countries to remove child porn web sites, or, should this prove impossible, allow them to block access to those pages within their territory. Studies suggest that between 10% and 20% of minors in Europe may be sexually assaulted during childhood.
The directive, already agreed by MEPs and home affairs ministers, will introduce EU-wide requirements on prevention, prosecution of offenders and protection for victims. Member States will have two years to transpose the new rules into national law.
"The new directive to combat sexual abuse and exploitation of children and child pornography is an innovative legislative instrument and a step forward for the protection of our children. The text will be available to the competent authorities and NGOs, so that there is zero tolerance of all crimes against children" said Roberta Angelilli (EPP, IT), who steered the legislation through Parliament.
Tough times ahead for child sex offenders
The text sets out minimum penalties for about 20 criminal offences - far more than are usually provided for in EU legislation. MEPs fought for tougher penalties across the EU, especially in cases of abuse by persons in a position of trust, authority or influence over the child (e.g. family members, guardians or teachers) or abuse of particularly vulnerable children (e.g. those with a physical or mental disability or under the influence of drugs or alcohol).
For instance, coercing a child into sexual actions or forcing a child into prostitution will be punishable by at least ten years in prison. Child pornography producers will face at least three years, and viewers of child pornography on the web at least one year.
On-line grooming and sex tourism
On-line "grooming" (befriending children via the web with the intention of sexually abusing them) will also become a criminal offence across the EU, as will child sex tourism, where the offence is committed on a Member State's territory or by one of its nationals abroad.
Child porn web pages must go...
Member States will have to ensure the prompt removal of web pages containing or disseminating child pornography hosted in their territory. They will also have to do their best to co-operate with third countries (US and others) to obtain the removal of such pages if hosted outside the EU.
... but blocking may still be needed
However, the removal of child pornography content at its source is often not possible (e.g. because the state where servers are hosted is unwilling to co-operate or because removal would take too long). In these cases, Member States may block access to those pages for internet users in their territory, says the text agreed with the Council. These measures to block access to web pages will have to follow transparent procedures and provide adequate safeguards.
The number of web sites devoted to child pornography is growing and it is estimated that 200 images containing child pornography are put into circulation every day. Ever younger children are portrayed in pornography, and the images are becoming more graphic and more violent.
Ban on working with children
Since some 20% of sex offenders go on to commit further offences after conviction, the directive stipulates that convicted offenders "may be temporarily or permanently prevented from exercising at least professional activities involving direct and regular contacts with children".
Employers when recruiting will be entitled to request information on convictions for sexual offences against children. Member States will also be entitled to take other measures, such as listing convicted persons in "sex offender registers".
Next steps
The directive is expected to be formally adopted by the Council of Ministers before the end of the year. Member States will then have two years to transpose the new rules into their national laws.
The legislative resolution was adopted in Parliament with 541 votes in favour, 2 against and 31 abstentions.
Procedure: co-decision, first reading Questions & Answers on removal or blocking of child pornography on the Internet Profile of rapporteur Roberta Angelilli (EPP, IT)
Things we learnt in plenary: Strasbourg, 24-27 October 2011
Budget, EU Summit, Sakharov featured The EU's 2012 budget and the euro-zone summits dominated this week's agenda. MEPs also discussed rules to combat child pornography, organised crime in the EU, mobility for Bulgarians and Romanians and asylum rules. In addition on Thursday EP President Jerzy Buzek announced that five Arab Spring activists had won this year's Sakharov Prize.
On 25 October, the EP called for stricter rules to prevent mafia-style organisations from gaining access to public funds. MEPs urged the Commission to draw up rules to prevent companies linked to organised crime from getting government contracts. They also proposed setting up a special committee "within three months" to investigate the misuse of public funds by criminal organisations and their infiltration into the public sector.
Also on Tuesday, the EP voted on a resolution highlighting the need for a reform of global economic governance to help rebalance the world economy and avoid another slump. MEPs call for a more democratic IMF, an end to banking secrecy, separation of speculative and retail banking, a single EU seat at the IMF and World Bank, and a halt to political exchange rate manipulation.
MEPs discussed the euro-zone summit , on Tuesday and again on Thursday, when they welcomed the decisions taken by leaders to resolve the crisis but also expressed doubts that the proposed measures are far-reaching enough.
Parliament called on all EU countries to allow Bulgarian and Romanian workers full access to their labour markets before the end of the year.
The EU's 2012 budget was centre stage Wednesday as MEPs agreed on key priorities for funding ahead of negotiations with finance ministers, set to begin in November.
MEPs also came up with proposals for a new skills and jobs agenda , which focuses on how the EU could reach its 75% employment target by 2020.
The problem of antibiotic resistance and the growing danger to humans and animals (it causes around 25,000 deaths in the EU each year and results in €1.5 billion in healthcare costs) led MEPs to call on the EU to promote a more prudent use of antibiotics.
People who are at risk of serious harm if they return to their home country, but who don't qualify as refugees should get similar rights to refugees as regards work, education, health care and accommodation, according to asylum rules proposals approved on Thursday.
MEPs approved a report about tackling sexual abuse and sexual exploitation of children and child pornography that calls for more investigations and charges to be brought, as well as the removal of child pornography from servers across the EU.
In a resolution Thursday, MEPs condemned the 7-year jail sentence given to Ukraine 's opposition leader. It said "a failure to review Yulia Tymoshenko's conviction will jeopardise the conclusion of the Association Agreement and its ratification, while pushing the country further away from the realisation of its European perspective". Plenary in photos on Flickr
EN
1
PHOTO
20111020PHT29927.jpg
EN
2
PHOTO
20111021PHT30001.jpg
EN
3
LINK
http://www.europarltv.europa.eu/en/home.aspx
EN
4
LINK
http://audiovisual.europarl.europa.eu/
EN
5
PHOTO
20111012PHT29064.jpg
EN
8
LINK
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=COM:2010:0636:FIN:EN:PDF
EN
9
EPTVPHOTO
20111012PHT29074.jpg
EN
10
EUROPARL-TV
http://www.europarltv.europa.eu/swf/EmbedPlayer.swf?vid=0435e025-3647-41e2-8d34-9f7c010462a1&cid=00000000-0000-0000-0000-000000000000&lang=en&bitrate=512&loop=off&autoplay=off&startVolume=medium&showTitle=on&showBottom=off
EN
12
PHOTO
20111021PHT29997.jpg
EN
13
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?reference=2011-10-2&language=EN
EN
15
PHOTO
20111012PHT29058.jpg
EN
16
LINK
/members/expert/alphaOrder/view.do;jsessionid=7BA15EEC918D1C5126279C2C4EF532A8.node2?language=EN&id=96835
EN
17
PHOTO
20111020PHT29852.jpg
EN
20
PHOTO
20111012PHT29060.jpg
EN
21
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/budget/figures/2012/2012_en.cfm
EN
22
LINK
/en/headlines/content/20110630MUN23022/html/EU-budget-at-glance
EN
24
LINK
/members/public/yourMep/view.do?name=balza*&partNumber=1&language=EN&id=96979
EN
25
LINK
/members/public/yourMep/view.do?name=fernandes&partNumber=1&language=EN&id=96899
EN
26
PHOTO
20111012PHT29076.jpg
EN
29
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5697042
EN
30
PHOTO
20111027PHT30458.jpg
EN
31
LINK
http://www.european-council.europa.eu/home-page/highlights/way-out-of-the-debt-crisis.aspx?lang=en
EN
32
PHOTO
20111025PHT30323.jpg
EN
34
LINK
/members/public/yourMep/view.do?name=Angelilli&partNumber=1&language=EN&id=1941
EN
35
PHOTO
20111027PHT30467.jpg
EN
36
LINK
http://www.flickr.com/photos/european_parliament/sets/72157627848886461/show/
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A7-2011-0263 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20110520STO19900 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A7-2011-0317 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20111014NEW29298 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20110930STO28001 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A7-2011-0354 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20111021BKG29990 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT OQ O-2011-000184 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20100630FCS77245#title5 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20110214BKG13662 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
