November plenary: Economic governance, Commission work programme, Lux Prize
Institutions
2011-11-11 - 11:00
Economic governance, Lux Prize on plenary agenda Vote on short selling Tuesday Question time on CAP Tuesday EU heritage label Wednesday Lux Prize awarded Wednesday Cross border professionals Economic governance was back on the agenda for the 14-17 November plenary session in Strasbourg when MEPs quizzed EU Council President Herman Van Rompuy, Commission President José Manuel Barroso and Jean-Claude Juncker Wednesday about the upcoming EU summit in December. They also discussed the Commission's 2012 work programme with Barroso on Tuesday.
Rules on short selling were approved on Tuesday and the future of the EU's farm policy wasin the spotlight Tuesday morning during question time with the Commission. MEPs vote on the parliament's position on the climate change talks in Durban late this year on Wednesday and discussed a single European railway area on Monday.
This year's EP Lux Prize for cinema was awarded on Wednesday.
20111107FCS30711
Newsletter - 14-17 November 2011 - Strasbourg plenary session
Discussion on the Commission's 2012 work programme on Tuesday Parliament to debate Commission strategic priorities for 2012
MEPs will discuss the Commission's work programme for next year with its President José Manuel Barroso on Tuesday. The current legislative term (2009-14) is the first in which MEPs had a say on the programme before the Commission approves it, due to changes introduced by the Lisbon Treaty.
Parliament keeps up the pressure on economic governance
MEPs are likely to put pressure on Messrs Van Rompuy and Barroso to take a tougher line on accountability and transparency, and develop a policy approach that is not essentially based on the decisions of just a couple of Member States.
Cutting down sovereign debt speculation and certain short selling practices
Profiteering from a country's fiscal troubles will be made much harder by legislation on short selling and credit default swaps (CDS), to be voted on Tuesday. This legislation, a response to the financial crisis, was heavily influenced by Parliament, in particular to ban buying CDS where the buyer does not already own the country's underlying bonds.
Future of cohesion and farm policies
On Tuesday, MEPs will quiz Commissioners Hahn and Cioloş on how to make EU cohesion and farm policy simpler, more competitive and growth and jobs oriented after 2014.Parliament is determined to use its full prerogatives as co-legislator to shape the future design of both policies.
MEPs to call for strong EU position at UN climate summit
The EU should fight to continue the Kyoto Protocol and keep CO2 emissions in check beyond 2012, says a draft resolution to be voted on Wednesday, two weeks before the UN climate summit in Durban, South Africa. Moving beyond the current 20% emissions reduction target for 2020 would stimulate the EU economy, it adds.
LUX Cinema Prize to be awarded on Wednesday
President Jerzy Buzek will announce the winner of the LUX Cinema Prize for 2011, in a plenary chamber ceremony at midday on Wednesday.
Making it easier for doctors to work abroad in the EU
To make it easier for doctors, engineers, dentists and other professionals to work in abroad within the EU, host Member States need to recognise their qualifications faster, but without compromising the reliability or safety of their work for citizens, says a resolution to be voted on Tuesday.
Call to act to halt bee deaths
The EU should step up investment in research on new medicines to prevent bee deaths and coordinate its efforts to protect what is fast becoming an endangered species, says a resolution to be voted on Tuesday.
European heritage label from 2013
Symbolic sites for Europe's history or integration will be eligible for a voluntary European heritage label from 2013 under plans to be voted by Parliament on Wednesday. The label would be granted, for example, to monuments, natural or industrial sites, or places of remembrance.
EP set to tighten up EU railway market rules
Parliament votes Wednesday on plans to tighten up EU railway market rules in order to establish a truly open and competitive single European railway area, offering more and better rail services for freight customers and passengers.
Online gambling: MEPs to call for EU-wide coordination to fight the black market and protect children
EU Member States should be free to make their own rules on online gambling, but should also co-ordinate them, so as to combat illegal cross-border gambling, protect children, and prevent vulnerable adults from getting addicted, says a resolution to be voted on Tuesday.
Other items on the agenda:
Court of Auditors' annual report on EU spending in 2010
MEPs to allow temporary duty-free imports of industrial goods to the Canary Islands
Aid worth €42.3 million to redundant workers in Ireland, Austria and Greece
EU-US summit debate
MEPs set to vote €40 million for integrated maritime policy
Roma discrimination
MEPs to call for international action to combat illegal fishing
Helping small cinemas survive the digital switch
Keeping the internet open and neutral
Human rights and democracy resolutions EuroparlTV European Parliament Audiovisual website
More competition needed on EU railways for better service, prices
Debora Serracchiani Trucks and planes cross borders seamlessly, but rail services encounter numerous technical, legal and political obstacles. On Monday Parliament debated proposals to encourage new operators to enter the market and offer more and better services. According to the report drafted by Italian Socialist Debora Serracchiani more funds are needed, as well as an independent regulator in each member state to stop discriminatory practices and market distortion. She told us more.
Why is a single European railway area important?
Because without the realisation of a single European railway area this sector won't develop and we won't see improvement in services, quality and employment, which would benefit the European consumer (as for instance in the aviation sector). While trucks and planes cross borders without any difficulty, cross-border rail services face many technical, legal and political obstacles.
Why did the 2001 Railway Package fail to stop the steady decline of railway transport and enhance the sector's attractiveness?
The text wasn't clear enough so it allowed EU countries to interpret it freely. In addition the Commission took too long to act. The EP has always pushed the Commission and EU countries to rigorously apply the rules. The fact that 13 cases were introduced against countries for failing to implement the rules shows the need to clarify and improve the legislation.
What are you proposing to ensure the reform will be a success?
We have committed ourselves to rewriting the rules more clearly and especially planning safe funds for infrastructure because, unfortunately, many countries have ignored the financing of the railway system, instead focusing resources on roads. We also want strong and independent national regulators (as in the energy field), transparency and separation of the accounts held by the infrastructure manager and the services manager in the case of integrated structures, open and free access to services linked to railway activity (maintenance, stations for passengers and goods, electricity network) and a bonus system to encourage the use of the European Train Control System (which would mean reduced charges for ECTS-equipped trains).
How will the European citizen benefit?
The railway system is still not as efficient as other forms of transport. With the realisation of a single market, citizens will be able to benefit from trains that go across Europe, at better prices and with service comparable to planes and coaches. To this day few trains travel across national borders, aside from the Thalys and Eurostar. This needs to be improved and competition introduced. Today, this is not the case!
The report was voted in plenary on Wednesday. Draft report Press release on committee vote European Railway Agency Debora Serracchiani
Cross border professionals: easier for them, safer for clients
A student practices dental work on a dummy at University of Amsterdam Doctors, midwives, dentists, pharmacists, architects and a host of other professionals should be able to work anywhere in the EU but cumbersome and time-consuming recognition procedures are a major obstacle. MEPs will discuss a report that proposes speeding up procedures without compromising safety on Monday ahead of the European Commission's revamp of the 2005 Professional Qualifications Directive later this year.
The directive, which came into force in 2009, sets rules for the mutual recognition of professional qualifications for up to 800 categories of regulated professions, accounting for around 4700 different professions and automatic recognition of professional qualifications for seven "sectoral" professions, including architects, dentists, doctors, midwives, nurses, pharmacists and vets. The aim is to allow a fully qualified professional from one EU country to practise anywhere across the EU.
The Commission launched an evaluation of the directive In March 2010 and aims to come up with proposals in December. The report, drafted by British Conservative Emma McClarkin aims to give the EP's view on the rules. Among the main points are:
rules must ensure mobility while guaranteeing safety . Protection of consumers and patient safety is vital
cross-border mobility is seen as a way of enhancing economic growth and competition within the EU. The EP finds the relatively low number of mobile professionals worrying
To address the problem of professionals who have been "struck off" continuing to practice " a proactive alert mechanism " should be established
a voluntary "professional card" , certifying the academic and professional experience of the individual should be introduced
guidelines should be introduced for the approval process and should set "reasonable" time limits
the number of regulated professions should be cut to enhance mobility, one of the priorities in the Commission's plan to improve the functioning of the single market.
The report was approved on Tuesday. Mobile professionals 4% of the EU workforce has lived and worked in another EU country about 2% currently lives, works in another member state 50% per cent of young Europeans would like to work abroad* directive has allowed around 85,000 professionals to move countries * Eurobarometer survey May 2011 Report on the implementation of the Professional Qualifications Directive Everything you need to know about the recognition of professional qualifications Commission green paper: Modernising the Professional Qualifications Directive
Strasbourg opening: Buzek on natural disasters, Arab spring, Eurogroup debate and human rights
Mr Buzek in plenary Parliament's sympathy with the victims of the latest earthquake in Turkey and floods in Italy and France, political developments in North Africa and the Western Balkans, and Wednesday's key debate on the Eurogroup and economic governance, were highlighted by EP President Jerzy Buzek at the opening of the Strasbourg session. Mr Buzek also looked ahead to Parliament's high-level human rights conference on 23 November.
Earthquake in Turkey
Mr Buzek expressed Parliament's sympathy for those close to the victims of the previous week's earthquake in Turkey, which, together with that three weeks before, had claimed almost 700 victims.
Floods in Italy and France
He also voiced sympathy with victims of the previous week's floods in Italy and southern France, where storms and rain remain a threat, and praised the efforts of the emergency services and local authorities to help.
Libya and Tunisia
Visiting Libya at the end of October, Mr Buzek had used meetings with the President, ministers and civil society representatives to stress the importance of putting into practice fundamental values such as democracy, the rule of law and human rights.
In Tunisia, he had met the Prime Minister, the head of the Central Bank and the leaders of the four main political parties, whom he urged to build an inclusive society, in which everyone, including women, can participate.
Western Balkans
From North Africa, the President had gone to toured the Balkans, including stops in Serbia, Croatia and Bosnia. In Serbia, he called for a normalization of relations with Kosovo, and in Bosnia and Herzegovina, for an end to the internal political stalemate. In Srebrenica, he laid a wreath to commemorate the July 1995 massacre. He also congratulated Croatia on completing its EU accession negotiations and encouraged it to pursue reforms.
Key debate
President Buzek highlighted Wednesday's key debate with European Council President Herman van Rompuy, Commission President José Manuel Barroso and Eurogroup President Jean-Claude Juncker on Eurogroup, economic governance and preparations for the December European Council.
Euromed Scola
Mr Buzek noted that that a two-day plenary session in Strasbourg of a parliament of young people from countries in the Mediterranean region had passed recommendations on social dialogue and engagement, migration and integration, equal opportunities, the environment, transport and renewable energy, and improving education and employment.
He welcomed their involvement in issues facing MEPs, adding that "We can be proud of their responsibility for the future of the Euro-Mediterranean region, which showed these young people to be future political leaders".
Human rights conference
Mr Buzek invited MEPs to take part in the European Parliament's 23 November High Level Conference on Human Rights and Sakharov Network meeting. This would be a unique opportunity for debate with human rights activists from around the world, including winners of the Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought, he said.
Willy De Clercq
Finally, the President marked the passing of former European and Belgian statesman Willy De Clercq, who served as an MEP, a European Commissioner and Deputy Prime Minister of Belgium for over a quarter of a century. He expressed Parliament's condolences to Mr De Clercq's family.
Agenda changes
The Commission statement on the contribution of the common fisheries policy to the production of public goods was taken off the agenda.
The vote on the Fleckenstein report on the European Maritime Safety Agency was also taken off the agenda.
On Wednesday afternoon, the second and third debates will be switched around, so that the order will be as follows:
1. Statement by the VPC/HR - EU-US summit of 28 November 2011
2. Oral questions - The open Internet and net neutrality in Europe
3. Oral questions - Situation of the Roma in Member States
4. Statement by the VPC/HR - Banning cluster munitions
5. Oral questions - Modernisation of VAT legislation in order to boost the digital single market
* * *
Frank Vanhecke (BE) joined the Freedom and Democracy Group with effect from 9 November Final draft agenda Plenary session newsletter
Short selling: banking on others' misfortune or just hedging bets?
Pascal Canfin Favours ban on naked CDS, short selling More transparency, reporting of positions Need for uniform implementation of rules across the EU As global markets continue to battle through the crisis the MEPs voted on short selling and credit default swap (CDS) regulation, Tuesday. Most people who invest in shares and bonds only profit if prices rise. But, short sellers make money if and when markets fall and have been blamed for exploiting the misfortune of other investors and raising the cost of borrowing for governments.
French Green Pascal Canfin's report on short selling and credit default swaps (CDS) was discussed in the Economic Affairs Committee in January. He talked to us about what needs to be done to make the business of short selling safer for everybody. Since then, Italy, France, Spain and Belgium have banned naked short selling and the EP imposed an EU-wide ban on naked CDS.
The aim is to identify "the potential risks in the financial system that could trigger the next crisis", he said."We have seen with the financial crisis the costs of having a self regulated financial system; I was not elected to let that happen again."
So, what is short selling?
It's a trading strategy that allows an investor to profit from falling prices. Say you expect shares in a company to lose value, you could borrow 1000 shares at €10 a share, sell them for €10,000, wait until the share drops to, say, €9, buy back 1000 shares for €9,000, return the shares and pocket €1000 in profit. But you had better be right because if the share price rises, you lose money.
And a CDS?
A credit default swap is a form of insurance against default. If you have bought bonds in a company, but are afraid the company will go bust, you buy a CDS and the seller reimburses the money owed to you by the company if it goes bust and can't buy back the bond. If the company stays in business you simply lose the price of the CDS.
Pros and cons
Short selling makes markets more efficient, as investors can trade on rising as well as falling prices and the CDS allows investors to insure against risk. However, "these products can lead to increased volatility and market overreaction," Mr Canfin said.
Particular problems can arise with "naked" short selling and CDS , which involve selling shares you don't own or taking out insurance on an instrument you don't own - it's a bit like taking out insurance on your neighbour's house, giving you the incentive to burn it down and collect the insurance. Many jurisdictions are moving to ban or seriously limit naked instruments.
For example, when the US financial system wobbled and everyone expected an implosion, they rushed to sell bank shares. Short sellers borrowed shares and dumped them on the market leading to large price drops, fostering instability and contagion. The US prohibited short selling of bank shares for a while
When Greece had problems, investors rushed to buy CDS , including investors who did not own Greek bonds, but who would get paid in the event of a default. Greater demand for CDS means higher prices for this form of insurance, making the bonds seem riskier, so forcing higher interest rates on the government and hurting the economy.
Possible solutions
Mr Canfin is in favour of banning naked CDS and short sales . "Of course the ban on naked CDS will not solve the fiscal problems of Greece or Ireland. Nevertheless, when you face such a situation, you can choose to add fuel to the fire or put water on it. These instruments should not be used as a speculative tool anymore."
His report also calls for more transparency and reporting of positions to boost confidence and avoid panic.
As to concerns that more burdensome rules will push financial firms to relocate away from the EU , Mr Canfin said, I am not sure European companies have an interest in relocating to the US, where the administrative burden is heavier. "Unfair competition between European trading venues is a more important risk. That is why we really need a strong ESMA" (European securities and markets authority) in order to have a uniform implementation of rules across the EU. Financial markets: short selling and certain aspects of credit default swaps Commission on short selling, CDS More transparency on derivatives? Financial glossary
European Heritage Label to raise awareness about EU's identity
Monument of the Schengen Agreement of 1985 along the river Moselle at Schengen, Luxembourg ©Belga/Belpress MEPs debated a European Heritage Label aimed at raising awareness of Europe's common heritage and identity Tuesday evening and ahead of the discussion we asked the EP's facebook fans which historical EU sites should get the label. Among the most popular were Schengen, where the treaty on opening internal EU borders was signed, the Berlin Wall, a symbol of East-West reunification, and the Gdansk shipyards, where Solidarnosc was born.
The report by Greek Socialist Chrysoula Paliadeli suggests designating sites that have played a key role in EU history. The aim is to identify, not sites of beauty or architectural value, but those with a symbolic value for European integration. It will be voted in plenary on Wednesday.
Participation would be voluntary and special attention would go to "transnational" sites of pan-European importance. The label would be granted to monuments, natural, submerged, archaeological, industrial or urban sites, cultural landscapes, places of remembrance, cultural goods from 2013. Sites that no longer meet the criteria would lose the label.
Facebook favourites
Among the sites most identified as having a key role in EU history by our facebook fans are:
Schengen , where the treaty on opening internal EU borders was signed
Berlin Wall , a symbol of West-East reunification
Gdansk shipyards , where Solidarnosc was born
Athens , the birthplace of democracy
Rome Capitol , where the treaties founding the EEC were signed
Baltic Way 1989
Ventotene Island , where Altiero Spinelli, seen as a founding father of the EU, wrote the Manifesto for a Free and United Europe
The European Heritage Label already exists as an intergovernmental initiative and in 2010 the European Commission adopted a proposal to transform it into an EU action. Draft resolution Press release after vote in committee EP on Facebook Commission's proposal
Parliament seals ban on sovereign debt speculation and short selling limitations
Rapporteur Pascal Canfin voting on the report on short selling Parliament on Tuesday voted into law a regulation to curb short selling and trading in credit default swaps (CDS), a financial product for insuring against default. The rules will impose much more transparency and virtually ban certain CDS trades, thereby making speculation on a country's default more difficult.
This is one of the key regulations pushed through by the Commission to tackle the financial crisis. Both short selling and CDS trading are accused of having fuelled market volatility, with CDS trades moreover having been widely blamed for potentially aggravating Greece's troubles.
Limiting speculation on a country's default - a key win for Parliament
Parliament obtained a ban on naked CDS trading (purchasing default insurance contracts without owning the related bonds). Purchasing Italian CDS, for example, will now be possible only if the buyer already owns Italian government bonds or a stake in a sector highly dependent on the performance of these bonds, such as an Italian bank – in the event of a Italian default, Italian banks would certainly suffer significantly.
The sole exception is an option for a national authority to lift the ban for a maximum of 12 months in cases where its sovereign debt market is no longer functioning properly, and then possibly renew it for a further 6 months. Even this possibility would be closely circumscribed, because the text specifies a limited number of indicators which could justify the regulator's action. Moreover, within 24 hours, the European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA) would publish an opinion on its web site as to the utility of suspending the ban. A negative opinion from ESMA would have political weight.
Welcoming the ban, rapporteur Pascal Canfin (Greens, FR) said: "These rules prove that the EU can act against speculation when the political will is there. This rule will make it impossible to buy CDS for the sole purpose of speculating on a country's default."
Curbing reckless short selling
The majority of MEPs originally advocated introducing a requirement to convert a naked short sale, the riskiest sort of short selling, to q normql short sale within a single trading day. This so-called hard "locate and reserve rule", whereby a trader must not only notify from where it plans to borrow the shares in question but must also have a guarantee that it will indeed be able to borrow them, was finally diluted. The regulation now requires the trader to locate and have a "reasonable expectation" of being able to borrow the shares from the located party. ESMA however will determine measures for judging what may be deemed a “reasonable expectation”.
Much more reporting
Another key to strengthening the Commission proposal is stepping up reporting requirements. A lack of information was one of the main problems for supervisors before the crisis. The extra information to be provided to national and European supervisors under the regulation will allow them to carry out their preventive work better, by alerting them earlier to potential risks. For example, supervisors would be informed of large short positions as soon as these positions account for 0.5% of the issued capital.
ESMA in the driving seat
MEPs from groups sponsoring the deal also managed to preserve the powers of the EU's financial markets watchdog, ESMA, in particular to restrict short selling, as an arbiter of a national authority's wish to introduce measures to address exceptional situations, and also to require other authorities to introduce exceptional measures to deal with difficult situations.
"The new powers for ESMA will allow better coordination at EU level in times of crisis", Mr Canfin said, adding however that, "it would have been better had ESMA had similar powers over decisions relating to sovereign debt, but the Member States refused".
The resolution was passed with 507 votes in favour, 25 against and 109 abstentions.
Next steps
The new regulation must be formally approved by the Council in the coming weeks, and will enter into force in November 2012.
Procedure: Codecision (1st reading)
Debate: 4 July 2011
Vote: Tuesday 15 November FAQ on the regulation (Commission document) Video of the post-vote press conference Profile of rapporteur Pascal CANFIN (Greens/EFA, FR)
MEPs warn against harmful internet traffic practices
Young man looking at a screen next to another screen with "lost on the internet" in French and German The open and neutral character of the internet is a key driver of innovation and consumer demand and must be preserved according to a resolution debated by the European Parliament Wednesday and voted Thursday. The resolution calls on the European Commission to ensure that internet service providers don't curtail the possibility for users to access any content, application or service.
Calls for guidelines on enforcement
The resolution prepared by German Christian Democrat Herbert Reul , and adopted unanimously by the Industry Committee 20 October, calls on the Commission to propose EU-wide guidelines to ensure EU telecom rules on net neutrality are properly and consistently applied and enforced.
The Commission said in April that there is no need for more EU rules on net neutrality because telecoms rules on transparency, switching (from one service provider to another) and quality should protect an open and neutral internet.
Prioritising data necessary but may cause problems
The EP agrees with the Commission that "traffic management ", or the prioritising of some packets of data over others, "is necessary to ensure the smooth flow of internet traffic, particularly at times when networks become congested", but the resolution warns of "the potential for anti-competitive and discriminatory behaviour in traffic management, in particular by vertically integrated companies" and asks the Commission to assess whether further legislation is needed to ensure freedom of access to information.
The resolution calls on the Commission and the European electronic communications regulatory group BEREC, in cooperation with EU countries to closely monitor the development of traffic management practices.
Informed choice
The EP also stresses "the need to enable consumers to make informed choices and to have the effective option of switching to a new provider that can best meet their needs and preferences, including in relation to the speed and volume of downloads and services".
Reul also asked the Council Wednesday how it will ensure a common approach to open internet and net neutrality across the EU. Net neutrality all internet users have access to content (video, audio, text) and applications of their choice all internet traffic treated equally, whatever its source, content or destination no unreasonable discrimination by network operators in transmitting internet traffic Draft resolution Commission communication on open internet and net neutrality Study on Network neutrality: Challenges and responses in the EU and US
Bolder measures needed, growth better factored into economic governance
(from left to right) Socialist Martin Schulz, Liberal Guy Verhofstadt, Christian Democrat Joseph Daul Wednesday morning MEPs discussed the immediate and medium term needs for stronger EU economic governance with European Council President Herman Van Rompuy, Europgroup President Jean-Claude Juncker and European Commission President José Manuel Barroso. The majority of EP political group leaders warned that any Treaty change would need to carried out in an open manner, including national parliaments and the EP. This was the only way democratic legitimacy could be ensured they said.
"Talk on a two tier Europe has been exaggerated. It is time to de-dramatise this. It is true however to realise that it is those member states which are outside of the eurozone that have a derogation and not the other way round," Van Rompuy said.
Barroso said: "Stronger economic governance is now a matter of common sense and not the dreams of people in favour of Europe. This crisis has taught us the lesson of interdependence and this is why we must solve things together."
For Juncker : "The economic semester (economic coordination system) needs to be more political and less technical. The EU's economic policy coordination cannot remain the preserve of finance ministers."
"Mr Van Rompuy needs to work much faster now. When there is a fire you try to put it out quickly rather than analyse the situation," EPP leader Joseph Daul said. On a multi-speed EU he said: "We need to include those member states which envisage joining the eurozone in the near future. In this sense we should go further on economic governance together with these countries."
Socialist leader Martin Schulz said: "Italy and Greece need investment and growth. This is what we should be discussing this morning. These countries are not only victims of excessive indebtedness but also of speculation." Reacting to Van Rompuy he said: "The EP is not a think-tank but a source of solutions as can be evidenced by the adoption of the six pack legislation, rules on short selling etc."
Daniel Cohn-Bendit for the Greens went further, "We need a European investment strategy. Member states are no longer able to undertake the necessary investment on their own." Eurobonds and the opinion given by Angela Merkel's advisers for a mutualisation of debt are what is needed, he said.
"The Franco-German method is not sustainable. We need a global approach spearheaded by the Commission. We need an economic and fiscal union. This is the only possibility to end the crisis as has even been recognised by Angela Merkel's economic advisors," Liberal leader Guy Verhofstadt said.
Ideology is prevailing over economic thought in this chamber today," ECR leader Jan Zahradil said. He went on to say, "be aware that if the treaty is changed some member states will not just quietly accept the changes without negotiating and asking for certain concessions."
Lothar Bisky for the GUE/NGL group asked, "how large must the crisis become before you understand what is needed? People want social equality and less tax injustice. We need a fairer burden sharing in the reforms undertaken."
EFD leader Nigel Farage said, "what we have now is German dominance. Precisely what the EU was set up to prevent. I do not want to be dominated by Germany."
Climate summit: EU should champion Kyoto Protocol
Hauwa Umar-Mustapha from Nigeria protests shortage of drinking water in front of the cooling towers of the brown coal power plant of power company in Germany ©EPA/PATRICK PLEUL The EU should show leadership at the UN climate summit in Durban and fight to continue the CO2-cutting Kyoto Protocol beyond 2012, says a resolution voted by the European Parliament on Wednesday. MEPs also say the EU's economy would benefit from aiming above the current 20% greenhouse gas reduction target.
"International climate negotiations are at crossroads between stagnation and progress - the EU must help to create a new dynamic in Durban." said Environment Committee and Parliament delegation chair (*) Jo Leinen (S&D, DE), after the resolution was adopted with 532 votes in favour, 76 against and 43 abstentions. "The economic crisis must not be used as an excuse not to act. The EU should back the Kyoto Protocol and work with other countries on a roadmap to ensure a comprehensive climate treaty is in place by 2015 at the latest", he added.
Support for Kyoto
The resolution says the EU should give "public and unequivocal" support to the continuation of the Kyoto Protocol, a landmark binding international agreement that commits industrialised countries to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. MEPs want to avoid any gap after the current phase expires at the end of 2012.
More than 20% emissions cuts
Echoing previous climate resolutions, MEPs say the EU should aim beyond its current 20% emissions reduction target for 2020. Doing so would be in its own economic interest, given the benefits of "green jobs, growth and security".
Climate fund and other measures
MEPs want the EU to help find agreement on the sources and management of a Green climate fund to support developing countries, which should reach US$100 billion per year by 2020.
New measures are also needed to curb aviation and marine emissions (excluded from the Kyoto protocol), and to address land use change. In the face of challenges by some countries outside the EU, MEPs stand firmly behind legislation they approved in 2008 to include aviation in the EU emissions trading system from 1 January 2012.
MEPs are concerned that there is a "gigatonne gap" between international commitments and the UN target of limiting average global warming to 2 degrees Celsius. UN scientific reports have concluded that that industrialised countries need to reduce their emissions by 25-40% below 1990 levels by 2020.
* Parliament delegation to the UN COP 17 summit in Durban, South Africa: Chair Jo Leinen (S&D, DE), Vice-chair Karl-Heinz Florenz (EPP, DE), Kriton Arsenis (S&D, EL), Bairbre De Brún (GUE/NGL, UK), Pilar Del Castillo (EPP, ES), Bas Eickhout (Greens/EFA, NL), Elisabetta Gardini (EPP, IT), Dan Jørgensen (S&D, DK), Corinne Lepage (ALDE, FR), Vladko Panayotov (ALDE, BG), Anna Rosbach (ECR, DK), Oreste Rossi (EFD, IT), Richard Seeber (EPP, AT), Francisco Sosa Wagner (unattached, ES) and Marita Ulvskog (S&D, SE)
Procedure: Oral questions + resolution
Roma strategy: MEPs call for real action
MEPs urge Member States to tackle discrimination of Roma people ©MaxPPP MEPs criticized the European Commission for not going far enough to combat discrimination against Roma people and urged member states to prepare their national Roma strategies by the end of 2011 in a debate on 16 November in Strasbourg.
In view of recent anti-Roma incidents in several EU countries, MEPs voiced concerns that the Commission is not doing enough to address the issue.
Talking about the EU's Roma strategy, Commissioner Androulla Vassiliou promised that it will not remain an empty paper and will complement existing EU legislation on anti-discrimination.
Speaking on behalf of the Council, Elzbieta Radziszewska , Poland's Secretary of State for Equality, called it a shame that many of Europe's 10 million Roma people live in extreme poverty and isolation. "The Council will provide political support for member states to prepare their national strategies," she said.
"Adopting a Roma strategy is just the beginning," said Hungarian Christian Democrat Lívia Járóka , who drafted an EP report the subject earlier this year. "Complex programmes will be needed to achieve results."
Romanian Liberal Renate Weber urged the Commission to enforce fundamental rights and considers the expulsion of Roma from several member states as unacceptable, while Italian EFD member Mara Bizzotto was critical of the Roma strategy, calling it hypocritical. She wondered why the EU spends money on inclusion if the Roma population has no intention of integrating into the societies in which they live. .
Italian EPP member Roberta Angelilli focused on the situation of Roma minors and cited a survey which said only 40% of Roma children attend primary school and 10% receive secondary education. The EU average for primary school attendance is 97%.
Austrian Socialist Hannes Swoboda complained that there is a lack of exact information on national strategies and on how EU funds are used to improve the lives of the Roma community.
The Commission adopted an EU Roma strategy in April 2011, which focuses on improving access to housing, education, jobs and healthcare.
EU countries have until the end of 2011 to submit strategies setting out how they want to achieve these goals.
Ms Vassiliou said that after the Commission has evaluated the national strategies, it will report to the EP on its findings early 2012. Fact Box: Roma in Europe 10-12 mln Roma in Europe (6 mln in EU) Roma populations: Romania 1.85 mln, Bulgaria 750,000, Spain 725,000, Hungary 700 000 Proportion of Roma population: Bulgaria 10.3%; Slovakia 9.17%; Romania 8.32%; Hungary 7.05% (source: EC) EU strategy on Roma inclusion (EP resolution) Press release on EP resolution Proud to be Roma - Interview with Lívia Járóka (La Une) The Roma and the EU Commission press release about the Roma strategy EPTV story: Roma integration in Bulgaria
10 things we learned during the plenary
EP President Jerzy Buzek and Wiesław Szczuka, Polish Under-Secretary of State for Finance, signed the "six pack" law on 16 November in Strasbourg How to exit the economic crisis and prevent speculators from gaining the upper hand in financial markets? What future for net neutrality in Europe? These are just a couple of questions MEPs tackled in the November plenary that took place in Strasbourg from 14 to 17 November.
MEPs called for EU-wide action to prevent honeybee deaths . Their disappearance could have a serious impact on Europe's food production and environmental stability, not to mention on 600,000 jobs that the sector provides. MEPs discussed the EU-US summit that will take place on 28 November in Washington, emphasizing the need for a transatlantic initiative for jobs and growth. Foreign policy issues like the situation in Palestine, Syria, Libya and Iran should also be addressed. EU lawmakers voted to simplify the mutual recognition of professional qualifications , paving the way for highly-skilled workers to respond to job shortages across Europe. They also voted into law a regulation to curb short selling and trading in credit default swaps (CDS) with the aim of reining in market volatility and making speculation on a country's default more difficult. The winner of the 2011 LUX film prize is "Les neiges du Kilimandjaro" by French director Robert Guédiguian. The film questions the injustices of today's societies and their political and trade union conflicts, and makes a plea for tolerance. MEPs discussed how to establish stronger EU economic governance with Herman Van Rompuy, Jean-Claude Juncker, and José Manuel Barroso. A large majority of political group leaders warned that any Treaty change would need to be carried out in a manner which included both national parliaments and the European Parliament. The Parliament said the EU should continue giving "public and unequivocal" support to the Kyoto Protocol at the UN climate summit in Durban and go beyond the current 20% emissions target for 2020. Member states should be free to make their own rules on online gambling (10% of all gambling in Europe, which creates €10 billion in revenue) but should also co-ordinate with other member states to combat illegal cross-border gambling, protect children and prevent vulnerable adults from getting addicted, said the MEPs in a resolution. Discrimination and violations of the human rights of Roma people were in the spotlight as MEPs called upon MS to follow EU guidelines for integrating Roma people, the biggest minority in the EU, in the fields of education, employment, health and housing. Digital equipment is too dear for small independent cinemas to be able to keep up with the digital revolution, said MEPs in a resolution. They called for specific EU subsidies to help them invest in production, archiving 3D projection, HDTV or Blue-Ray technology. Focus in photos on Flickr
EN
1
PHOTO
20111111PHT31223.jpg
EN
2
PHOTO
20110831PHT25653.jpg
EN
3
LINK
http://www.europarltv.europa.eu/en/home.aspx
EN
4
LINK
http://audiovisual.europarl.europa.eu/
EN
5
PHOTO
20111111PHT31203.jpg
EN
8
LINK
http://www.era.europa.eu/Pages/Home.aspx
EN
9
LINK
/members/expert/alphaOrder/view.do?language=EN&id=96865
EN
10
PHOTO
20111111PHT31213.jpg
EN
12
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/internal_market/qualifications/docs/guide/users_guide_en.pdf
EN
13
LINK
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=COM:2011:0367:FIN:en:PDF
EN
14
PHOTO
20111111PHT31207.jpg
EN
17
PHOTO
20110207PHT13259.jpg
EN
18
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5872692
EN
19
LINK
http://europa.eu/rapid/pressReleasesAction.do?reference=MEMO/10/409&format=HTML&aged=0&language=EN&guiLanguage=en
EN
22
PHOTO
20111109PHT30944.jpg
EN
25
LINK
http://www.facebook.com/europeanparliament
EN
26
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/culture/our-programmes-and-actions/doc/label/EHL%20decision_EN.pdf
EN
27
PHOTO
20111111PHT31219.jpg
EN
28
LINK
http://europa.eu/rapid/pressReleasesAction.do?reference=MEMO/11/713
EN
29
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/frd/vod/search-other-events?language=en
EN
30
LINK
/members/expert/alphaOrder/view.do?language=EN&id=96711
EN
31
PHOTO
20111109PHT30948.jpg
EN
33
LINK
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:52011DC0222:EN:NOT
EN
34
LINK
/activities/committees/studies/download.do?language=en&file=36351#search=%20network%20neutrality%20
EN
35
PHOTO
20111111PHT31221.jpg
EN
36
PHOTO
20111109PHT30942.jpg
EN
37
PHOTO
20111109PHT30940.jpg
EN
41
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/justice/discrimination/roma/index_en.htm
EN
42
LINK
http://europa.eu/rapid/pressReleasesAction.do?reference=IP/11/400
EN
43
LINK
http://www.europarltv.europa.eu/en/player.aspx?pid=734835cd-76e1-4f5d-bcad-9f8d009d8546
EN
44
PHOTO
20111117PHT31794.jpg
EN
45
LINK
http://www.flickr.com/photos/european_parliament/sets/72157628002251003/show/
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A7-2011-0367 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20111010IPR28783 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A7-2011-0373 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT AGENDA 20111114 SYN NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20111028NEW30562 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20100607FCS75591 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20100414FCS72750 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A7-2011-0331 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20111003IPR28104 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT MOTION B7-2011-0572 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P7-TA-2011-0092 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20110309IPR15166 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20110204STO13208 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
