Website redesign
Institutions
Information
2011-11-30 - 10:44
Screen shots of the old (left) and new sites Welcome to the new-look European Parliament website. Today we introduce an entirely redesigned site, bringing a cleaner, more contemporary and visually appealing appearance and some important new features, while retaining all the familiar news and information you expect to find here. We hope you will like it.
First things first, the website retains its former content and underlying structure. For those familiar with the site, it should hold no mysteries and all your favourite content is still there. However, we have sought to simplify the navigation to help users to get to the information they seek more quickly. For example, those seeking the pages on the plenary, committees or delegations will find separate sections for each of these in the top level navigation. But even with a striking new look, continuity is the key.
However, we have also taken the opportunity to make a number of significant improvements. The first you will notice, introduced in response to user feedback, will be the new portal, a new point of entry to the site with quick links to the most popular pages and, below, the latest news, videos and social media updates from Parliament. You will also find links to important related websites and a new tool making it much easier to seek out individual Members of Parliament.
Another big change comes in the new "EPTV" section, which combines EuroparlTV, Parliament's previously separate online video news and information service, with access to familiar features such as full live streaming of Parliament's plenary and committee meetings.
There are many more, smaller, improvements that you will discover as you go along, and there will be a steady stream of new features on the site from now on. Our aim, following on from this graphical redesign, is to make the site ever more responsive to the needs of its users and to give EU citizens new ways to engage with their Parliament online.
20111129STO32672
EN
1
PHOTO
20111121PHT32063.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
