"Europe should stop harbouring dictators' blood money"
External relations
2012-02-06 - 15:35
MEPs are telling member states to stop harbouring dictators' assets ©BELGA/CTK/J.Horazny Dictators should no longer be able to bank on the EU to safeguard their ill-gotten gains for them. That is the message from MEPs who have adopted a resolution calling for Member States to stop providing safe havens for the personal fortunes of leaders of authoritarian regimes. They claim the EU is currently being inconsistent as it imposes sanctions on tyrants while at the same time allowing them to stash their riches in European banks.
MEPs fear that the current approach is damaging the EU's credibility and harming its foreign policy. Restrictive measures such as embargoes and sanctions are not being consistently applied, either because the EU treats countries with similar human rights records in another way or because Member States apply the restrictions differently. Sir Graham Watson, who drafted the resolution, said it was time to put an end to this. "This report aims to make our current policies on restrictive measures coherent and consistent."
The British liberal pointed out that many dictators see the EU as an attractive place to keep their money, invest, own property and make use of healthcare services as they are free to travel and spend their often dubiously acquired wealth here. "We currently allow them to shield their often dubiously acquired gains within our banking systems, we offer them the incentive and capacity to continue with corruption and exploitation of their people and their resources."
In the report, adopted on Thursday, MEPs call for:
Clear criteria
The Council should develop clear criteria for when and how restrictive measures are to be applied, and who is to be sanctioned . Judgments of the International Criminal Court should be taken into account.
Target the person responsible, not the population
Only those responsible should be targeted by any sanctions and restrictive measures and the impact on the civil population should be minimised.
Rigour and consistency
Member states should avoid double standards and implement existing sanctions rigorously and consistently regardless of political, economic and security interest. Sanctioned leaders and their associates should be strictly prohibited from owning assets and property within the EU and member states should declare when people on the sanction list have physical and financial assets held within their borders.
Academic institutions as well as sports associations and charity organisations should be prohibited from accepting money from sanctioned leaders and their associates, while the EU and member states should strictly adhere to travel bans prohibiting sanctioned persons from travelling within the EU for other than humanitarian purposes.
Prosecute accomplices
Member states should investigate and if necessary prosecute anyone in Europe helping to circumvent the sanctions.
Return stolen property to the people
Frozen and confiscated assets should be repatriated as soon as possible to their respective countries to the benefit of the population.
Dictators´ assets within the EU Over the last two decades $150 billion is estimated to have been transferred from countries in North Africa (Algeria, Morocco and Tunisia) to European banks Egyptian dictator Hosni Mubarak and his family were estimated to have a personal fortune of $50-70 billion invested predominantly in the EU and US The director of the London School of Economics resigned over revelations that the institute had been involved in a £2.2 million deal to train Libyan civil servants The assets of the former Gaddafi regime in the EU are estimated to amount to billions, especially in the UK in the form of private property North Korean leader Kim Jong-il kept about $4 billion in European banks Sudanese president Omar al-Bashir is suspected of siphoning off $9 billion from his country’s oil boom and depositing much of it in British banks 20120203STO37167 EP recommendation to the Council Sir Graham Watson Press release
EN
1
PHOTO
20120201PHT36835.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/meps/en/2155/Graham_WATSON.html
-//EP//TEXT TA P7-TA-2012-0018 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20120201IPR36948 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
