No need to feel blue over calendar colours
Institutions
2012-02-20 - 12:20
Parliamentary calendar MEPs often feel tickled pink and sometimes might see red, but they never have a reason to feel off colour about the way their calendar is organised. Weeks in the Parliamentary calendar are coded with a colour to indicate that period's particular activities and working methods. For example, this week has been marked turquoise to indicate MEPs will mostly be working in their home constituencies. Let's bring you up to date with what all the colours stand for in the European Parliament's calendar.
Red: plenary sessions
Red in the calendar certainly marks red-letter days as it is when full plenary sessions take place. During these plenary sittings MEPs debate important issues, vote on new proposals and adopt legislation. Plenary sittings are held each month in Strasbourg apart from August, while there are also additional two-day sittings in Brussels on a regular basis.
Pink: committees at work
Pink is used to show when Parliamentary committees are in action. Committees are the forums where MEPs prepare the work of the plenary, discussing for example the details of all proposed legislation from the Commission and the Council before voting and submitting the outcome to Parliament as a whole.
There are 20 full permanent committees specialising in particular fields. These range from domestic policies, such as transport and tourism (TRAN), environment, public health and food safety (ENVI), regional development (REGI) and petitions (PETI), to external affairs, including foreign affairs (AFET) and development (DEVE). Committees meet once or twice a month, mainly in Brussels but occasionally in Strasbourg. To find out more, click on the committees link on the right.
Blue: political groups meet
When you see blue in the EP calendar, it indicates when MEPs meet with other members from their political group. MEPs are grouped together on the basis of political affiliation rather than nationality. Although MEPs cannot belong to more than one political group, it is possible for a member not to belong to any group. In such a case they are known as non-attached members.
Every month, Parliament’s members meet within their groups to discuss proposed legislation which will come up at the plenary session, which is why weeks that are mainly blue generally precede full red weeks. During these meetings political groups set their priorities and take positions on the main issues on the agenda.
Turquoise: MEPs work in their constituencies
In turquoise weeks, such as this week, MEPs have the opportunity to undertake activities outside Parliament's usual places of work. For example, they travel to their constituencies to meet the electorate at home, or take part in official delegation visits to maintain and develop the Parliament's international relations.
20120220STO38545 Parliamentary committees Parliamentary calendar
EN
1
PHOTO
20120209PHT37725.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/committees/en/parliamentary-committees.html
EN
3
LINK
/pdf/general/cal2012.pdf
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
