Basel II directives on track
Economic and monetary affairs
2005-09-07 - 18:26
MEPs in the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee have reached a broad agreement on many of the issues at stake when it comes to updating EU law in parallel with the Basel II agreement on the capital adequacy of investment firms and credit institutions. They approved the first reading report from Alexander RADWAN (EPP-ED, DE) with 36 votes in favour, none against and six abstentions.
This overwhelming vote in favour came after compromises were reached on such questions as internal group lending, the approach to covered bonds and minimum requirements for data history, amongst others. Hundreds of amendments were made to the Commission's proposals. Many made substantial changes, but there were also a large number aimed at tidying up and clarifying the text.
Another issue relates to Parliament's powers regarding "comitology" - the system which grants the Commission authority to decide on the detailed implementation of an EU law. The proposed constitution would have given Parliament an explicit right to revoke such implementing decisions, but with the constitution's ratification in doubt, MEPs decided that implementing powers for the Commission in this case should not come into force until Parliament's future role in this area has been clarified. MEPs in the committee hope an interinstitutional agreement can be reached to confirm Parliament's powers of "call back."
The compromise texts adopted by the committee were also developed in the light of the rapporteur's discussions with the Council, with a view to the legislative procedure being completed at first reading.
The International Convergence of Capital Measurement and Capital Standards: a Revised Framework , or the ”Basel II Framework,” offers a new set of standards for establishing minimum capital requirements for banking organisations. It was presented in June 2004 by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, a group of central banks and bank supervisory authorities in the G10 countries, which developed the first standard in 1988. The changes aim to make capital requirements much more risk sensitive.
For more information on Basel II, see the website of the Bank for International Settlements: http://www.bis.org/press/p040626.htm
13.07.2005 Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs In the chair: John PURVIS (EPP-ED, UK)
Procedure: Co-decision, First reading Plenary vote: September II (tbc)
20050826IPR01426
EN
1
A
http://www.bis.org/press/p040626.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
