Protecting workers from the risks of optical radiation
Social policy
2005-09-07 - 18:26
Parliament's contribution to a package of measures to protect workers' health and safety reached another important stage with the adoption on 12 July of a second reading report on the exposure of workers to risks from optical radiation. The report, drafted by Csaba ŐRY (EPP-ED, HU), was adopted by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs by 22 votes to 1, with 23 abstentions.
Prevention and early diagnosis of damage to the eyes, together with the prevention of long-term health dangers, are the key aims of the directive, which lays down exposure limit values and requires employers to carry out risk assessments. It also includes provisions on workers' rights to information, training, consultation and health checks.
MEPs disagreed with the Council's common position on one key point. They believe national authorities - rather than the EU - should lay down the rules on whether and how employers should assess dangers to the eyes of natural radiation from the sun, and how they must respond to such risks. The Council's text would require employers not only to assess the risks but also to set up an action plan if a risk is identified.
However, MEPs agree that rules on radiation from artificial sources are best laid down at EU level. Concerning radiation from lasers, for example, the Council common position gives details of the measures employers must take to protect their employees (e.g. switching to different working methods to reduce the risk from radiation; limitating the duration and level of the exposure; the design and layout of workplaces). MEPs agree with these rules, although they want the Commission to draw up a practical guide to help employers, in particular managers of smaller firms, to understand the technical provisions of the directive.
This directive is the last of a series of four designed to protect workers from the dangers of various "physical agents". Previous directives have dealt with vibrations, noise and electromagnetic fields.
12.07.2005 Committee on Employment and Social Affairs In the chair: Jan ANDERSSON (PES, SE)
Procedure: Codecision, second reading Plenary vote: September I, Strasbourg
20050826IPR01428
EN
1
PHOTO
20050819PHT00962.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
