Special medicines for children
Public health
2005-09-07 - 18:26
"For far too long Europe's children have been waiting, and parents' and patients' organisations have been calling, for special paediatric medicines. Let's not disappoint them!" The appeal made by rapporteur Francoise GROSSETÊTE (EPP-ED, FR) to her fellow members of the Environment Committee did not fall on deaf ears: the committee adopted her report on paediatric medicines on Wednesday 13 July by 40 votes to 9 with 9 abstentions.
This could pave the way to an agreement with the Council at first reading under the codecision procedure.
Most of the time sick children have to take smaller doses of medicines designed for adults, although their organism absorbs or eliminates them differently and there can be particular side effects. Few pharmaceuticals companies produce drugs aimed specifically at children, because the clinical trials are more difficult and the time taken to perfect them is longer.
Six months for all
The draft regulation under consideration aims precisely to encourage the pharmaceuticals industry to change its attitude, essentially by extending the life of patents or supplementary protection certificates by six months. MEPs debated the merits of this incentive at length. Some would have liked to make it proportional to the profits earned, shorter in some cases and longer in others.
However, the rapporteur, the Commission and a majority of Member States feared that variable protection regimes might cause insurmountable problems of implementation. In addition, many procedures laid down in the regulation would have had to be reformulated. In the end, no alternative proposal achieved majority support in the committee, which thus positions itself de facto on the side of the Commission's initial text: six months in all cases. There will, however, be one exception: the exclusive commercial rights of "orphan drugs", intended to treat rare illnesses, will be increased from 10 to 12 years if they are invented specifically for children.
Under current legislation, a medicine covered by a patent and a supplementary protection certificate is protected for a maximum of 15 years. A further six months of protection would, according to Commission estimates and depending on the case, produce extra profits of 800,000 to 9 million euros, compared with the average cost of a clinical trial, which can be as much as 4 million euros.
Stimulating research
The Commission is urged to review the regulation six years after it enters into force and amend it if it has not produced the desired impact, notably on research. But MEPs want to boost research now by other means. On of their amendments calls for the creation, within a year after the adoption of the regulation, of a special EU programme for research into medicines for children, to be called MICE (Medicines Investigation for the Children of Europe).
And, to optimise research efforts, the regulation would set up, under the auspices of the European Medicines Agency, a network of researchers and research centres to avoid duplication of research and or tests on children. The agency should also, say MEPs, compile an inventory of therapeutic needs in the two years after the entry into force of the regulation, and this should seek to establish priorities for research.
The regulation will also set up a Paediatric Committee, the "cornerstone" of the whole edifice, according to Ms Grossetête. MEP would like this to be created six months at the latest after the entry into force of the regulation. They want to amend some of the provisions regarding its composition and call for its opinions to be published. These would include opinions on paediatric research plans submitted by companies seeking the extra six months protection. MEPs want there to be transparency in the granting of certain derogations provided for in the regulation. Lastly, it should be noted that the regulation not only details the procedures for authorising the marketing of products, the derogations regime and requirements in terms of communication, it also provides for penalties to be imposed on companies that do not comply.
13.7.2005 Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety
In the chair: Karl-Heinz FLORENZ (EPP-ED, DE)
Procedure: Codecision, first reading
Plenary vote: September I, Strasbourg
20050826IPR01433
EN
1
PHOTO
20050822PHT01285.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
