EP's budgetary powers upheld for Romania and Bulgaria
Budget
2005-09-07 - 18:26
The President of the European Parliament made the following statement after the vote in the temporary committee on the financial perspective, which he chairs:
"Parliament's temporary committee, and in particular its rapporteur, Reimer Böge, has risen to the challenge. I very warmly congratulate him. It was an arduous job: laying down a position, at the right time, which is coherent, realistic and ambitious was somewhat of a Herculean task.
But the job has been done. Parliament will give its verdict on 8 June. I shall put its position to the European Council. If the Member States reach agreement quickly, negotiations can be embarked on with the Council.
Without Parliament's agreement, there will be no financial perspective; and if there is no agreement, we shall revert to the annual budgetary procedure, which gives Parliament a very great deal of leeway. The Member States must bear in mind that, under the annual procedure, Parliament could increase the overall budget total to 1.13% in commitment appropriations and 1.03% in payment appropriations.
To ensure, to some extent, that the Commission and Parliament terms of office run in parallel with the financial perspective, the temporary committee is calling for the next financial perspective to run until 2011, subsequently running for five years at a time.
The very large majority secured by Mr Böge for his report - 29 votes to 9 with 4 abstentions - suggests that he should secure just as much backing from plenary.
The temporary committee has voiced its own priorities (as opposed to the Commission's). The financial perspective must make it possible to fund both enlargement and future policies. The temporary committee's priorities for achieving that are not the same as the Commission's.
How ambitious?
Within the multiannual financial framework, the Böge report sets payment and commitment appropriations at 1.07% and 1.18% respectively of EU gross national income (€883 bn and €975 bn respectively).
The Commission is proposing payment and commitment appropriations accounting for 1.14% and 1.24% respectively (€943 bn and €1 022 bn respectively).
Parliament's temporary committee:
has opted not to incorporate the European Development Fund (€21.876 bn) into the financial framework; it ought to be incorporated into the budget without making cuts in other policy areas;
is proposing that a number of reserves be established outside the financial framework in order to:
cope with contingencies or situations that are hard to anticipate (cohesion, emergency aid, solidarity fund, guarantee fund) or
facilitate the EU's economic adjustment with regard to competition.
The aim of this strategy is to ensure greater flexibility in the way in which the Union operates. In a context where there are budgetary difficulties at national level, the temporary committee has sought to take a realistic approach, making provision for what is essential and putting forward ways and means of responding to humanitarian, economic or social emergencies, and allowing more effective action to be taken in connection with the Lisbon strategy.
If all amounts had been entered, the funding level set in the Böge report would have been virtually identical to what the Commission has proposed: just 0.01% lower. Parliament's priorities
Cohesion, growth and employment, and sustainable development
Cohesion
The report accepts the figure of 0.41% of EU GNI to cover the structural funds in their entirety.
The 10 new Member States will be eligible for that funding up to a level representing 4% of their GNI. However, that ceiling of 4% of GNI should be handled in a more "elastic" fashion. (Any country demonstrating a greater take-up capacity will be able to go beyond the ceiling.)
In addition, a mechanism for phasing out the system of aids for regions falling below structural-aid eligibility thresholds has been proposed. In other words, regions in the EU 15 grouping which are currently eligible for the funds concerned will continue to qualify for them, but on a degressive basis. (It should be pointed out that some EU 15 regions will no longer be eligible because of the statistical effect, but that, at all events, a number of them will still qualify under Objective 1, 2 or 3 programmes.)
With regard to EU 25, Parliament's temporary committee reminds Member States that optimum implementation of the Cohesion Fund is essential.
Social policy agenda
For the social policy agenda, a €200 m increase has been called for in order to realise the Lisbon objectives more effectively.
Agricultural expenditure, rural development and preservation of natural resources
The Böge report rejects "any attempt to renationalise the CAP".
Failing agreement on the financing of agricultural expenditure for Bulgaria and Romania, however, the report backs the phasing in of cofinancing for farm spending within the EU 15 grouping.
The Rural Development Fund allocation is regarded as the barest of minimums. The temporary committee proposes a €21 bn allocation for Natura 2000.
Citizenship, freedom. security and justice
The temporary committee has voted for a €1 bn increase for this area, from which Europol, Eurojust and the youth and culture programmes ought to benefit.
The Union in the world
Within this heading, the temporary committee's emphasis is on the pre-accession and neighbourhood instruments and the CFSP. We take the view that an additional €4 bn is vital, since one thing is clear: under the current financial framework, this heading, which is of central importance for EU action in the world, is underfunded. Constantly resorting to the flexibility instrument is out of the question.
Flexibility and reserves
This area represents one of the central features of Mr Böge's report, combining the need to be able to act flexibly with the need to be able to respond to unforeseen events.
Flexibility
It is proposed that annual funding for the flexibility instrument be increased to € 500 m (€200 m at present).
That increase would be funded through reallocation within headings, by redeploying unused appropriation and, if necessary, by new appropriations.
Reserves
The temporary committee is proposing the creation of a competitiveness reserve (€ 7 bn) to replace the Growth Adjustment Fund, a cohesion reserve (€3 bn), an emergency aid reserve (€1.5 bn), a solidarity fund reserve (€6.2 bn) and a loan guarantee reserve (€3 bn).
Own resources
One more point is of great importance to us. The Böge report clearly sets the financial perspective in the context of the own resources debate. The present system must be revised with a view to producing a solution which, in the short term, more fairly distributes net contributions.
Before the next financial perspective comes to an end, the EU must succeed in establishing an independent financing system. Naturally, we intend to involve our counterparts in the national parliaments in what is a wide-ranging debate on the EU's future. "
20050824IPR01361
EN
1
PHOTO
20050818PHT00285.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
