Security must take priority over rights, UK Home Secretary tells MEPs
Justice and home affairs
2005-09-07 - 18:26
Britain's Home Secretary Charles Clarke told MEPs on 13 July that, in the fight against terrorism in Europe, security must take priority - despite the concern of many MEPs that citizens' rights could be undermined by EU measures designed to prevent terrorist attacks such as the one that devastated London last Thursday.
Addressing the Civil Liberties Committee to present the programme of the UK presidency, Mr Clarke gave support to moves to speed up draft EU legislation to allow data retention from phone calls and emails to help fight terrorism, a plan rejected by MEPs in June when they sent the proposal back to the parliamentary committee for further debate.
How is the right balance between security and freedom to be found? " The point I want to make is that the human right to travel on the underground in London on a Thursday morning without being blown up is also an important right ", Mr Clarke said. He added that the challenge of a more secure Europe requires " a proportionate response ". " None of our proposals are new, they were not new even after the Madrid attacks, but they are things we still need to do ". The original proposal to store data from phone calls, text messages and emails for a maximum of three years was put forward by the UK, Ireland, France and Sweden. The stored information would only include details on the date, time and location of the communication but not on the content of the conversation.
To give an example of how important intelligence agencies and the use of new technologies are, Mr Clarke mentioned that the presence of CCTV cameras on public transport in London would certainly help investigators to identify the terrorists. " The support that we had from international, and particularly European, intelligence agencies and police has been first class ," Mr Clarke told the committee. " It has made a material difference ".
Less rhetoric and more practical measures
Parliament's rapporteur on data protection, Alexander ALVARO (ALDE, DE), who asked MEPs in June to reject the proposal to store data from phone calls and emails, told Mr Clarke today: " You have our support but you will not get blind obedience. I find very annoying the rhetorical way people use to explain how to fight terrorism. (...) You argue that intelligence units are the best weapons but they failed in New York, Madrid and London ". Many MEPs insisted that Member States must justify the data retention measures. Kathalijne Maria BUITENWEG (Greens/EFA, NL) said " Privacy is not something holy but it is up to us to prove a measure is necessary ".
Giusto CATANIA (GUE/NGL, IT) said that the tragic events in London " show that our strategy is not working. (...) We need to retrieve troops from Iraq, this is the first step which needs to be given ". Mr Clarke gave a straight answer: " It is wrong to link the situation in Iraq with the terrorists' attacks. We have to break the link of Iraq with what motivated terrorists to attack London. After all, 9/11 took place before the conflict started in Iraq ".
When Mario BORGHEZIO (IND/DEM, IT) argued that we are dealing with " Islamic terrorism ", the British Home secretary said that " what was also powerful to see in London was the absolute determination of all faiths - Catholic, Jew, Muslim - to stand for the respect of democracy and of other faiths. The police is with the Islamic community and against radicalism ".
Finally, asked about the Parliament's strong wish for more democratic scrutiny over EU actions through the use of the co-decision procedure for the adoption of legislation to prevent terrorist attacks, Mr Clarke answered: " We think that the most important thing is to focus on the substance. We want to use whatever pillar (legislative procedure) will allow us to get a deal on the fight against terrorism and organised crime ".
13.7.2005 Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs In the chair: Jean-Marie CAVADA (ALDE, FR)
20050826IPR01416
EN
1
PHOTO
20050822PHT01305.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
