Commissioner Rehn defends "rigorous" framework for negotiations with Turkey
External relations
2005-09-07 - 18:26
Appearing before the Foreign Affairs Committee, Enlargement Commissioner Olli REHN stressed that the framework for accession negotiations with Turkey proposed last week was the most rigorous ever. Drawing lessons from the previous round of enlargement, Mr Rehn said, "the focus will be less on commitments and more on practice, less on words and more on deeds".
On the Commission's intention to go ahead with the opening of negotiations on 3 October, the Commissioner said that the EU is a community which adheres to its commitments and that "pacta sunt servanda". The conditions under which the decision to open negotiations was taken have not changed, he said.
The Commission has made it clear that the shared objective of the negotiations is accession by Turkey, but that the negotiations are by nature open-ended and the outcome is not a foregone conclusion. " In other words: let us give Turkey the opportunity to prove itself ", Mr Rehn said.
In general, MEPs were supportive of the negotiation framework as proposed by the Commission - which will have to be approved by the Council - although a number of them did stress the need for real and visible progress in the fields of human rights, women's rights, religious freedom and Cyprus, as well as the need for a genuine application of the accession criteria.
In reply to questions, the Commissioner said that the priorities in the negotiations will be respect of human rights in general, zero-tolerance of torture, and respect of the rights of non-muslim communities, women's organisations and trade unions. As regards religious freedom, Mr Rehn stated that the Commission had signalled that the Law on Foundations currently before the Turkish parliament was deficient and that it might be better to postpone its adoption until it had been improved. He added that this will in fact be one of the core issues before negotiations start.
On Cyprus, Mr Rehn said that Turkey would sign the "Ankara" Protocol this summer and that he expected its ratification in good time. Personally, he felt that the EU should encourage both parties to open trade and economic relations. He added that if necessary there was always the possibility of not opening negotiations on certain chapters, such as the one on the customs union. " But I haven't given up hope yet ", he added.
On Armenia, Mr Rehn said Turkey will have to maintain good neighbourly relations in general and thus normalise its relations with Armenia and open its borders. This will also be to the benefit of eastern Turkey, including the Kars region. However, recognition of the events of 1915-1916 is not a precondition for opening accession negotiations, although the Commissioner regretted the postponement of a conference of historians on this issue at the Bosphorus University.
04.07.05 Committee on Foreign Affairs In the chair: Elmar BROK (EPP-ED, DE)
20050826IPR01417
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
