MEPs want to improve bathing water standards
Environment
2005-09-07 - 18:26
Parliament adopted a legislative resolution, in second reading, on a new directive on the quality of bathing water with Member States reluctant to establish more stringent standards than exist today. The assembly adopted the report of Jules MAATEN (ALDE, NL) in a spirit of compromise, giving up some of the Environment Committee's demands in the hope of coming to an agreement with the Council (the 25 Member States).
"The directive on bathing water is without doubt one of the directives best-known to the European citizens", declared Mr Maaten. the European Parliament rapporteur, in Monday's debate. The old directive from 1976 has greatly improved the quality of water. But due to scientific developments and health concerns , "it is no longer good enough", indicated the rapporteur. "If we stick to today's standards, one bathing area in eight, in the Union, runs health risks" , revealed Mr. Maaten.
Against the hopes of the Environment Committee, the plenary approved, in particular, the inclusion, for a transitional period of 8 years, of an extra category, " sufficient quality" , which was introduced in the Council's common position. But MEPs imposed stricter standards for this category than those hoped for by the Council.
The plenary also accepted another of the Council's demands that there be a distinction between coastal waters and inland waters, and less strict microbiological standards applied to the latter. On the other hand, contrary to the wishes of the Council, Parliament succeeded in laying down a series of detailed binding requirements for national and regional authorities to follow in case of emergency.
Some MEPs, notably from the Greens, wanted the directive to cover not only bathing water but also stretches of water where water sports are practised, such as surfing and canoeing. But their amendments were rejected.
Throughout the debate on Monday evening, Environment Commissioner Stavros DIMAS indicated that he was favourable to the introduction of a " sufficient quality " category. He considered that the standards proposed by Parliament were too strict. However, it is now up to the Council to say what it thinks, and, if any divergence with Parliament remains, MEPs and the Council will have to go to conciliation.
When this directive comes into force, there will have to be a " simple standardised system of symbols " to keep the public informed about the state of bathing water (to be devised by the Commission within 2 years of the consultation). The Internet, too, will provide this information. Good quality bathing water in the EU will, according to these new rules, have to be achieved "at the latest by the end of the 2011 bathing season".
MEPs during the debate stated:
Christa KLASS (EPP-ED, DE): "The Council common position goes no way towards improving the situation in relation to the 1976 directive, for fear of the costs involved. But many of the costs are already included in the directives on nitrates or the treatment of used water".
Gyula HEGYI (PES, HU): "The Council's approach is realistic" , but the position of the Environment Commission ruins it. "We have to avoid rules which go too far in the way of detail". On the same question, Peter Olajos (EPP-ED, HU) said: "Too much goodwill can be harmful. If we adopt the report as it stands, that is what will happen. We cannot raise the bar higher than the Council." Mr Olajos spoke about the Balaton lake, where such a directive would have disastrous consequences for tourism and unemployment.
Holger KRAHMER (ALDE, DE) called for competence to be returned to the Member States: "This directive is a good example of a piece of legislation that the EU can give up!" On the same subject Christopher FJELLNER (EEP-ED, SE): "The EU is in the process of legislating in an area full of large differences from one country to another. A law must be able to be applied, otherwise it is better to put an end to this stupidity."
Marie Anne ISLER BÉGUIN (Greens/EFA, FR )called for the extension of the standards to stretches of water where water sports are practised: "What value would this directive have in the eyes of those, particularly the young, who practise water sports? A petition to include these areas has received 10,000 signatures."
Johannes BLOKLAND (IND/DEM, NL): " The Council's position is not positive. Whereas it does not seek to strengthen the rules, 85% of community water is in compliance with the 1976 directive and 80% with the rules of this proposal. The new directive must be more ambitious."
Dorette CORBEY (PES, NL): "The Council is playing a cynical game. Avoiding standards is not a good idea when health is at stake."
Frederique RIES (ALDE, BE): "This directive must be practicable. In Wallonia (southern Belgium), a river of less than 10cm deep has been described as bathing water and, as a result, required 750,000 euros of investment."
Françoise GROSSETÊTE (EPP-ED, FR) called for "a balance between realism in relation to health concerns, and tourism activities. We should not create fear unnecessarily."
20050826IPR01457
EN
1
PHOTO
20050818PHT00189.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
