Transport Committee demands EU-wide blacklist for air carriers
Transport
2005-09-07 - 18:26
Following a number of serious air crashes earlier this month, Parliament's Transport Committee is demanding an EU-wide blacklist of air carriers which do not meet international aircraft safety standards. These carriers should be named and shamed throughout the Community, said chairman Paolo COSTA (ALDE, IT) at a meeting of the committee on 30 August. He called for zero tolerance towards the carriers concerned.
Although Mr Costa welcomed the decisions by the Belgian and French governments to publish their own blacklists, he added that an EU list would be more effective and would avoid confusion. "I do not think that Belgian and French citizens will feel safer after the publication of these lists" , Mr Costa said. He added that the EP as co-legislator would do everything possible to have such a list established, possibly by the end of this year. The blacklist should also cover aircraft chartered from companies in non-EU countries and Member States should provide the European Commission with a list of carriers banned from their airspace.
Ticket sellers, national civil aviation authorities and airports in the EU should bring the Community's blacklist to the notice of passengers, on their premises and/or on their websites. Finally, said Mr Costa, the European Aviation Safety Agency should play a more important role to ensure the safety of civil aviation EU-wide. He was convinced that Parliament was speaking today in the name of all EU citizens, who wanted safe flights when travelling inside and outside the Community.
An opportunity to introduce legislation on these matters will arise in the near future when Parliament examines a draft regulation by the European Commission on providing information to passengers on the identity of the carrier which is operating their flight.
30.8.2005 Committee on Transport and Tourism In the chair: Paolo COSTA (ALDE, IT)
20050907IPR00050
EN
1
PHOTO
20050907PHT00060.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
