Funding the EU after 2007: the next Financial Perspective
Budget
2005-09-07 - 18:26
If the European Union wishes to become a political and economic heavyweight in the world arena, it must have the resources to match its ambitions. This is the crux of the current debate on Europe’s multiannual budget for 2007-2013.
On Wednesday 8 June in Strasbourg, the European Parliament adopted the report drafted by Reimer BÖGE (EPP-ED, DE) on the next Financial Perspective. The report will form the basis of Parliament’s position for its negotiations with the Council of Ministers, when MEPs will be seeking to ensure that enough funding is provided for the EU’s future priorities.
This Focus explains the key issues.
20050819FCS00990
What is the next Financial Perspective about?
At the end of the 1980s, EU governments and the European Parliament agreed on a system of medium-term programming for EU expenditure. The initiative for this came from Jacques Delors, the French President of the European Commission at the time, and the aim was to put an end to internal squabbling between governments and MEPs over the amount of money to be allocated each year to EU policies.
This time the multiannual budget has to be negotiated for an enlarged EU of 25 Member States for the period starting in 2007. Following the June 2004 elections, the European Parliament set up a temporary committee to examine the issues. During the current negotiations, by the end of which the Parliament and the EU governments must reach agreement, MEPs will be keen to defend projects that they consider crucial to the continuing unification of the continent. European solidarity, for example, is crucial to enable the new Member States from Eastern Europe to catch up with the more advanced regions. The EU also needs to fund research and education properly in order to stimulate growth and remain competitive against its increasingly dynamic competitors around the world. And it must be generous towards projects beyond its own borders if it wants to remain a major player on the world political scene.
The talks will not be easy. The countries that pay in more than they receive from the EU budget (known in Community jargon as the ‘net contributors’) set the tone in January 2004 with an announcement that they wanted to impose a ceiling on EU expenditure of €750bn for the period 2007-2013. The EU budget is financed largely by ‘national contributions’ paid direct from national treasuries. But in periods of budgetary austerity, Europe’s governments are tempted to tighten the purse strings. The German Christian Democrat MEP Reimer Böge, who drafted Parliament’s recommendation, doubts that this overall limit will enable the EU to cover its needs. He has warned that if EU spending does not reach at least €883bn, funding for some policies will suffer. The President of the Parliament, Spanish Socialist Josep Borrell, has warned the governments of the 25 Member States that the Parliament will not agree to a penny-pinching deal.
Although bargaining is likely to be tough, the EU countries are keen to reach agreement by the end of the year. Parliament adopted its position in June, defending an ambitious level of funding for the Community budget. The Council, on the other hand, failed to reach an agreement during its summit on 16 and 17 June, mainly owing to the deep divide between France and the United Kingdom over the ‘UK rebate’ (see Frequently Asked Questions) and the Common Agricultural Policy.
If the EU institutions do not manage to strike a deal by the end of 2006, two options are possible from 2007, after the current Financial Perspective expires: either the existing Interinstitutional Agreement is prolonged (preserving the structure of the current Financial Perspective, with the ceilings being calculated on the basis of the 2006 figures); or the Interinstitutional Agreement is abrogated, in which case the EU reverts to the Treaty provisions for the annual budget procedure (see Frequently Asked Questions).
The proposals of the Böge report
The annual figures proposed by the Böge report within the multiannual framework are:
- payment appropriations: 1.07% of the European Union’s GNI (€883bn over seven years);
- commitment appropriations: 1.18% of GNI (€975bn over seven years).
The Commission is proposing payments of 1.14% (€943bn) and commitments of 1.24% (€1 022bn).
The temporary committee:
has opted not to incorporate the European Development Fund (€21.876bn) – which is currently outside the Community budget – into the Financial Perspective; and MEPs believe that, were the EDF ever to be incorporated into the Community budget, this must not lead to cuts in other policy areas;
is proposing that a number of reserves be established outside the Financial Perspective in order to:
cope with contingencies or situations that are difficult to anticipate (cohesion, emergency aid, solidarity fund, guarantee fund),
assist the EU to make economic adjustments designed to boost competitiveness.
The aim of the strategy is to help the EU operate more flexibly. Against a background of national budgetary constraints, the temporary committee has sought to be realistic. It has programmed only the budgetary areas which really need to be programmed, and has tried to enable the EU to respond when necessary to humanitarian, economic or social emergencies and take more effective action to boost the Lisbon strategy.
If the EDF and the reserves had been incorporated into the Financial Perspective, the funding level set in the Böge report would have been virtually identical to what the Commission proposed.
Heading 1: Competitiveness and cohesion to boost growth and employment
Total funding proposed by the temporary committee: €459bn
Main policies
Research & development
Trans-European networks
Education and training
Social policy
Convergence
Cross-border cooperation
1a. Competitiveness: MEPs believe research funding needs be ‘ simplified ’ but also that an ‘ ambitious ’ and adequately resourced programme for competitiveness and innovation is vital to create prosperity. And they want a €200m increase for the social policy agenda (over and above what the Commission has proposed), mainly to help achieve the Lisbon objectives and stimulate employment.
1b. Cohesion: Regional policy is seen as ‘ indispensable ’ for stimulating EU economic and social cohesion. MEPs are therefore urging that cohesion funding be ‘ used exclusively for that purpose ’ in order to support growth, employment and sustainable development and above all to reduce disparities between EU regions. The temporary committee argues that financing in this area should total 0.41% of EU GNI and that the new Member States should be allowed to use up to 4% of their GNI for projects in those policy areas. However, the 4% GNI ceiling ought to be handled in a more ‘ elastic ’ fashion, i.e. this figure could be exceeded if a country showed it could absorb more Community funding. MEPs also call for the introduction of a transitional mechanism for regions hit by the ‘statistical effect’ and hence no longer qualifying for structural funds (i.e. regions which have fallen below the eligibility thresholds for structural aid).
Heading 2: Preservation and management of natural resources
Total funding proposed by the temporary committee: €396.2bn
Main policies
Agricultural market support & direct payments
Rural development
Fisheries
Protection of the environment
Within heading 2 of the Financial Perspective, MEPs regard the sums earmarked for the Rural Development Fund by the Commission as very low – in fact as a bare minimum. They believe the problems of rural areas can in part be addressed by supporting businesses that help diversify the economy. And they propose allocating €21bn to Natura 2000 (a programme for the biodiversity and protection of natural habitats).
MEPs are opposed to renationalising the Common Agricultural Policy but back the phasing-in of cofinancing for agricultural expenditure within the EU-15 if needs outstrip the resources available after the accession of Bulgaria and Romania (scheduled for 1 January 2007). It should be remembered that the heads of state and government agreed in October 2002 to set the ceiling for agriculture expenditure at €293bn.
Heading 3: Citizenship, freedom, security and justice
Total funding proposed by the temporary committee: €19.4bn
Main policies
Asylum and immigration
External borders
Security
Justice and fundamental rights
Health and consumer protection
Culture and youth
Citizenship
The area of freedom, security and justice is a priority of the new financial planning arrangements. The temporary committee believes that a €1bn increase above what the Commission has proposed is ‘ necessary in order to attain its goals ’, while making provision for a ‘ sufficient margin ’ for unforeseen needs. Europol (the European Police Office) and Eurojust (an embryonic European public prosecutor’s office) ought to receive increased funding as the fight against organised crime and terrorism is now a priority. Other funding increases are proposed for youth and culture programmes.
Heading 4: The EU on the world stage
Total funding proposed by the temporary committee: €70.6bn
Main policies
Neighbourhood policy of the EU
Humanitarian aid
Development and economic cooperation
CFSP
For this heading, which was underfunded in 2000-2006, MEPs are calling for more flexibility (see below) to meet new needs and for adequate funding for key areas such as the new neighbourhood policy. They say the EU needs to strengthen its influence in the Mediterranean and envisage a Baltic Sea strategy that involves Russia as an equal partner. MEPs also want to be consulted on any EU external action which has budgetary implications. Lastly, with regard to cooperation aid, a distinction must be made between developing and industrialised countries.
Flexibility and reserves
The flexibility instrument, designed to cope with ‘ new unforeseen needs ’, proved vital during the 2000-2006 period. Now it must be reviewed and its funding should be upped to €500m a year (from €200m at present), says the Böge report. In its new form this instrument, which is regarded as a ‘ non-negotiable part ’ of the Interinstitutional Agreement, will be financed by reallocations within the various Financial Perspective headings, redeployment of unused funds within and between headings or, if the first two options are not possible, an injection of additional funding.
Turning to reserves, the temporary committee proposes the creation of reserves for competitiveness (capped at €7bn and replacing the Growth Adjustment Fund), cohesion (€3bn), emergency aid (€1.5bn) and the Solidarity Fund (€6.2bn).
Frequently asked questions
What happens if the negotiations break down?
If the twenty-five EU governments and the European Parliament do not agree in time on the next Financial Perspective (bearing in mind that the current FP expires at the end of 2006), two options can be envisaged:
The current Interinstitutional Agreement could be prolonged : The ceilings for 2006, the final year covered by the current FP, would be adjusted by applying the average rate of increase over the preceding period, excluding enlargement-related adjustments. However, this rate could not exceed the expected growth rate of Community GNI. The existing expenditure categories of the FP would be preserved.
The Interinstitutional Agreement could be abrogated : The EU would then revert to the annual budget procedure, as established by the Treaty (Art. 272). This would give the EP more room for manoeuvre on non-compulsory expenditure. The budget would be divided into ‘compulsory’ expenditure (mainly agriculture, on which the Council has the final say) and ‘non-compulsory’ expenditure (on which Parliament has the final word) which would be calculated according to the maximum rate of increase. This scenario is also theoretically possible if Parliament rejects a deal reached by the European Council.
Even with an annual budget, multi-annual programming would be possible either with ad hoc agreement between Council and Parliament on the financing or with the annual confirmation of the amounts, on the assumption that the legislative programs will be adopted.
Will the UK rebate be abolished?
The reform of the ‘own-resources’ system (the main source of revenue of the EU budget) is closely linked to the Financial Perspective but the Council has so far failed to reach agreement on this, despite repeated urging from Parliament. The Commission has asked the Council to consider a different funding system for the EU, with a new fiscal resource based on an energy tax, VAT or corporate income tax. The Member States have firmly resisted this idea so far.
Another important issue is the UK rebate. This mechanism, introduced in 1984 at the insistence of Margaret Thatcher, is designed to correct a budgetary imbalance. At the time the UK argued that it received very little from the Community budget even though Britain’s per capita GDP was well below the Community average. The Luxembourg presidency, in a bid to resolve the situation, has suggested phasing-out the UK rebate, which was worth €5.3bn in 2004.
On the own resources issue, the temporary committee’s report states that Parliament will ‘ take account in its final vote ’ of how the Council acknowledges the need to reform the own resources system so as to share out new expenditure ‘ fairly ’ among Member States.
Historical background
The Financial Perspective lays down a framework for Community expenditure over a given period, on the basis of broad priorities decided by the EU institutions. It establishes the maximum figures and the breakdown of foreseeable expenditure by the Community and is decided jointly by the Parliament, the Council (national governments) and the Commission under an Interinstitutional Agreement. The aims of the FP are thus to tighten up budgetary discipline, keep the overall increase in spending under control and ensure that the budget procedure functions smoothly.
Since this system was introduced, the EU budget has been kept firmly under control, without the slightest overspend. The fact that there is a budget surplus year after year indicates how disciplined the EU’s budgetary management has been and contrasts with the budget problems faced by the Member States in some periods.
Moreover, the absolute size of the budget as a percentage of GDP is very modest. The Community budget has been equivalent to an average 1% of GDP over the period 1988-2002, i.e. well below the ceilings laid down, and has steadily decreased in relation to the own resources ceiling since 1996. In addition, the increase in commitment and payment appropriations under the budget has slowed down markedly in recent years. And it is worth noting that the programming period 2000-2006 started out at a figure of 10 billion euros less (-11.9%) in commitment appropriations than the previous period.
Lastly, the annual increases in the Community budget have been far less than the increases in national budgets. For the reference period 1996-2002, the Community budget increased by 8.2% in terms of real expenditure (from 77.032 billion euros in 1996 to 83.371 billion in 2002). In the same period, the cumulated national expenditure of the 15 current Member States increased on average by 22.9% (from 3532.28 billion in 1996 to 4342.86 billion in 2002).
The fourth exercise of its kind
The Financial Perspective was initially created in 1988 as part of the Delors I package, named after the President of the Commission, Jacques Delors, whose brainchild it was. This medium-term financial framework put an end to the annual budget marathons, which were often a source of serious conflict between the Member States and/or the institutions and were a regular feature of news stories about the Community in the late 1970s/early 1980s.
The European Parliament and the Council of Ministers, known together as ‘ the two arms of the budgetary authority ’ , disagreed vehemently on a number of occasions, particularly over increases in non-compulsory expenditure (nowadays this expenditure, on which Parliament has the final say, includes the social and regional funds, research and energy, with the most striking exception being agriculture). On three occasions, in 1979, 1982 and 1985, Parliament even went so far as to reject the budget.
The price of this new-found peace has been the need to negotiate ‘packages’ lasting five, then seven, years. This means far more forward thinking, even though the budget itself is not drawn up on a multi-annual basis.
The Financial Perspective lays down ceilings for total expenditure and for each category of spending. For the current programming period, there are seven categories: agriculture, structural measures, internal policies, external action, administrative expenditure, reserves and pre-accession aid. An annual budgetary procedure is still needed to decide on the level of expenditure for each item each year.
Following the Edinburgh European Council in 1992, another agreement was reached covering the next seven years (Delors II package). A third accord, reached in 1999 at the Berlin European Council which adopted Agenda 2000, laid down a financial framework for 2000-2006. It included some of the funding needed for enlargement.
On each occasion the Financial Perspective has reflected the strategic principles and policy choices of the time:
– 1988-1992 : budgetary crises end, agriculture ceases to dominate the budget, structural policies are launched;
– 1993-1999: the structural funds are substantially increased (+41%) and become the chief instrument for the economic and social cohesion needed to underpin the single currency;
– 2000-2006 : the Community budget is stabilised, own resources do not increase, savings are made to finance enlargement.
The agreement on the Financial Perspective has been accompanied every time by the negotiation of an Interinstitutional Agreement between the Commission, Parliament and the Council of Ministers. These Interinstitutional Agreements are not legally binding and can be abrogated by the Council or Parliament. However, they have so far reduced tension by encouraging both sides to try and reach negotiated solutions. For the last ten years they have also enabled annual budgets to be kept under the maximum limits, although Parliament still has significant room for manoeuvre to amend non-compulsory expenditure. Final report of the EP’s Temporary Committee
EN
1
PHOTO
20050819PHT00679.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/comparl/tempcom/finp/report/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
