Sixty years after the Second World War
External relations
2005-09-08 - 18:19
Opening the debate on the 60th anniversary of the end of the Second World War, the President of the European Parliament, Josep BORRELL said: "Sixty years ago the world began to take stock of a horrific event, the after-effects of which would still be felt years later: 60 million soldiers and civilians killed on five continents; the systematic extermination of peoples and minorities; cities and regions reduced to rubble and ashes; public finances in ruins; 30 million displaced persons.
As you are aware, the war in the Pacific continued until 14 August and culminated in terrifying images of nuclear annihilation. Europe at that time was a continent destroyed, starving and under threat. On 8 May 1945, certain contemporary political leaders proclaimed that the flags of freedom were flying 'across' Europe. However, the end of the war brought peace and freedom to only one half of the continent; the other half fell victim to the 'new international order' which had been laid down at Yalta.
Peace and freedom were not bestowed universally. On that 8 May, many countries saw the geography of Europe redrawn. In 1945 we defeated a totalitarian regime, yet half of Europe was promptly taken over by another one, which proved particularly vice-like and resilient. The world entered an era of bi-polarity and ideological conflict and lived through a nuclear-inspired age of terror. Our continent was rent asunder. Today, 60 years on, we are able within the European Parliament to commemorate jointly a Europe which has both triumphed and rediscovered itself. On 1 May of this year we celebrated the first anniversary of our re-encounter with 10 new countries - which will soon be joined by more.
This gives greater significance to today: 9 May (Europe Day) - the date upon which, 55 years ago, foundations were laid which would enable our continent to come to terms with the desolation of war. With the new countries' recent accession to the European Union, those terms have now been met in full.I should like this day - on which we are commemorating three events which are very different in nature but which have a common thread - to be a day of reflection.Today is a fine opportunity for us to remind ourselves (and each other) of our duty to preserve a collective memory - and in doing so to involve in particular the younger generations, who have no experience of war.The streets of Europe are full of the names of eminent persons and significant events which help to preserve our collective memory: the Westerplatte in Gdansk/Danzig, Montgomery Square in Brussels, the Stalingrad metro station in Paris, the Dresden Boulevard which is just a stone's throw away from here, the military cemeteries of both sides ... All of these constitute the heritage of our shared memory.
In our modern Europe the individual is no longer subordinate to the State, and law and order prevail. Our system - our genetic code - is based on the division of powers, on the sovereignty of the people and on human rights. We must all commit ourselves to the continuing struggle to uphold the values of peace, justice and tolerance - in the world as a whole and not just within Europe. Peace is no longer what the people of Europe are hoping for. We already have peace amongst ourselves and we all regard it as irreversible. What people are hoping for is a European Union which will bolster their prosperity and their security as they face up to the threats posed by a world which is no longer the one carved out at Yalta.Our obligation is to look to the future in order to make that future a reality."
On behalf of the Council, Jean-Claude JUNCKER, in an impassioned speech, said that it was important to "speak the truth" and recognise that May 8 1945 was a day of Liberation. But he also said that both a "free Europe" and a "paralysed Europe" had emerged from the end of the Second World War, with the people of Central and Eastern Europe "subjugated" and the Baltic States "thrown from one disaster to another". Noting that Europe was itself a product of the war, he concluded, "let us be proud of this Europe that our fore-bearers have built for us".
The President of the European Commission, José Manuel BARROSO, recognised that true freedom for millions of Europeans came from the fall of the Berlin Wall. He expressed his admiration for Central and Eastern European countries' struggle for democracy, and reflecting on the progress made, he said, "How can we not be optimistic if we look at where we were just 60 years ago?" But he cautioned not to take the Europe of today for granted, saying, "the history of Europe has revealed we have to work for peace". In this sense, he saw the European Constitution as the way towards greater progress in the future.
Graham R. WATSON (ALDE, UK) said that the debate must be about the future, not the past. "Let us rejoice that Europe is united in peace", he said. But he sounded a note of caution. "There are no guarantees. Can we move forward or will our achievements melt before our eyes and be replaced by national conflicts?" He referred to new global challenges, such as climate change, international organised crime and terrorism, and saw greater convergence as the key to better facing such global challenges. He thus welcomed cooperation with Russia and China but warned against tolerating authoritarian regimes.
Nigel FARAGE (IND/DEM) asked what the arguments for the EU are, emphasising that it was wrong to say that the European Union had kept the peace in Europe for the last 60 years. He held NATO up as the sole guarantor of peace, which he said was an example of intergovernmental cooperation, and cited the examples of wars in Yugoslavia, the former Soviet Union and the USA as proof that "federalism does not guarantee peace". He concluded by saying, "we must tell the peoples of Europe the truth about our ambitions and give them free and fair referendums or we will be heading for disaster".
Vote Thursday, 12 May 2005
MEPs will vote on a joint resolution on the 60th anniversary of the end of the Second World War on 8 May 1945.
Parliament will vote tomorrow on a draft resolution of several political groups which highlights the importance of keeping the memories of the past alive, because there cannot be reconciliation without truth and remembrance. The draft emphasises at the same time that only a strong Europe can offer a means of overcoming the atrocities of the past. The draft resolution expresses respect for, and pays tribute to, all who fought against tyranny, and particularly those who became its victims.
The draft resolution renews the Parliament's commitment to a peaceful and prosperous Europe founded on the values of respect for human dignity, freedom, democracy, equality, the rule of law and respect for human rights. It confirms its united stand against all totalitarian rule of whatever ideological persuasion.
MEPs welcome this first opportunity to commemorate the anniversary with elected Members from all 25 EU countries as an expression of the ever closer union of our nations and citizens, who have overcome the divisions between aggressors and victims and between victors and defeated, an occasion to share and combine our remembrances on the way to a truly common European memory and an opportunity to prevent recurrences of nationalism and totalitarian rule. The draft resolution will welcome the fact that the Central and Eastern European states and peoples can now also enjoy freedom and the right to determine their destiny after so many decades under Soviet domination or occupation or other communist dictatorships. The draft resolution welcomes German unification and the fact that ten of the Central and Eastern European states have joined, or will soon join, the European Union. The draft resolution stresses that the process of European integration has helped to overcome almost all post-war dictatorships on the European continent, both in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe and in Spain, Portugal and Greece.
MEPs will declare that the process of European integration and the further development of the European Union as a model of peace are the result of a free decision by the people to determine their own destiny and commit themselves to a shared future. The Parliament will also declare that, under the Helsinki Agreements, no country has the right to decide on the destiny of another country. Finally, MEPs will call on all countries to open their archives pertaining to World War II.
20050824IPR01359
EN
1
PHOTO
20050818PHT00183.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
