A Constitution for Europe – state of play
Institutions
2005-09-07 - 18:26
Despite the shock of the 'no' votes in the referendums in France and the Netherlands, ratification of the Constitution is proceeding in several countries, while others have chosen to suspend the process. Here is the state of play.
Although it is known as the ‘Constitution’, the text signed in Rome by the Heads of State and Government on 29 October 2004 is an international treaty just like all the others that have been ratified in the course of the construction of Europe. In order to enter into force it must be ratified by the 25 Member States that make up the European Union.
Each State ratifies the treaty according to its own rules: either by the parliamentary method or by referendum, or by both.
Who has said 'yes', who has said 'no' and who is waiting
To date 13 countries have already ratified the European Constitution: Luxembourg and Spain by referendum and the other countries (Germany, Austria, Cyprus, Greece, Hungary, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Malta, Slovenia and Slovakia) by the parliamentary method.
In Belgium approval of the Treaty takes place by means of a complex parliamentary procedure which will soon be completed. Sweden has decided to postpone the vote in Parliament and Finland is getting ready to do so. Denmark has postponed its referendum and Poland, which was also leaning towards a referendum, is still considering which procedure to follow. Portugal and the Czech Republic also thought it preferable to wait before organising an indicative referendum.
Referendums have also been postponed in Ireland and the United Kingdom, two countries in which a referendum was to accompany the parliamentary procedure. Estonia has yet to opt definitively for one solution or the other. In that country, however, the method of ratification will be decided in court. Following a complaint, the judges must rule on compliance of the European Treaty with the Estonian Constitution. If they rule in favour, the Estonian Parliament can then take a decision regarding the Constitution after organising a public debate. If not, a referendum is the only possible route.
Two of the 25 Member States, France and the Netherlands, have rejected the Constitution. They both did so by means of a referendum and while legally the Dutch 'Nee' is only of consultative value, it is nevertheless politically valid.
In the countries which have opted for a referendum, the 'Yes' and 'No' camps are clearly defined. The Dutch rejected the Constitution by 61.7% of the votes and the French by 54.8%. Turnout was high in both cases (63 and 70% respectively). On the other hand, the Spanish, the first to vote, gave the new Constitutional Treaty their overwhelming support (76.7%), as did the citizens of Luxembourg, 56.52% of whom said 'Yes'. An important point: the citizens of the Grand Duchy voted after the French and Dutch referendums had taken place, in an atmosphere of general crisis.
20050819FCS00974
What if the Constitution is dead?
The 'no' vote in France and the Netherlands, two founding countries of the European Community, eclipsed Spain’s 'Yes'. Many people then believed that the Constitutional Treaty was dead. The Prime Minister of Luxembourg, Jean-Claude Juncker, was determined to fight back, declaring, after the 'yes' vote in his country, that ‘the Constitution is not dead’.
This is not the first time in the history of the construction of Europe that a European Treaty has been rejected in a referendum. In 1992 the Danes said 'No' to the Treaty of Maastricht, which launched the single currency project. In 2001 it was the Irish who said 'No' to the Treaty of Nice on the reform of the EU institutions prior to the future enlargement of Europe. These two countries had concerns regarding particular points in the Treaties and after some improvements to the texts the 'Yes' votes carried the day at the end of a second referendum. On the other hand, the refusal of the French National Assembly to ratify the Treaty establishing the European Defence Community in 1954 dealt a fatal blow to that political project.
What fate awaits the Constitution? A declaration annexed to it stipulates that ‘ if, two years after the signature of the treaty (…), four fifths of the Member States have ratified it and one or more Member States have encountered difficulties in proceeding with ratification, the matter shall be referred to the European Council.’
The Constitution says nothing more on the subject. Following the 'no' votes of France and the Netherlands, this declaration has given rise to differing interpretations. After deciding to grant themselves ‘a period of reflection’, the Heads of State and Government of the Twenty-Five agreed to take stock of the ratification process in the first half of 2006.
One thing is certain: until the Constitutional Treaty comes into force, the Treaty of Nice holds sway. In fact, if 20 Member States have approved the Constitution by 29 October 2006, then from 1 November the European Council will be able to study the situation and take a decision. At least seven countries must ratify the Treaty for this scenario to be on the agenda. The Constitution makes no special provisions should there be fewer ratifications. Until the Constitutional Treaty enters into force, the Treaty of Nice will remain valid. Information on the Constitution intended for the general public The European Parliament approved the Constitution for Europe by an overwhelming majority A Constitution for Europe – text published in the Official Journal
EN
1
PHOTO
20050818PHT00236.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://europa.eu.int/constitution/en/lstoc1_en.htm
EN
4
LINK
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/JOHtml.do?uri=OJ:C:2004:310:SOM:EN:HTML
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2005-0004 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
