The European Parliament’s support for the ‘Orange Revolution’ in Ukraine is a step towards an ambitious Wider Europe - Neighbourhood policy.
External relations
2005-09-07 - 18:26
In view of the serious political crisis over the recent presidential elections in Ukraine, the European Parliament made a firm commitment to resolving the situation and upholding democracy. This stance reflects a vision of the neighbourhood policy in which democracy and the rule of law are preconditions for the peaceful coexistence of peoples, and where economic and social reform go hand in hand with respect for democracy and human rights.
Since the entry into force on 1 March 1998 of the partnership and cooperation agreement between the EU and Ukraine, the European Parliament has been closely following the political situation in the country. Within the framework of a Parliamentary Cooperation Committee set up to ensure implementation of the agreement, MEPs have worked to forge closer bilateral ties with Ukraine.
During the visit of an EP delegation to Kiev in September 2003, President Kuchma invited the European Parliament to send observers to the presidential election due to take place the following year. Parliament had already sent monitors to the parliamentary elections of 2002. The 2004 presidential election was regarded both in Ukraine and by European and American observers as a decisive turning point in the country’s political development. But barely three days before the first round of the presidential elections, in a resolution adopted on 28 October 2004, the European Parliament was deploring the increasingly tense atmosphere of the election campaign and the involvement of the administration and the media on the side of Victor Yanukovych, the outgoing Prime Minister, to the detriment of the leader of the opposition, Viktor Yushchenko. Parliament also urged the Ukrainian authorities ‘ to put an end to the ongoing violations of democratic procedures’ .
On 29 October, a delegation of seven MEPs arrived in Ukraine, joining up with the delegations from the parliamentary assemblies of the Council of Europe, the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and NATO. Marek Siwiec (PES, PL) led the EP delegation and Charles Tannock (EPP-ED, UK) was the vice-chair. Under Mr Siwiec, a Polish member of the Socialist Group, the delegation concluded that the campaign had been marred by worrying factors such as the use of state funds by Mr Yanukovych, restrictions on the free movement of other candidates and campaign bias in the media. MEPs also themselves observed practical problems in the polling stations, including defective electoral rolls and inadequate equipment. In general, however, the vote seemed to go off fairly normally in the large majority of polling stations they visited. The European observers reserved judgment until the second round, scheduled for 21 November, which seemed likely to take place in far more sensitive circumstances.
The atmosphere of the campaign in fact deteriorated considerably between the two rounds, particularly as widespread fraud had been suspected. On the day of the second round MEPs noted the lack of transparency and verification of the democratic process, particularly by the Territorial Electoral Commissions. At the end of election night, the MEPs felt that the real vote count was producing a victory for Mr Yushchenko, which seemed to confirm the exit polls. But the Central Electoral Commission was giving initial results that went the other way. The European observers, like their counterparts from other countries, judged these preliminary results to be unrealistic and became suspicious of fraud and large-scale irregularities
EP resolution described as a ‘bombshell’
On 2 December, at a plenary session, the European Parliament adopted a fresh resolution in which it said ‘ it strongly condemns the conditions under which the second round of the presidential elections in Ukraine have taken place ’ and ‘ expresses its solidarity with the Ukrainian people ’, who were by now showing their disapproval by demonstrating in hundreds of thousands in the streets. MEPs condemned the decision by the Central Electoral Commission, which had proclaimed victory for Mr Yanukovych without verifying the validity of the elections. They called on the Ukrainian authorities ‘ to annul the second round of the presidential elections and reorganise this second round before the end of this year ’. This appeal, which was backed by many other voices around the world, together with the steady nerves shown by the Ukrainian demonstrators and the mediating efforts of the EU High Representative for Foreign Policy, Mr Javier Solana, and the Polish and Lithuanian Presidents, helped defuse the political crisis.
A political solution was reached on 8 December. It was welcomed in the following words by European Parliament President Mr Josep Borrell: ‘ We are satisfied with the efforts made by all concerned in order to overcome the crisis caused by the serious irregularities affecting the second round of the presidential elections . The Ukrainian people did not accept the result, and have demonstrated that by peacefully assembling in the centre of Kiev and camping out in the cold and the snow. I am delighted that they have been heard. ’
A re-run of the second round was arranged for 26 December. Once more an EP observer delegation set off for Ukraine, this time led by Jacek Saryusz-Wolski, a Polish Christian Democrat MEP. At a meeting with MEPs, Mr Yushchenko said that the resolution adopted by Parliament on 2 December was ‘ a bombshell that expressed the truth in a way not seen in writing from any other international organisation so far .’
The EP monitoring mission concluded that this time the elections had been free and fair, in accordance with international standards, and that they had taken place in a peaceful atmosphere. They produced a clear victory for Mr Yushchenko, who had won 52% of the vote as against 44% for Mr Yanukovych.
On 13 January this year, the European Parliament voted overwhelmingly in Strasbourg (467 votes in favour, 19 against and 7 abstentions) for a third resolution which was finally able to welcome ‘ the substantially fair elections held on 26 December 2004 ’, which according to MEPs represented ‘ a victory for democratic values, institutions and procedures in Ukraine ’.
The importance that the European Parliament attaches to the recent presidential election in Ukraine is illustrated by its sending of three ad hoc delegations and adopting three parliamentary resolutions, as well as by the personal commitment of many MEPs. The MEPs worked hard to help resolve the political crisis and to ensure that democratic standards were observed.
20050819FCS00984
A key neighbour
Relations between Ukraine and the EU are currently governed by the ‘European neighbourhood policy’ put forward by the European Commission in May 2004, just after the EU took in 10 new Member States. This policy establishes a general framework within which specific action plans are to be drawn up and implemented for each of the EU’s ‘new neighbours’. On 9 December 2004, the Commission adopted action plans for seven countries, including Ukraine. Ukraine’s plan still has to be ratified by the bilateral Cooperation Council before it becomes operational. The aim of the plans is to hold out the prospect, not of membership but of gradual integration into certain EU policies (e.g. education, research, environment), to improve cooperation in fighting crime and in managing borders and population movements, and also to bring national laws gradually into line so that these countries can enjoy the benefits of the internal market.
But, in a series of recent resolutions on the common foreign and security policy and human rights, notably those of 14 and 28 April 2005, the European Parliament invited the EU to adopt a more ambitious neighbourhood policy, ‘ in accordance with the global ambitions of the Union ’, ‘ so that a fairer balance between the different regions can be achieved ’ and to ‘ avoid any cool gesture of diminished interest on the part of the EU for progress in the western Balkans, Ukraine and the southern Caucasus, at least ’.
MEPs stressed that ‘ the establishment of security in the Union’s neighbourhood will serve /…/ to counter threats of a regional nature ’. They underlined the need for political, commercial and economic interactions with the EU, and recognised that the process of economic and social reform necessitates as its basis ‘the adoption of policies promoting human rights and democratic standards’. In the context of the Financial Perspectives for 2006-2013, the European Parliament is studying a new ‘Neighbourhood and Partnership’ Instrument proposed by the Commission. This is intended to support the reforms in the EU’s neighbouring countries, notably those to the east of Europe.
By changing the geopolitical realities, the latest enlargement has undoubtedly contributed to Parliament’s growing interest in the post-Soviet zone. Its stances on Moldova and Georgia (which had its own ‘Rose Revolution’ a year before the ‘Orange Revolution’ in Ukraine) reflect this orientation.
Parliament is particularly concerned about the situation in Belarus. The EU and Belarus signed an agreement in 1995 but it has come to nothing, and no cooperation committee has been set up between the European Parliament and that of Belarus. Since President Lukashenko replaced the parliament directly elected in 1996 with a national assembly appointed by himself, contacts between his regime and the EU have been very limited. However, the European Parliament is endeavouring to maintain political contacts with the forces of Belarusian democracy. In July 2005, MEPs expressed their concern at the deteriorating situation in the country, especially as regards freedom of the media. They called on the Council and the Commission to support the creation of an independent radio network broadcasting to Belarus from Poland and Lithuania and possibly Ukraine. This demonstrates Ukraine’s special position in relations with the EU.
Furthermore, in their resolution of 28 October 2004, MEPs recognised the importance of Ukraine as a ‘ key neighbour and strategic partner with deep historical, cultural and economic links to the Member States of the EU ’.
A prospect of membership?
In a resolution on the EU’s new neighbourhood policy, which was adopted by a large majority on 20 November 2003, Parliament was already expressing the view ‘ that the Wider Europe - Neighbourhood policy is in no way incompatible with certain European neighbouring countries’ aspirations to EU membership or different contractual relations .’ MEPs added that Parliament ‘ supports Ukraine’s desire for EU integration and the Council’s and the Commission’s current focusing on preparing an action plan for Ukraine ’. Many Ukrainian leaders, however, believe that the lack of any prospect of EU membership reduces the attraction of the action plan.
‘ Our road to the future is that of a united Europe ’, said the new Ukrainian President in his inaugural speech on 23 January 2005. ‘ We are part of the same civilisation and we share the same values . Our place is in the European Union. My goal is a Ukraine in a united Europe .’ On this point, Mr Yushchenko’s position is no different from that of his predecessor. For example, on 7 October 2003, at the EU-Ukraine summit in Yalta, whereas EU leaders emphasised that the new neighbourhood policy did not necessarily entail ultimate membership of the EU, President Kuchma said that the long-term strategic goal of his country was full and complete integration into the European Union.
Between one resolution and the other, MEPs have increasingly come to recognise Ukraine’s European aspirations. Although the European Parliament does not rule out the idea of Ukraine one day joining the EU, it has always stressed the need for the country to meet the Copenhagen political criteria, which include holding free and fair elections. From this point of view, in a resolution adopted three days before the first round of the presidential elections, the EP said the election would ‘ provide an unambiguous test of the extent of the Ukrainian authorities’ commitment to implementing common European values and standards ’.
When questioned on 25 January by members of the EP Foreign Affairs Committee, Benita Ferrero-Waldner, Commissioner for External Relations and Neighbourhood Policy, said that the European Union ‘ which has already just digested 10 new countries ’ must be ‘ pragmatic ’. She went on ‘ it would be a pity to drop the neighbourhood policy just as it has been set up’ . The Commissioner acknowledged that any European country which meets the ‘Copenhagen criteria’ is entitled to apply for membership. ‘ But there is one criterion which must not be forgotten ’, she said: ‘ the European Union’s absorption capacity ’.
In its resolution of 13 January 2005, the European Parliament ‘ calls upon the new Ukrainian political leadership to consolidate Ukraine’s espousal of common European values and objectives by taking further steps to promote democracy, civil society and the rule of law, by resuming the liberal market reforms and by overcoming the political divisions in Ukraine ’.
Parliament also pledged ‘ its continuing support, assistance and commitment to the Ukrainian people’s establishment of a free and open democratic system, their creation of a prosperous market economy and their country’s assumption of its rightful place in the community of democratic nations ’.
In addition, MEPs welcomed the Council’s intention to organise an early EU-Ukraine Cooperation Council with a view to the swift adoption of the EU-Ukraine Action Plan. And, above all, MEPs called on ‘ the Council, the Commission and the Member States to consider, besides the measures of the Action Plan within the framework of the European Neighbourhood Policy, other forms of association with Ukraine, giving a clear European perspective for the country and responding to the demonstrated aspirations of the vast majority of the Ukrainian people, possibly leading ultimately to the country’s accession to the EU ’. European Parliament resolution of 13 January 2005 on the results of the Ukraine elections European Parliament resolution of 2 December 2004 on the situation in Ukraine after the second round of the presidential elections marred by irregularities European Parliament resolution of 14 April 2005 on the European Security Strategy, relating in particular to the neighbourhood policy European Parliament resolution on the political situation and the independence of the media in Belarus European Parliament resolution of 28 October 2004 on the presidential elections in Ukraine on 31 October 2004 European Parliament resolution of 14 April 2005 on the annual report from the Council to the European Parliament on the main aspects and basic choices of CFSP, including the financial implications for the general budget of the European Communities - 2003 European Parliament resolution of 28 April 2005 on the Annual Report on Human Rights in the World 2004 and the EU’s policy on the matter
EN
1
PHOTO
20050819PHT00638.jpg
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2005-0009 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2004-0074 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2005-0133 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2005-0295 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2004-0046 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2005-0132 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2005-0150 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
