A brand new website for the European Parliament
Institutions
2005-09-09 - 22:22
The European Parliament is launching a completely new website designed to provide quicker and easier public access to information on the political decisions taken by the elected representatives of Europe's citizens. Replacing the old website, which was essentially a collection of databases, the new site is a dynamic and attractive information tool presenting continuously updated news on Parliament in a colourful, easy-to-read format in 20 languages.
Parliament has thus made a major effort to make its abundant information available to the public in a clearly comprehensible manner.
Five areas, three categories
The new website consists of five different information sections and is tailored to the needs of three different user categories. The five sections are: News, Parliament, Your MEPs, Activities and EP Live. The three user categories are the wider public, European affairs experts and researchers. The format has been designed to make the most topical issues immediately visible and understandable to any visitor, but anyone who wishes to delve more deeply into a subject, is of course more than welcome - and even encouraged - to go to other parts of the site as well.
News
In the News section, the wider public will find easily digestible, lively and continuously updated news stories on what is going on in the Parliament in all 20 languages. The stories are primarily aimed at people with an interest in but no special knowledge of European affairs. This part of the site enables visitors to see at a glance what the latest news is. The layout has been made a lot more attractive and the site is easy to navigate. The pages also feature images and sound.
In the same News section, experts in need of more detailed information, such as journalists, will find press releases on debates, votes and other events in Parliament, background stories, agendas and briefings. Here again, the site has been made more attractive and easier to navigate. And for those who want a historical overview, the archives of previous press releases and notes are available.
Parliament
The section describing the European Parliament as an institution sets out the way it is organised and what its political role and powers are. This part of the site also explains how to submit petitions, write to the Parliament, visit the Parliament or contact the information offices in all 25 member states. Those with more specialised interests will find reference documents, such as Parliament's internal rules or fact sheets, and also calls for tender and for subsidised projects. In the archives section, information on previous parliamentary terms of office can be looked up, including election results.
Your MEPs
The backbone of any Parliament is, of course, its members. A special section of the website therefore enables the reader to look up information on individual MEPs. Here can be found information on MEPs' backgrounds, their mandates within the Parliament and the work they have done, such as questions they have put to the Commission and Council, resolutions and reports they have drawn up and speeches they have made during plenary sessions. Readers can access their contact details as well as information on the composition of the political groups, committees, delegations and other bodies through which the Parliament does its work. In the archives this information is available as far back as the first direct European elections in 1979.
Activities
Under Activities, current topics are presented in more detail. Full reports and debates can be looked up by subject and by date. For experts all the legislative documents of the current legislature are available, such as reports, draft resolutions, agendas, verbatim debates and minutes. In the archives this information is available for the three previous terms of office as well.
EP Live
Finally, in the EP Live section, the most important events taking place in Parliament can be followed live through webstreaming. These broadcasts cover not only plenary sessions, but also a selection of committee meetings, hearings and press conferences. And to make sure that no-one needs to miss out on any of these events, a programme of upcoming broadcasts can be found here, as well as a selection of audio and video recordings of earlier events.
A dynamic tool for today's information needs
With its new website, the European Parliament aims to provide a dynamic and modern information tool allowing easy access to all information relevant to the needs of different users. By designing the site in 20 languages and providing readable, attractively formatted news items Parliament hopes to give a better insight into what it is doing to a wider audience and thus indeed "bring Europe closer to the citizen".
20050908IPR00068 Download posters, flash animation, movie… about the launch of the new website.
EN
1
PHOTO
20050908PHT00074.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/ep_products/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
