MEPs ask for mandatory EU target for renewable energies
Energy
2005-09-29 - 14:13
The European Parliament adopted a report by Claude TURMES (Greens/EFA, LU) which outlines a strategic overview on where renewable policies stand in Europe and proposes concrete actions to increase the share of renewable energy in the EU.
MEPs recognise the potential of a wide diversity of 21 different renewable energy technologies and point out that the EU is a world leader in most renewable energy technologies. Nevertheless, new EU-wide initiatives and directives are necessary, according to the MEPs.
MEPs recall that, last year, the European Parliament called for a 20 % target for renewable energies in overall energy consumption in the EU by 2020. They point out that new studies show that a more ambitious target is feasible. The Commission is asked to draw up an EU medium-term renewable energy strategy for the period after 2010. Mandatory targets should be set , but the EU target should be broken down into both sector and national targets, say MEPs.
Renewable energies, MEPs emphasise, along with energy efficiency and conservation, not only help to overcome health and environmental degradation, ensure sustainable development but also they contribute to innovation and to regional as well as national development, fair trade and create jobs in line with the Lisbon strategy. Parliament calls for tax cuts as incentives for promoting renewable energies as well as for fair and free access to the grid and non-discriminatory tariffs, which currently prevent the development of renewable sources of electricity in several Member States.
Furthermore, MEPs call on the Commission to come up with new legislative initiatives in order to put an end to huge market distortions which penalise renewable energy production. Market distortions include: insufficient ownership, unbundling requirements, ineffective wholesale markets, increased market concentration and direct and indirect subsidies.
MEPs also adopted a number of proposals concerning the use of biomass which they consider to have many advantages compared to conventional energy sources and compared to some other renewable energy sources. The Commission and Member States are asked to use the structural and cohesion funds to promote the use of biomass. Member States should also examine their tax systems and abolish all unnecessary tax burdens for users of biomass.
In order to finance concrete actions, MEPs suggested that the upcoming 7th framework program for research, technological development and health (FP7) must include increased funding for renewable sources of energy and energy efficiency.
Last but not least, MEPs want the European Institutions to become flagships for renewable energies. They should set positive and visible examples to European citizens by the use of renewable energies in their own buildings and modes of transportation. Parliament's Bureau is asked to develop a long-term commitment to the gradual phasing in of renewable energies in the electricity, heating, cooling and transportation needs of the Parliament and to combine this effort with measures to increase energy efficiency in the operation of the European Parliament.
20050922IPR00573
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
