Parliament debates Europe's Autumn agenda
Institutions
2005-09-26 - 20:03
President Josep BORRELL formally welcomed the Bulgarian and Romanian observers to the European Parliament. He gave his views on the state of the European Union, including the challenges of ratifying the Constitution and managing a Europe of 27 Member States. Parliament's group leaders then set out their positions.
President Josep BORRELL welcomed the new observers from Bulgaria and Romania. Their presence, he said, was a reminder that the 5th enlargement of the EU in May last year had been incomplete. Parliament had already given its assent to the accession of both countries: " We all expect them to accede as planned on 1 January 2007. We and they will all work to make that a reality ."
He said this was a difficult moment for the EU - while its institutions were functioning normally in terms of day to day business, " There is a crisis of identity in the European integration project ," he said. " Some say we just need to improve the functioning of our markets and continue enlarging, but the problem is much more profound. The political spirit and the geographical dimension are obstructed - this Parliament must contribute to getting out of the impasse ."
Looking back to the goals set out in his speech one year earlier, President Borrell pointed out that Parliament had met the challenge of working with colleagues from 25 political cultures and in 20 languages. He recalled the agreement on the MEPs' statute, finally reached under the Luxembourg presidency, resolving a situation which had undermined Parliament's public image for many years. The regulation on parliamentary assistance and reform of the EU's Financial Regulation remained to be achieved. In the case of the latter, he hoped new more efficient financial procedures could be in place by January 2007.
" The investiture of the Commission was a turbulent session, but Parliament emerged more mature, more credible and more visible to the public ." Relations with the new Commission had been set on a strong footing by the new framework agreement between the two institutions. An example would be the presence of José Manuel BARROSO at this week's Conference of Presidents meeting.
" Last year, our proceedings were thrown into gloom by news of hostage taking. Terrorist barbarism continues now, in London in July and daily in Iraq. The threat of terrorism puts our societies to the test of facing up to it in full respect of our democratic values ," he said. He also called for Europe to combat terrorism in alliance with its neighbours in the Islamic world, something which could be supported through the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly, which the EP currently chairs, while avoiding Islamophobia, which would be a victory for the terrorists.
On the Financial Perspective, Mr Borrell pointed out that agreement within the Council was a necessary condition for adopting a financial framework for 2007-13, but not a sufficient one. " There is no point in the Council agreeing something which cannot be taken on board by Parliament. I urge the Council to reach agreement during the UK presidency - afterwards it will become much more difficult ." If no agreement was reached before work had to begin on the 2007 budget, Parliament would meet its responsibilities under the treaty to ensure there would be a proper budget in place for 2007.
Turning to the Constitution, the EP President said the "period of reflection " had not been intended to be just a pause. While there was no legal vacuum at present, the problems the constitution had been intended to solve were still there. " We need a properly designed constitution that lets our institutions work efficiently ," he said. " There is no plan 'B', but there is a plan 'D' - for democracy and debate, the essence of a parliament ." He called for Heads of State or Government with " significant " results in the ratification process to come to Parliament.
Looking at the legislative work ahead, he said this was an opportunity to show the EU's " added value " on topics such as REACH, services, air safety, railways, security and justice and Turkey. "The European Parliament is indispensable in striking the balance between freedom and security in combating terrorism ."
Regarding the quality and relevance of European legislation, he noted that " better regulation " was nothing new - each successive Commission entered office promising to simplify the acquis communautaire . "When it comes to withdrawing legislative proposals, the Commission has an obligation to inform Parliament, in a substantial way, not just as a formality ." On the substance, there were no doubt many opportunities to simplify legislation, evaluate its impact and improve its transposition into national law.
The EP President said the October summit in the UK would be a chance to discuss the European Social Model - a debate which really concerned how Europe should respond to the challenges of economic globalisation.
He concluded with a quote from Alexis de Tocqueville: " Nations, like men, only reach a greater destiny through dialogue and debate ."
Political group speakers
EPP-ED group leader Hans-Gert POETTERING (DE) welcomed the Bulgarian and Romanian observers, before turning to the issue of Europe's " crisis of identity ." This could only be resolved if we were able to bring our values, held in common across the political spectrum, into constitutional law. The " no " votes in France and the Netherlands should not be the last word, he said. Parliament should request Heads of State or Government to come to the chamber to set out their view on the way forward. While he agreed with the Commission's aim of better legislation, he asked the Commission to properly respect the consultation of Parliament on these issues. He also called for a full role for Parliament in creating legislation aimed at combating terrorism.
Martin SCHULZ (DE), leader of the Socialist Group gave his welcome to the new observers, before strongly calling for the Commission to announce its plans to Parliament, not through the press. " The EP has a right to know ," he said. He criticised the Commission President Barroso for telling the press there was no point concentrating on the Constitution, when " it is his job to defend and fight for the Constitution. What message does this send to those who have ratified or are doing so?" He also attacked the Commission for not " raising an outc ry" at the failure of the Council to reach a proper agreement on the Financial Perspective.
For the ALDE group, their leader Graham WATSON (UK) added another welcome for the observers. Europe, he said, was in the doldrums, and it was time to challenge the Member States to drive things forward. " Will Germany reform? Will Italy reign in its deficit? Will the UK back its fine words with action? Will Paris and The Hague give a lead to their peoples ?" He too criticised the Commission for not respecting Parliament's rights regarding withdrawal of legislation, telling Commission Vice-President Margot Wallstrom, " Our involvement is your accountability, our approval is your legitimacy ." He directly called for the French President and Dutch Prime Minister to come to the Chamber and say how they planned to move forward on the Constitution. " Let us not be too quick to read the burial rites ," he said.
Daniel COHN-BENDIT (DE) for the Greens/EFA group welcomed the Bulgarian and Romanian observers and stated that they had arrived at a " bizarre " time in EU history. He criticised the UK presidency of the Council as " presiding over nothing" and not making enough progress. As to the Commission withdrawing proposals, Mr Cohn-Bendit said that the Parliament was not yet fully aware of which proposals the Commission wished to withdraw and was therefore too early to judge. Nevertheless, he criticised the proposal from Commissioner REDING on the introduction of " euro TV " and said that such a proposal would never get a majority in the Parliament.
Francis WURTZ (FR) for the GUE/NGL group also welcomed the Bulgarian and Romanian observers stating that " Europe has to take up its responsibilities as Europe was facing a crisis of identity ". Europe needed to adapt to the challenges from globalisation and the European Parliament would be judged on how it legislated on issues including the services directive, the directive on port services, the working time directive and the position it takes on WTO negotiations.
Nigel FARAGE (UK) for the IND/DEM group was another speaker to welcome the new observers but stated that they would be joining a club where generous daily allowances are allocated, and where dinners and breakfasts would be offered. The observers, he said, would then be asked to go back to their respective countries to tell their constituents " how well everything is ". Mr Farage stated that the Commission was treating Dutch and French voters with " contempt " with their wish to push the Constitution forward. He also criticised the monthly trip to Strasbourg as €200 million wasted. He called for the Romanian and Bulgarian people to have a say on accession through a referendum.
Brian CROWLEY (IE) for the UEN group also welcomed the observers, but stated that the EU had recognised the problems but had not offered the rights solutions. People often saw Europe as distant, unrepresentative, interfering, burdensome and sometimes uncaring. It was right that the Commission was in the process of examining the quantity of proposed legislation, and advocated codification to reduce the overall number of directives on the statute books. On the financial perspective, Mr Crowley said that it was mistake to link the reform of the CAP with an overall agreement.
Jean-Marie LE PEN (NI, FR) welcomed the Bulgarian and Romanian observers as they would give the French language a boost following previous enlargements. Mr Le Pen welcomed Mr Barroso's recent statements on the Constitution as well as the decision to withdraw a number of proposals. As to the financial perspective 2007-2013, he stated that the French-British debate should not spoil what the countries of Central and Eastern Europe expected from the EU. He strongly criticised the services directive as well as the impending decision to open negotiations with Turkey.
In her response to the debate, the Vice-President of the Commission Margot WALLSTROM formally welcomed the Romanian and Bulgarian observers. She expressed the Commission's solidarity to those who had suffered because of the recent flooding in these two countries. Commissioner Wallstrom pointed out that the Commission still strongly supported the Constitution and it had played an active role in the Convention and pushing the Constitution forward. Mrs Wallstrom said also that the Constitution would not be ratified by all 25 Member States in the " foreseeable future " given the French and Dutch rejections. She welcomed the Council's decision to engage in a " period of reflection ". There was no plan B but the Commission had come up with plan D for democracy, dialogue and debate. The Commission would work with the Parliament to establish concrete proposals on how to better engage with citizens in the Member States. The best way to convince European of the value of Europe, she said, was to make Europe relevant. Europe's objectives of more and better jobs and sustainable development were still very relevant, she said.
As to the question of better regulation, Mrs Wallstrom said that Commissioner VERHEUGEN had informed the Parliament on this issue at least ten times. The Commission would take a three pillar approach, namely screening proposed legislation, simplification and upgrading existing methods of examining the need for the legislation including improved impact assessments. The Commission would put forward a list, expected to be about one-third of the Commission's 183 pending proposals, and the full proposal would be presented to the European Parliament
Highlights of the Week
The second Strasbourg session of September sees a busy agenda for MEPs. Parliament will officially welcome Observers from Bulgaria and Romania. The 35 Romanians and 18 Bulgarians will be able to participate in parliamentary committee meetings but not vote or address the plenary. Both countries are expected to join the EU on 1 January 2007.
On Monday evening, before Parliament begins to tackle its legislative work, President Josep BORRELL will make a statement on the future of Europe. This will be followed by reaction from the political group leaders. The issue of the Commission's decision to withdraw legislative proposals is also likely to be raised. President Borrell will also hold a press conference in Strasbourg on Tuesday 27 September at 12.15.
On Monday, MEPs will debate the 25th anniversary of Solidarity (Solidarnosc) and its message for Europe. The subsequent resolution is expected to call for 31 August to be marked as Liberty and Solidarity Day.
On Tuesday, the plenary session opens with the debate on procedures in Member States for granting and withdrawing refugee status. Parliament will vote on the question of data retention for the purpose of combating crime, including terrorism. The Civil Liberties Committee is recommending rejection of the initiative on data retention as sizeable doubts remain on the choice of the legal basis and the proportionality of the measures. France, the United Kingdom, Ireland and Sweden submitted the proposal on data retention. Also on Tuesday, MEPs will debate the legislative package on how to improve the EU's railways (known as the third railway package). The Transport Committee wants international passenger services to be opened up to competition by 1 January 2008 and national passenger services by 1 January 2012.
On Wednesday, Parliament will discuss the controversial issue of the opening of accession negotiations with Turkey which was a feature of the recent German election campaign. Also on Wednesday, the Commission and Council will make statements on oil dependency and oil prices, reform of the UN and on Belarus. The House is set to adopt resolutions on all of these matters. MEPs will also debate EU-India relations. The Foreign Affairs Committee is backing a new strategic partnership and calls for extra funding for its implementation.
Ari VATANEN (EPP-ED, FR), a former World Rally Car Champion, will lead the debate on the important issue of how to reduce the number of road accident victims in the EU. The own-initiative report aims at improving and strengthening the proposal, in particular with regard to young road users and their education, vulnerable road users and the introduction of cost-effective intelligent safety systems.
Thursday opens with a Commission Statement on the textile industry given the recent EU agreement with China. Caroline LUCAS (Greens/EFA, UK) will present her report on prospects for trade relations between the EU and China. The session will end as usual with three debates and resolutions on human rights in the world (see below
Changes to the agenda
There were no major changes to the agenda. On Thursday in the " urgency debates ", the situation in Vojvodina will be debated instead of Uzbekistan. The other human rights debate are Nepal and Tunisia.
20050921IPR00555
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
