Both EU and Turkey must abide by commitments, says Commissioner Rehn
Enlargement
2005-09-13 - 17:33
Speaking to MEPs in the Foreign Affairs Committee on 13 September, enlargement Commissioner Olli REHN stressed that the Commission expects Turkey "to fully and non-discriminatorily implement the provisions of the Ankara protocol in due course and in good faith".
With regard to the declaration isssued by the Turkish government saying that the signing of the Ankara protocol (by which Turkey extended its customs union with the EU to the 10 new member states) did not mean the formal recognition of Cyprus, Commissioner Rehn said it was "regrettable" that a candidate country did not recognise all EU member states. This was what had obliged the EU to react by a counter-declaration clarifying the expectations Turkey has to meet.
Mr Rehn also stressed that formal recognition of Cyprus by Turkey was a condition for accession. "Full formal recognition will have to take place - the sooner the better" , he said. However, he also recalled that legal recognition of Cyprus was not a precondition for starting the accession negotiations.
Restrictions regarding the free movement of goods are not acceptable to the Commission and must be unequivocally removed, said the Commissioner. Turkey must fully apply the Ankara protocol to all Member States, including Cyprus. If it failed to do so, this would have clear consequences for the negotiations and the opening of certain chapters. This again would mean that no progress could be made in the negotiations.
However, Mr Rehn pointed out that the EU must also adhere to its commitments and start negotiations as planned. He emphasised that Turkey had met the pre-conditions for the start of accession talks, namely the adoption of six pieces of legislation and the signing of the Ankara protocol.
Regarding the negotiating framework yet to be adopted by Council, Commissioner Rehn said that while the accession of Turkey was the aim of the negotiations, it would not be automatic and the outcome of the process was open. He considered the proposed negotiating framework "a solid foundation for rigorous, but also fair negotiations" . He also made it clear that the opening and closing of each chapter had to be approved unanimously within the Council, which gave the member states 71 possibilities to veto - "a strong safeguard for each member state" .
Several Members of the Foreign Affairs Committee raised the question of implementation of the Ankara protocol. Mr Rehn answered that Turkey had stated it would fully implement the protocol. The pace of the negotiations would be influenced by the pace of reconciliation between Turkey and Cyprus and also by the full implementation of the Ankara protocol, he added.
In reply to questions on the issue of human rights, Commissioner Rehn stated that the overall trend was positive but "there are still court cases opened against those who express criticism in a non-violent way" . Human, cultural and trade union rights will therefore be among issues covered by the next progress report on Turkey.
20050912IPR00212
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
