Air Transport: Parliament acts after black summer
Transport
2005-09-15 - 13:14
On 14 August 121 people were killed when a Cypriot airliner crashed near Athens after flying hundreds of miles by itself. The crew had been seemingly been incapacitated by a possible failure of cabin pressure. Among the dead were eight children and 48 teenage footballers on their way to a tournament. It was one of six aircraft accidents ranging from Greece to Venezuela that killed over 500 people in five weeks and generated fear and political clamour across the world.
Ironically the crashes began with a story of miraculous survival on 2 August when an Air France A340 Airbus skidded off the runway in Toronto. On that occasion all 300 passengers scrambled to safety. Subsequent crashes were not so merciful. Prompted by multiple crashes, political opinion in Europe is moving towards greater monitoring of aircraft that carry Europeans and use European airspace. At the end of August the French and Belgian governments published "blacklists" of airlines they considered dangerous. Unfortunately, the lists did not include the same airlines. In May this year a Turkish airline banned by four European countries promptly redirected its flights to Belgium where no such ban was in place. This lack of coherence has prompted growing calls for greater European coordination.
When the European Parliament reconvened in September, aircraft safety and the inconsistencies of the black lists was one of the first items on the agenda for discussion. MEPs and the European Commissioner for Transport, Jacques Barrot, agreed that the EU must work collectively to identify dangerous airlines. The French MEP, Christine de Veyrac, of the Christian Democrat European Peoples Party (EPP-ED), warned that aviation experts were predicting one accident a week by 2020 and that "urgent action" is necessary. Ms de Veyrac is author of a report for the Parliament's Transport Committee which is due to be voted on during the plenary session of the Parliament in November. It proposes an EU-wide blacklist of airlines based on "objective safety criteria" with an obligation on the part of the airlines to inform passengers of their safety records.
The MEP wants the European Air Safety Agency (EASA) to be given the principle role in air safety and believes consideration should be given to the EU issuing safety certificates to third country carriers who use EU airspace. During the debate Commissioner Barrot called for greater powers at an EU level to control third country aircraft in the EU. Mr Barrot also asked the EP to back a regulation on air passenger information that the Commission proposed in February. Some of the most passionate comments came from Greek and Cypriot MEPs deeply affected by the crash near Athens. Kyriacos Triantaphyllides, a Cypriot member of the European United Left Group (GUE/NGL), said that the "fierce climate of competition" was compromising safety while the Greek Independent Member Georgios Karatzaferis drew attention to government subsidies that Greece's Olympic Airways had received and the criticism this generated. He asked why "the subsidies were controversial if they seemed to ensure greater safety".
The blackest list
Here is the grim toll of aircraft crashes this summer:
2 August, Toronto: More than 300 people escape from an Air France Airbus A340.
6 August, Mediterranean: 18 people die when a Tunisian plane carrying Italian holiday makers is forced to ditch off Palermo.
14 August, near Athens: 121 people die when a Cypriot "Helios" airliner crashes after the crew were seemingly incapacitated.
16 August, Venezuela: 161 passengers from Martinique die on a Colombian "West Caribbean Airways" flight.
23 August, Peru: 40 people are killed when a Peruvian "TANS" Boeing 737-200 crashes in the jungle.
5 September, Indonesia: Indonesian passenger jet crashes on take-off killing 100 people aboard and 47 people on the ground
20050912STO00265
EN
1
PHOTO
20050912PHT00263.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
