Parliament adopts Basel II directives
Economic and monetary affairs
2005-09-28 - 15:03
The European Parliament has given a first reading to two directives aiming to update EU rules on capital requirements for banks and credit institutions, in line with the Basel II agreement. In approving a report from Alexander Radwan (EPP-ED, DE), MEPs adopted hundreds of amendments to the Commission's draft directive. These were the results of discussions with the Commission and Council - the new directives should now enter force at this first reading stage.
The overall aim is to create a more sophisticated and risk sensitive approach to capital requirements used by banking regulators, better reflecting the complexity and diversity of today's financial markets. This should ensure a better regulatory underpinning for the stability of the financial system and a more efficient use of capital. During Monday's debate in plenary, Commissioner Charlie McCREEVY told MEPs " A recent study estimated that banks would have reduced capital requirements of about €80 to 120 billion as a result of the proposed directive. It is also said that this directive will reduce the capital requirements for loans to SMEs by more than 50%. This Parliament has tabled amendments to our proposals that improve the rules for retail and SME lending still further ."
Changes made by Parliament make clear that Member States may apply capital requirements on a solo and consolidated basis and allow , under certain conditions , zero risk weighting for internal group lending to be extended to banks operating in an institutional protection scheme. Banks will have to explain their rating decisions to SMEs and other corporate applicants for loans - an amendment adopted by Parliament says that if voluntary agreements do not achieve this, national measures should be adopted.
A series of amendments tabled in plenary made it possible also to incorporate revised rules dealing with capital requirements for banks' trading-related activities.
The issue of " comitology " - the system which grants the Commission authority to decide on the detailed implementation of an EU law - had threatened to delay the final adoption of this legislation. The proposed constitution would have given Parliament an explicit right to revoke such implementing decisions, but with the prospects for the constitution in doubt, MEPs want to ensure this right is enshrined in an inter-institutional agreement. As far as these directives are concerned, a last minute compromise between Commission, Council and Parliament means the old comitology system - which largely excludes Parliament - can be used to implement and update the directives for a maximum of two years or until 1 April 2008 at the latest, after which these powers could be renewed only with the agreement of the three institutions . In the meantime they will review the system used for such implementing provisions.
20050922IPR00576
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
