Are we ready for bird flu?
Public health
2005-09-15 - 13:04
An outbreak of avian flu was reported in Russia and Kazakhstan in July, triggering widespread concern in the European Union. Commissioner Markos KYPRIANOU came to Parliament's Environment and Public Health Committee on Wednesday 14 September to discuss the situation. To a question by Robert STURDY (EPP-ED, UK), who asked "Are we ready?" the Commissioner replied that he was "not satisfied with the situation".
There is no imminent threat to poultry farmers or human beings in Europe. But precautionary measures and the capability to react if a sudden threat arises could be improved even now. Commissioner Kyprianou said he believed pressure should be put on Member States to agree partnership deals with the pharmaceutical industry - which he pointed out were not "charities" - so as to develop vaccines more quickly. "I am most concerned about the amount of vaccines available", he said, "because we will need large quantities all at once" if Europe is hit by a pandemic. He was also unhappy that he had no information about the level of stocks in the Member States.
Preventive vaccine against flu is in itself a useful form of protection, stressed Mr Kyprianou. However, were existing bird flu viruses to mutate by combining with human viruses, it would take around three months to come up with a suitable vaccine. Agreements should therefore be concluded now with the industry to ensure the vaccines can be distributed efficiently in a crisis.
Better preventive measures
The Commissioner acknowledged that existing surveillance programmes were not carried out as effectively as they should be. Robert STURDY (EPP-ED, UK), who is drafting the Environment Committee's opinion on this subject, agreed with Mr Kyprianou on the need for better cooperation between Member States to swap information and best practice and to coordinate emergency plans. The current arrangements are due to be beefed up. Parliament will vote in the next weeks, albeit only under the consultation procedure, on a new directive to strengthen existing measures and on related expenditure in the veterinary field. A report is in the pipeline at the Agriculture Committee and an opinion at the Environment Committee. The aim is to improve monitoring of "weakly pathogenic" viruses to try and prevent them mutating into "highly pathogenic" viruses.
MEPs also heard the views of Zsuzsanna JAKAB, director of the newly established European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control in Stockholm. She explained that her centre was monitoring the situation in Europe and the rest of the world on a daily basis and was working precisely on better exchanges of information and an assessment of the Member States's prevention plans. The centre has already concluded that the outbreak in Russia in July is retreating. By contrast, the situation in south-east Asia continues to cause concern: it is at alert level 3 - transmission from animal to human - on a scale of 4, where level 4 means transmission from human to human, something which has not yet been identified among the sixty or so deaths recorded since 2003.
Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety Karl-Heinz Florenz EPP-ED DE
20050909IPR00148
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
