UK Minister: No proposal on EU budget deal before November
Regional policy
2005-09-13 - 11:33
Parliament's Regional Development Committee heard on Monday that the British Presidency had no intention of putting forward new proposals for regional funding until the broader problem of the EU's long-term financial planning was resolved.
"I can make clear now that if we decide to make a new proposal for the next EC budget, we will not do so before November. Agreement would then be for the December European Council." This was the message from Alan Johnson, the UK's Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, in his opening remarks to Parliament's Regional Development Committee on 12 September.
Timetable for adopting Structural Funds
As to the timetable for agreeing the structural and cohesion funds, the Minister said "We need to reach a settlement on the wider budget before we can adopt the structural fund regulations or establish the precise levels of future spending."
Alyn Smith (Greens/EFA, UK ) asked what odds the Secretary of State would give on reaching a deal on the budget. The Minister replied, "I am not a gambler so no odds now, the UK Presidency has no contingency plans if a deal on the budget cannot be reached."
Implicit in the Minister's speech was the recognition that the structural fund regulations would not be adopted during the British Presidency. With no compromise on the financial perspective expected before the December European Council, it would be for the incoming Austrian Presidency to reach a deal on the structural funds. The Secretary of State did however say "we are determined to reach agreement on the vast majority of technical issues swiftly so that the regulations can be adopted immediately after a budgetary settlement."
Eligibility of Social Housing / VAT - a concern for MEPs
Constanze Angela Krehl (PES, D) and Alain Hutchinson (PES, BE) both stressed the importance of making the upgrading of social housing eligible for financing under the structural funds, a concern in particular for many of the new Member States. Mr Johnson stated that there appeared to be opposition in the Council to the use of structural funds for social housing and that most Member States did not want VAT to be reimbursable through structural funds.
Parliament adopted its initial position on the structural funds on 6 July in plenary.
2005-09-12 Committee on Regional Development Chairman Gerardo Galeote Quecedo EPP-ED ES
20050909IPR00142 European Parliament's Position on Structural Funds as adopted on 6 July 2005 British Presidency of the Council of the European Union
EN
2
LINK
http://www.eu2005.gov.uk
-//EP//TEXT TA 20050706 TOC NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
