Nominees for the 2005 Sakharov Prize
Human rights
2005-09-15 - 13:04
Parliament's Subcommittee on Human Rights was presented on Monday 12 September with nominations for the 2005 Sakharov Prize. The Foreign Affairs Committee will decide on a shortlist of candidates on 26 September.
Each year since 1988 the European Parliament has awarded the Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought to individuals or organisations who have made an important contribution to the fight for human rights in their country. Named in honour of the Soviet dissident Andrei Sakharov, the prize gives recognition to people who have fought against oppression and injustice.
On 26 September 2005, members of the Foreign Affairs Committee will choose a shortlist of three candidates from the list of nominees below. This list will be forwarded to the EP Conference of Presidents, which will select the winner on 27 October. The prize will then be awarded at a ceremony at Parliament's December plenary session in Strasbourg.
Here is a brief description of the candidates put forward for this year's prize. Nominations must be supported by at least 25 Members of the European Parliament or by a political group. The prize money for the award is € 50,000.
Candidates proposed by the political groups
Hauwa Ibrahim (nominated by Martin Schulz on behalf of the PES Group ) First female lawyer from northern Nigeria, defending women accused of adultery and young people sentenced to cruel and inhuman punishment under Sharia law.
Reporters without Borders (nominated by Graham Watson on behalf of the ALDE Group) Association defending freedom of the press worldwide.
Yang Zili, Mojtaba Saminebad and Zouhair Yahyaoui (posthumously) (nominated by Daniel Cohn-Bendit and Monica Frassoni on behalf of the Greens/EFA Group)
Cyberdissidents in China, Iran and Tunisia respectively
Mukhtar MaiI (nominated by André Brie and Francis Wurtz on behalf of the GUE/NGL Group)
Victim of an honour crime in southern Punjab village of Meerwala, Pakistan, who built a school from the compensation she won and now campaigns on women's issues.
Alexander Yessenin-Volpin and Sergei Kovalev (nominated by Nigel Farage and Jens-Peter Bonde on behalf of the IND/DEM Group)
Dissidents and human rights activists in the former Soviet Union.
Gunars Astra (posthumously) (nominated by Brian Crowley on behalf of the UEN Group)
Soviet dissident and a fighter for democracy, freedom and human rights in Latvia under the Soviet regime.
Candidates proposed by individual Members
"Ladies in white" (nominated by Gerardo Galeote Quecedo (EPP-ED) and José Ribeiro e Castro (EPP-ED) and others)
A group of women who stand up for the rights of Cuban political prisoners.
Ibrahim Adam Mudawi (nominated by Simon Coveney (EPP-ED) and others)
Sudanese human rights and peace activist.
Daniel Barenboïm and the West-East Divan Orchestra (nominated by Erna Hennicot-Schoepges (EPP-ED) and others)
Pianist and conductor, co-founder of the West-East Divan Orchestra, which seeks rapprochement between Palestinians and Israelis.
Aminatou Haidar (nominated by Karin Scheele (PES) and others)
Activist for the cause of people of the Western Sahara, arrested in June 2005.
2005-09-12 Subcommittee on Human Rights Chair Hélène Flautre Greens/EFA FR
20050912IPR00210
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
