MEPs respond to Commission proposals on immigration policy
Immigration
2005-09-15 - 13:14
IMMIGRANTS - INFO 14/09
At a meeting with Commissioner Franco Frattini on 13 September the Civil Liberties Committee gave its backing to the Commission's plans to create a genuine common policy on immigration and asylum. However, many MEPs were concerned at the proposals for returning illegal immigrants. The Commission's draft directive would allow EU countries to remove illegal immigrants if a non-EU national does not return voluntarily.
Mr Frattini, Commissioner for Freedom Security and Justice, presented to MEPs a complete package of measures on immigration adopted last 1 September by the Commission, which comprises a draft directive on common standards on return procedures and three non-legislative texts on the integration of migrants, regional protection programmes and development of the countries of origin. " There has been little credibility attached to migration policies in the EU. We need a truly European policy and new measures to tackle migration problems ", said Mr Frattini. " We must pay particular attention to enforcing the law: two out of three people who are living illegally in the EU remain illegally in the territory ". Just one third of the immigrants caught residing illegally are returned to their country of origin. " We want to avoid having 20 or 25 different schemes for repatriation ", Mr Frattini concluded.
The draft directive lays down common rules on procedures in EU countries for returning non-EU nationals staying illegally in these countries, including removal, use of coercive measures and temporary custody for a maximum of six months. Only if the illegal immigrant does not return voluntarily may the Member State use a complusory removal order. In such cases, the returned non-EU national will not be readmitted to any Member State for five years.
Martine Roure (PES, FR) was the first member to show concern: "It is clear that of the four documents before us today, three are communications and there is only one binding legal instrument , the directive on return procedures". Roure explained that "this directive is partly based on a Council decision on the organisation of shared flights which Parliament opposed" . The socialist MEP argued that the readmission ban for a period of five years was far too long and that this, together with the possibility of temporary custody for six months, amounted in actual fact to "migrant detention measures, something which is unacceptable. Migrants are not criminals ". Ewa Klamt (EPP-ED, DE) disagreed: " Unlike Ms. Roure I would like to congratulate the Commissioner because this is the first serious attempt to provide a comprehensive global approach to immigration. It is not about repression ".
Panayiotis Demetriou (EPP-ED, CY) also supported the Commission proposals saying " they are satisfactory but not perfect ". He wanted to know how Commissioner Frattini planned to avoid the growing abuse of asylum requests in Europe. Simon Busuttil (EPP-ED, MT) wanted to speed up all the measures and claimed " Malta is facing a crisis situation regarding migration. Before the summer more than 1000 immigrants landed accidentally in the island which is the equivalent of 170.000 arriving in a country like Germany ".
Giovanni Claudio Fava (PES, IT) criticised Italy's decision to return illegal immigrants to Libya and asked for a more concise definition of the " safe third countries " concept, which a Member State can invoke in order to repatriate illegally resident immigrants. " The UK considers Iraq to be a safe country! " he said as an example. Discussing Italian problems relating to migration, Stefano Zappalà (EPP-ED, IT) announced that the Civil Liberties Committee was sending a delegation to visit the reception camp on Lampedusa island, where hundreds of immigrants arrived illegally last year.
Integration of legal immigrants
The Commission has published three different communications relating to the integration of legal third-country nationals in the EU, together with a green paper on economic migration. Alexander Nuno Alvaro (ALDE, DE) supported the spirit of the proposals but did not agree with the idea of helping third countries to stop the brain drain. " It is not up to us to stop scientists coming to Europe, we rather need to ensure that we have our own scientists. Our experts are leaving Europe as well ". Regarding the education of migrants in the Member States, Jean Lambert (Greens/EFA, UK) said we should also add specific training for the national press and TV. " The media can be a real barrier to the integration of migrants, sometimes they lead to misinformation ". Finally Stavros Lambrinidis (PES, GR) added that an extra effort must be made to break the link between migrants and terrorism, differentiating Islamic radicals from the rest of the religious community.
One of the non-legislative proposals is the creation of 'Regional Protection Programmes' to assist third countries who host large refugee communities. Mr Frattini explained that in some countries with whom the EU has no official contact because of their failure to respect for human rights, the aim is to finance projects by local NGOs as a way to help them indirectly, as is the case with Belarus. Giusto Catania (GUE/NGL, IT) replied: " Frankly speaking I am not particularly satisfied with what you said, or rather with what you didn't say. (…) You feel Belarus doesn't respect human rights but Europe is financing the construction of reception camps for migrants on its own territory, that needs to be said as well ".
20050909IPR00147
EN
1
PHOTO
20050914PHT00305.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
