Chemicals: REACH moves into the final furlong
Environment
2005-09-15 - 21:44
The huge legislative workload on the draft EU chemicals regulation passed an important milestone this week in Parliament, with five committees adopting over 1,000 amendments on Tuesday and Wednesday. But according to rapporteur Guido SACCONI (PES, IT), "any mountaineer knows that it's just when you see the summit that the climb becomes hardest".
The summit will be reached in mid-November, when Parliament completes its first reading in plenary. So far nine out of ten committees have adopted their opinions. Only the lead committee - the Environment and Public Health Committee - has yet to decide its position, which it will do when it votes on 4 October.
The Environment Committee held its final debate on REACH on 15 September, when it discussed the opinions of other committees, especially those of the Industry and Internal Market Committees, which have a particularly important role under the special cooperation procedure (Rule 47 of Parliament's Rules of Procedure). This is because REACH (which stands for Registration, Evaluation and Authorisation of Chemicals) is intended not only to protect the health and the environment of Europe's citizens but also to improve competitiveness in the industry as well as the functioning of the single market.
Simpler procedures...
In those two committees, MEPs worked hard to thrash out compromises and reduce the number of amendments. Of the 2,200 amendments they considered, around 650 were adopted, and these will be added to the 900 or so amendments of the Environment Committee. A technical group will now buckle down to the task of comparing the different positions and bringing them closer together, in the hope of achieving a clear majority at the plenary vote.
The Industry and Internal Market committees wish to reduce the burden on industry and smaller firms by making the product registration procedures simpler (when the amounts produced are less than 10 tonnes per year in the Industry Committee's view and less than 100 tonnes in the view of the Internal Market Committee) and also by transferring many of the tasks of the future European Agency for Chemical Products. The Internal Market Committee, whose rapporteur is Hartmut NASSAUER (EPP-ED, ED), is proposing a simpler system for pre-registration of chemicals. The Industry Committee, for whom the rapporteur is Lena EK (ALDE, SE), also wants to exclude certain products such as minerals or waste. (*)
...without making a mockery of the entire project
Mr Sacconi faces a tough task to bring all this together. He believes some of the amendments adopted by the Industry and Internal Market Committees may endanger the fundamental principles of REACH by watering down the principle of replacing hazardous products, reversing the burden of proof (which in the original draft text lies with industry) and overloading the future Agency. He fears that, if further concessions are not made to reach a compromise, all this effort may simply "erect a monument to futility" - although he immediately added that he had every hope of achieving such a compromise.
A representative of the UK Presidency said the compromise proposal tabled at the Council a few days ago by his government bore certain similarities with the Sacconi report. It will be debated at the the Council from next week . "Even if we are not all on the same wavelength" , he said, "the gap is narrowing".
(*) Parliament's press service will publish a more detailed note on the various options in the near future.
2005-09-14 Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety Chair Karl-Heinz Florenz EPP-ED DE
20050909IPR00149
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
