Bulgarian and Romanian "observer" MPs join the European Parliament
Institutions
2005-09-26 - 00:09
Yet another two languages can be heard spoken in the buildings of the European Parliament as of next Monday. On that day 18 members of the Bulgarian parliament and 35 members of the Romanian parliament will arrive in Strasbourg as so-called "observers
If everything goes well, Bulgaria and Romania will become the 26th and 27th Member States of the European Union in January 2007, although there is a possibility that the accession of either of them will be delayed by a year should they not be entirely ready with the necessary preparations.
After the Accession Treaties for both countries had been signed in April this year, the European Parliament invited both future Member States to send observer MPs, as had been done in the case of earlier enlargements. The number of observers is the same as the number of MEPs each country will have after their formal accession.
The observers will be able to attend the meetings of the European Parliament, its committees and its political groups. In this way the Bulgarian and Romanian parliaments will be able to get acquainted with the work, the procedures and the working methods of the European Parliament. When both countries then actually join the EU and their peoples elect their fully-fledged Members of the European Parliament, they will be able to hit the ground running.
The Bulgarian and Romanian "observers" arriving on 26 September will not have the same rights as "real" MEPs. Most importantly, they will not be able to vote and they will not be able to take the floor during plenary sessions. But they can take part in the deliberations in committees and political groups. And like "real" MEPs, they will join the political group of the European Parliament to which they feel affiliated and they will go to committee meetings.
And although full interpretation into and from Bulgarian and Romanian will not be in place yet, during the plenary session of 26 September it will be available and Bulgarian and Romanian will be added to the twenty languages used already.
20050921STO00551
EN
1
PHOTO
20050922PHT00586.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
