Budgetary Control Committee recommends two candidates for OLAF top job
Budgetary control
2005-10-13 - 15:12
MEPs in the Budgetary Control Committee have recommended Björn Eriksson and Franz-Hermann Brüner, in that order of preference, for the post of Director of OLAF, the EU Anti-Fraud Office. This follows a hearing during which MEPs made clear that whoever is appointed will be expected to enhance the independence, credibility and efficiency of the office. The candidates were thoroughly grilled on their views regarding OLAF's future, independence, credibility and efficiency.
Five candidates
Five candidates were shortlisted by the Commission, with the post first having been advertised in Official Journal of the European Union. The Commission will appoint the Director after consultations with the European Parliament and the Council. Tuesday's hearing was part of this consultation procedure. The five candidates are:
Mr Franz-Hermann BRÜNER, 60, the present Director of OLAF, who was appointed for a first term in March 2000;
Mr Johan CG DENOLF, 52, Director DGJ-DJF (Directorate for combating economic and financial crime), national directorate in Brussels, Belgian Federal Police, since 2001;
Mr Björn ERIKSSON, 59, Province Governor in Östergötland, Sweden, since 1996;
Mr François FALLETTI, 55, the French representative at Eurojust in the Hague since 2004;
Mr Alain GILLETTE, 60, Director of the External Audit of the United Nations since 2001.
Independence, credibility and efficiency
During the hearing, MEPs were especially concerned about the independence of OLAF in relation to the Commission. The candidates were pressed on this point, as well as regarding their attitude towards whistleblowers. They were also asked what they would do to enhance the reputation of OLAF as a professional organisation, especially in view of a number of leaks concerning ongoing investigations. Finally, the candidates were asked to explain their priorities and ideas for improving efficiency. In this context, MEPs focused on the need to reduce the average length of an investigation, currently 22 months.
Qualifications controversy delays decision
At the beginning of the hearing, Commission representatives announced that one of the candidates did in fact not have the formal qualifications for the job as OLAF Director due to lack of appropriate professional experience. Nevertheless, the committee decided to proceed with the hearing of all five candidates. The candidate concerned, Mr Denolf, told MEPs that he is contesting the Commission's decision. In the circumstances, the Budgetary Control Committee decided to postpone the decision on its recommendation to the Commission on the order of preference of the candidates.
Two candidates selected
The committee met again on Wednesday to decide on its recommendation. Having thoroughly evaluated all five candidates, the MEPs decided to recommend the following two candidates (in order of preference): Björn ERIKSSON and Franz-Hermann BRÜNER. The Committee of Permanent Representatives in the Council will discuss the issue on Friday 14 October and will also make a recommendation. Shortly thereafter, the Commission is expected to make a formal decision about the nomination of the new OLAF Director.
2005-10-11 Committee on Budgetary Control Chair, Committee on Budgetary Control Szabolcs Fazakas PES HU
Hearing of the candidates for the post of OLAF Director
20051010IPR01190
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
