Halving the number of road accidents by 2010
Transport
2005-10-17 - 17:02
Parliament expressed its deep concern on the low levels of road safety in some Member States, especially in many of the ten new Member States. In adopting the report by Ari VATANEN (EPP-ED, France) with 453 votes in favour, 69 against with 14 abstentions, MEPs set out many recommendations aiming at one crucial target: halving the number of road accidents in the EU by 2010.
At present, more than 40,000 deaths are caused by road accidents in the EU, and, in addition to the unacceptable human suffering, there are the related direct and indirect costs, estimated at €180 billion or 2% of the EU's GNP. Consequently, MEPs felt that the time was ripe for a far-reaching European Road Safety Action Programme.
Parliament is particularly worried about the safety of vulnerable road users, including young people, for whom the death rate is particularly high. The risk of death in motorcycle or moped travel was 17 times higher than in car travel and walking or cycling on EU roads was up to nine times riskier. MEPs, however, pointed out that only enforcing compliance with existing road traffic rules would dramatically improve road safety.
Given the fact that cross-border enforcement of road traffic laws remains very unsatisfactory owing to the lack of any uniform system by which national authorities were able to prosecute offenders from other Member States, the Commission was urged to outline a proposal for a workable Community-wide approach to enable Member states to follow up offences and penalties imposed.
MEPs also demanded a better harmonisation of road signs across Europe. They urged the Commission to investigate the problem of the over-abundance of road signs. Parliament also regrets that the common emergency number " 112 " is not known to all EU citizens. The Commission is therefore called on to evaluate current awareness of the single European emergency call number on the part of the European public and the quality of the services provided to citizens in distress via this number.
Finally, MEPs took the view that out of the huge selection of technologies should receive particular attention: seat belt reminders and advanced systems; electronic stability control, speed limitation systems, alcolocks and eCall (emergency calls). Other important issues in the Vatanen report include the promoting of the use of cost efficiency analyses and the strengthening of the European Road Safety Charter.
20050922IPR00585
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
