No time to waste if a deal is to be reached on the EU budget
Regional policy
2005-10-17 - 19:02
Gerardo GALEOTE (EPP-ED, ES)
The EU's future funding must be agreed by December in order that cities and regions can use structural and cohesion funds to contribute to growth and jobs. This was the chief message of the closing session of the European Week of Regions and Cities held on Thursday in the European Parliament's Plenary Chamber.
For Gerardo GALEOTE-QUECEDO (EPP-ED, ES) the chair of the European Parliament's Regional Development Committee, the message to the Council was crystal clear: "it is essential that the Heads of State or Government reach an agreement on the financial perspective in December during the UK Presidency. It should be based on the European Commission proposal, but also agreeable to the European Parliament. The Parliament's proposal for the EU's future financing is realistic and is detailed in the report drafted by Reimer BÖGE (EPP-ED, DE). However, not just any agreement would be acceptable to the European Parliament - the agreement must be based on the principles of solidarity and a step by step approach, both for old and new Member States" .
Commenting on the lack of agreement on the financial perspective, Commissioner Danuta HÜBNER said, "As time passes by, I can see more and more anxiety and confusion among our regions and cities. How to draw up credible development strategies without a decision on the available resources and the legal instruments underpinning the future programmes? Thanks to the input of many of you here, we have put on the table a modern policy targeting its resources on growth and jobs, contributing to the competitiveness of the Union and matching the expectations of our citizens. But if there is no agreement on the financial perspective in this year much of this effort will be wasted."
The Commissioner told MEPs and participants in the European week of Regions and Cities that "the main message that I take from this week is that it is difficult to find another Community policy which would be of so much interest to our citizens."
Vice-President of the Committee of the Regions Albert BORE outlined the importance of a strong EU regional policy "We need a modern European Cohesion Policy with its founding principle of solidarity which is the only means by which the citizens of the European Union, in the places they live, in cities and regions, can get jobs, live in their neighbourhoods, have innovative ideas and join them up so that the EU can compete and survive in today's global society. "
The European Investment Bank President, Mr Philippe MAYSTADT underlined that the EIB contributed to financing the infrastructure needs of the EU such as improving transport links but it was also active in improving Eur opean universities as well as in the dissemination of new technologies.
The OPEN DAYS - European Week of Regions and Cities (10-13 October) was organised by the European Commission's Directorate General for Regional Policy and the Committee of the Regions, together with the European Parliament and 106 regions and cities from 26 countries. More than 2,500 individuals signed up to attend the programme, which included three flagship debates and 66 workshops focussing on regional development and cooperation.
2005-10-13 Committee on Regional Development Chair of EP Regional Development Committee Gerardo Galeote Quecedo EPP-ED ES
European Week of Regions and Cities
20051010IPR01197 European Week of Regions and Cities
EN
1
PHOTO
20051014PHT01484.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/regional_policy/opendays/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
