Barroso urges Europe to modernise in face of globalisation
Institutions
2005-10-20 - 17:43
European Commission President José Manuel Barroso outlined to MEPs on Thursday two contributions adopted by his institution to the EU's efforts to deal with the challenges of globalisation and break the deadlock on the financial perspective. The plans were broadly welcomed by the MEPs, who are now keen to see the Commission act on its own suggestions.
"The Commission is issuing a wake-up call to the European institutions over the need to modernise our policies so as to preserve our values in the face of the challenges of globalisation and the ageing of our population" , said Mr Barroso. "The status quo is not an option" , he added. Measures proposed by the Commission include the creation of a Globalisation Adjustment Fund to help workers whose companies are relocated or restructured. The Commission is also urging that social security systems be updated, but on the basis of a "foundation of shared values" , and that a "roadmap" be drawn up for assessing progress made by Member States towards greater social justice.
Five proposals on the financial perspective
Although the financial perspective (the EU's financial framework for 2007-2013) is not on the agenda for the informal summit at Hampton Court on 27 October, the Commission will insist on "the urgent need to reach a deal by December" . If no agreement is reached, the resources needed for the Union to function properly will be endangered, added Mr Barroso. "The Commission is not satisfied" with the budgetary compromise proposed in June, he said, but went on: "this must not jeopardise the multiannual nature of the financial perspective" .
In addition to the Globalisation Adjustment Fund, the Commission's suggestions for breaking the deadlock include a proposal to earmark a third of the EU budget for improving competitiveness, with each Member State setting a target for research and innovation projects and other competitiveness related spending. To modernise the EU budget, a review should be launched in 2009. Mr Barroso also stressed that the 2002 agreement fixing the level of agricultural spending until 2013 must be respected. Lastly, the European Development Fund should become part of the EU budget and there must be "a proper role for Parliament in policy definition for external spending" .
Plan D
"Plan D is not a public relations exercise" , said Margot Wallström, Commissioner for Interinstitutional Relations, who accompanied President Barroso to the debate. Plan D for Democracy, Dialogue and Debate, adopted last week by the Commission, is intended to shape the debate on the future of Europe during the "period of reflection" called for by the European Council following the No votes in the French and Dutch referendums on the draft constitution. Mrs Wallström called for Parliament and the Commission to join forces on this project.
Response of MEPs
It was then the turn of Parliament's political group representatives to speak. On behalf of her group, Marianne Thyssen (EPP-ED, BE) spoke of the need for "urgent coordinated action by the Member States and the EU institutions" to face up to the challenge of globalisation. Success was not guaranteed but "we must work to make a success of globalisation" and any solution must safeguard our system of values.
"It is not possible to stabilise the European Union by trying to make the EU's wage levels, health care systems, taxes and social systems compete with those of Africa and Asia" , according to Martin Schulz (PES, DE), the Socialist group leader. He backed the Commission's proposals, especially the creation of the Globalisation Adjustment Fund. Although he expected there to be serious reservations within the Council he hoped the President of the Commission would fight his corner.
On behalf of the Liberals, Bernard Lehideux (ALDE, FR) also welcomed the plan for a Globalisation Adjustment Fund to cope with the socio-economic consequences of this phenomenon. "All the consequences must be tackled appropriately so that economic progress is not achieved at the expense of the protection of our social contract" .
For Jean Lambert (UK), speaking for the Greens/EFA group, "Europe must try to control globalisation. Today it is not under control" . Broadly speaking, "the Commission's proposals seem to go in the right direction" , said Ms Lambert, who emphasised the need to abide by environmental rules and protect services of general interest. She added "We must close the gap between the rich and the poor" .
Kartika Tamara Liotard (GUE/NGL, NL), for her group, was more critical of the Commission's proposals, saying they "mean working longer for the same salary" . She believed Mr Barroso was "lining up behind the stronger members of society" and that "a Europe which goes too fast does not give the impression of being a social Europe". She stressed the importance for the EU institutions to engage in dialogue with the public over the future of Europe.
Jens-Peter BONDE (IND/DEM, DK) argued that with Plan D the Commission was "trying to reintroduce the constitution by the back door" . Commenting on Commissioner McCreevy's statements on the Vaxholm case, he maintained that the Commission had no place interfering in domestic labour law issues.
Brian Crowley (UEN, IE) was of the view that "there must be a safety net for every citizen who finds himself in a difficult situation" . He believed the EU must draw on the most positive aspects of national social models. However, he criticised the Commission's proposal to channel some agricultural policy funding towards programmes such as Natura 2000.
For the unaffiliated Members, Irina Belohorska (NI, SK) underlined that "Europe must act quickly in the face of globalisation" and that the reforms must take account of the needs of elderly people and the problem of poverty among women.
UK Prime Minister Tony Blair and Commission President José Manuel Barroso will take part in a debate on preparations for Hampton Court informal summit at the European Parliament's plenary session in Strasbourg on Wednesday 26 October.
20.10.2005 -
Conference of Presidents open to all Members with Commission President José Manuel Barroso
20051017IPR01531
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
