Parliament urges Iran to restart talks with the EU 3
External relations
2005-10-13 - 15:53
The European Parliament wholeheartedly supports the attempt by the three EU Member States France, Germany and the UK to find a solution to the nuclear dispute with Iran through negotiations. It urges the IAEA to make full use of its control and inspection capacities and urges Iran to restart talks with the "EU 3" (UK, France and Germany)
Parliament calls on the US government to support the negotiations by giving security guarantees to Iran and says it welcomes the statement by UK Foreign Secretary Jack STRAW that neither the US nor Europe is considering military action against Iran.
In a resolution adopted by 499 votes in favour, 43 against and 89 abstentions, MEPs also deplore the double-standards applied to nuclear and non-nuclear weapon states and recognise Iran's right to develop a nuclear programme for civil and peaceful use. Nevertheless, Iran should fully suspend all activities relating to the enrichment of uranium, as the IAEA made clear that there is no confidence that Iran's nuclear programme is meant for peaceful purposes only. Parliament also urges Iran to reconsider the construction of a heavy-water research reactor.
MEPs urge Iran to cooperate fully with the IAEA inspectors, reminding it that it has signed the Non-Proliferation Treaty, which allows the IAEA to verify if signatories to the treaty comply with the treaty's provisions.
They also voice grave concerns over Iran's human rights performance. They strongly condemn the death sentences against minors, which frequently concern sexual acts and sexual orientation, the treatment of minorities such as the Kurds, the arrest of women for 'improper veiling' and the arrest of cyber-journalists. They call for the immediate release of journalist Akbar Ganji, and his lawyer Abdolfattah Soltani.
Iran is urged to resume the EU-Iran Human Rights Dialogue. In the framework of this dialogue, the Council should closely monitor the human rights situation in Iran. The Commission is asked to use the European Initiative for Democracy in order to intensify contacts with Iranian civil society and independent media.
20051007IPR01161
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
