African Caribbean Pacific-European Union Assembly in Edinburgh, at last
Development and cooperation
United Kingdom
2005-11-08 - 11:20
ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly in Edinburgh 19-24 November
19-24 November sees the 10th Joint parliamentary Assembly of the African Caribbean Pacific - European Union countries take place in Edinburgh. The JPA will be hosted in the Edinburgh International Conference centre (EICC), with the support of the Scottish Executive. A press conference will be held on Thursday at 24 November at 1pm at the EICC with the Co-Presidents Glenys Kinnock MEP and Sharon Hay Webster from Jamaica.
The packed programme begins with the Standing Committees on Saturday 19 November all day and the Women's Forum in the evening; then the Bureau will meet on Sunday 20 November. The Plenary Session will begin on Monday 21 at an opening ceremony and will last until Thursday 24 November. The JPA will also hear and debate with the Presidency of the ACP-EU Joint Council, namely Ministers Gareth Thomas (U.K.) and Olivier Andrianarison (Madagascar), as well as with Commissioner Louis Michel. Scottish speakers will include First Minister Jack McConnell MSP and Scottish Parliament Presiding Officer George Reid MSP.
The JPA will deal with major issues related to the ACP-EU partnership and will adopt the following reports:
The role of National Parliaments in implementing the Cotonou Partnership Agreement . Mr Mauro Zani MEP and Mr Abubakar Bawa Bwari (Nigeria), the Co-Rapporteurs, are putting forward concrete suggestions to increase the control of parliaments in ACP countries in the planning and use of development aid money;
Agricultural and mining commodities . This report, drafted by Mr Louis-Claude Nyassa (Cameroon) and Mr Nirj Deva MEP, raises the question of how ACP countries could better benefit from their resources, in particular in the context of the negotiation of the Economic Partnership Agreements and the WTO negotiations, one month before the Hong Kong Summit;
Finally, Mr Barry Faure (Seychelles) and Ms Fiona Hall MEP will present a report on the causes and consequences of natural disasters , a topic more acute than ever. They insist on a policy of early warning and prevention, including the reduction of CO2 emissions. They also express themselves in favour of a facility for natural catastrophes.
Beyond the reports, the JPA will discuss urgency topics such as the situation in West Africa and the registration, the evaluation and the authorisation of chemical substances (REACH).
Workshops out and about in Scotland itself will look at progress in health research, fisheries and sustainable development and eco-tourism.
20051108IPR02077 More information on the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly
EN
1
PHOTO
20051011PHT01306.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/intcoop/acp/10_01/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
