MEPs concerned about Secret detention centres in Europe
Institutions
United Kingdom
2005-11-15 - 12:41
MEPs concerned about possible existence of detention centres in Europe
Opening the debate on "secret detention centres in Europe" Commissioner for Justice, Freedom and Security, Franco FRATTINI said that there had been widespread reporting in the reputable media on the alleged existence of CIA secret detention centres. Many Member States, he recalled, had already made statements on the issue and have categorically denied the allegations. If such centres did exist, he said, it would be a grave infringement of both European and national law.
Commissioner FRATTINI recalled that the Union was based on Article 6 of the Treaty of the European Union which outlines the principles of democracy, human rights and respect of the rule of law. Sanctions, he recalled, were available to both the Member States and national governments if these principles were to be contravened. Mr Frattini also pointed out that all Member States wishing to accede to the Union have to reach certain standards in these areas. The Commission, he said, would follow matter the closely and would inform the European Parliament of any developments. Carlos COELHO (PT), for the EPP-ED group, stated that he was pleased that no EU countries or candidate countries were involved in "this outrage - this shame." He went on to say that "we all feel solidarity with the victims of terrorism," but "every step must be taken in respect fundamental human rights and the rule of law." This would be the best way to "give legitimacy" to our fight against terrorism said Mr Coelho. Martine ROURE (FR), for the PES group, referred to the 2002 report by Human Rights Watch which identified "ghost prisoners" held by the United States government. She said it was not acceptable that there were possibly areas in Europe where "our writ doesn't run." Mrs Roure asked Commissioner Frattini what measures the EC would take to ensure that "all Charters that govern Human Rights are upheld in the EU." Baroness Sarah LUDFORD (UK), for the Liberal ALDE group, launched a scathing attack on the American government, saying that it had made "disappearances a US tactic." The war on terror, Baroness Ludford stated, had opened the "blackest of black holes." Hélène FLAUTRE (FR), for the Greens/EFA group, welcomed the opportunity to have this debate and said that if these allegations were true then they represented "a violation or articles 3, 5 and 6 of the UN Convention against Torture." She called for the Commission to get to the bottom of the matter as "it was sapping our credibility." Vittorio AGNOLETTO ( IT), speaking for the GUE/NGL group, said that Commissioner Frattini's statement reminded him of the "three monkeys - hear nothing, see nothing, say nothing". He said that there were "hidden prisoners and torture centres in Europe". There was evidence to prove this, including evidence from the USA. The EU, he said, had not done enough to investigate the matter. He also stated that 22 US intelligence agents had been involved in the kidnapping of an Imam violating the sovereignty of a European state. Ryszard CZARNECKI ( PL), speaking as a non-attached MEP, said that the issue affected Poland. The Polish government had made statements denying the existence of camps but this only applied to the present and not the past. There had to be a balance between civil liberties and the fight against terrorism and public opinion should be listened to in order to strike correct balance. British Speaker during the debate Claude MORAES (UK), pointed out that US Secretary of State Condoleezza RICE had herself ordered an inquiry into these leaks to the press, - a clear indicator in his view of their veracity. He called on the Commissioner to institute an "enquiry that would bring credibility to this House." Response to the debate Commissioner Frattini, responding to the debate, said that the whole House supported the principles of the absolute respect for human life and the dignity of the individual. Were the allegations to be proven, it would constitute a grave breach of the Treaty of the European Union and would lead to political sanctions being taken against the Member States concerned. If evidence was provided, it would be an issue for a criminal investigation at national level. He recalled that, at the moment, the Italian authorities were investigating alleged action of CIA operatives in Italy. The Commission was carrying out a policy of dialogue with the Member States and with NGOs. The Commission was, he said, intensifying its contacts with the US Senate and Congress. Indignation expressed by MEPs was not the answer to this issue. The Commission could not carry out a full scaled enquiry obliging Member States to handover documents as the Commission did not have such powers. The Commission, he said, did not have the same powers as a national judge. Had the European Constitution been in force, it would have been easier he said, for the Commission to investigate and obtain answers. Presently, the evidence to facilitate an enquiry, such as photos or witness statements, was not available. The Commission, he said, would nevertheless continue its policy of questioning Member States and candidate countries.
Debate : 14.11.2005
20051115IPR02317
EN
1
PHOTO
20050907PHT00056.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
