Waste cannot be traded just like other goods
Environment
2005-10-25 - 12:52
As well as free movement of goods and consumer products within the EU, there are also less savoury exchanges going on - shipments of waste. A new European regulation will soon enter force to make sure this type of trade reduces its impact on the environment. On Tuesday 25 October, the European Parliament adopted a second reading report on this subject from Johannes BLOKLAND (IND/DEM, NL).
The main political groups with the exception of the Greens/EFA, GUE/NGL and UEN were able to agree on compromise amendments which are also acceptable to the Council, so the legislation should be adopted at this second reading stage. The new regulation should enter force a year after publication in the Official Journal, that is to say probably at the start of 2007.
In the debate ahead of the vote, the rapporteur spoke about the scale of the problem of illegal waste exports, which are growing, notably to developing countries. He gave the example of a British ship heading for China, which was intercepted in March with a cargo of sixty containers of illegal waste which had been declared as nothing more than paper for recycling. This was not an isolated case. According to the rapporteur, 75 per cent of waste shipments checked on their departure from the UK showed fraud or anomalies - and the situation is hardly different in other countries. For this reason, Mr Blokland was pleased that there was an agreement between Parliament and Council to allow the legislation swiftly to enter force.
A better organised hunt for fraudsters
The new text has its origin in a recognition of failure. A less ambitious regulation has been in place since 1993, but it has proved ineffectual. A revision was also needed in order to incorporate the standards adopted in 2001 by the OECD and in the 1998 revisions to the Basel Convention. The new regulation will impose stricter rules on notification and monitoring and should encourage Member States to cooperate more in tracking down fraudsters.
The rapporteur also called for greater monitoring on ships being exported for dismantling. "Many single hulled vessels are soon to be demolished, and there will be a great temptation to export them to countries with lower environmental standards, in Asia, for example," he warned, while welcoming the Council's plans to increase EU capacity for this task. The new regulation itself does not deal with this point in detail, but instead refers to the efforts currently undertaken by the International Maritime Organisation, the Basel Convention and other agencies to put in place binding global standards.
On the other hand, MEPs added new provisions to favour public access to the decision making systems and to justice, in accordance with the Aarhus Convention. If Member States so decided, reception facilities will need to keep proper registers and information on waste shipments will have to be published. To encourage local recycling of household waste, authorities in receiving countries will be able to object to imports, notable when it is mixed municipal waste collected from private households. Various other grounds for refusal were already in the legislation, notably concerning dangerous substances. (Management of radioactive waste is already regulated by other legislation.)
Opposition to "waste tourism"
Originally, the Commission had proposed two parallel legal bases for the proposed regulation, both environment policy (Article 175 of the EC Treaty) and trade policy (Article 133). At first reading, Parliament had decided the legislation should be based only on the treaty's environment provisions, and the Council agreed. Many MEPs who spoke in the debate supported this move, with the exception of Maria del Pilar AYUSO GONZALEZ (EPP-ED, ES) who said her group preferred the Commission's original plan.
On the other hand, Dorette CORBEY (PES, NL), Marios MATSAKIS (ALDE,CY) Jonas SJÖSTEDST (GUE/NGL SE) and Irena BELOHORSKA (NA, SK) it was above all a matter for protecting the environment rather than organising trade in waste. Given the Commission's continued opposition, the Council will have to adopt a unanimous position on this point. MEPs seem confident that this can be achieved, thereby removing the doubts about timing of the rules entering force. The rapporteur warned anyone thinking of taking a challenge to the Court of Justice on this point that the Court's past rulings show it tends to give priority to the environment when there are two legal bases in competition.
While the EPP-ED group had its doubts about the legal basis, the Greens/EFA spokesperson Caroline LUCAS (UK) said they were disappointed with the whole package: "Waste should not be transferred except when it is absolutely unavoidable," she said, adding that the Greens would abstain in the vote.
20051019IPR01652
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
