The Week Ahead 24 - 30 October 2005
Institutions
2005-10-21 - 10:04
The weekly summary of the main events at the European Parliament over the next seven days is now available.
Tony Blair - European Council. The British Prime Minister will join a debate with MEPs the day before the Hampton Court informal summit, the agenda of which includes how to maintain and strengthen social justice and competitiveness in the context of globalisation; Europe’s place in the world; and the security of EU citizens. Mr Blair and Commission President José Manuel Barroso will also take part in a meeting of the leaders of Parliament's political groups. (Wednesday) President Josep Borrell will represent Parliament at the summit. (Thursday)
Bird flu. MEPs will debate Europe's preparedness for an outbreak of avian flu, after the Commission responds to an oral question on the subject from the Environment Committee. (debate Tuesday, vote on a resolution Wednesday)
Budget 2006. The EU's 2006 draft budget reaches its first reading this week, with the Budgets Committee calling for MEPs to restore much of the funding for research, education and competitiveness cut by the Council. (debate Wednesday, vote Thursday)
Barroso and McCreevy. The Commission President and the Internal Market Commissioner will come before the plenary to explain Mr McCreevy's comments on the Vaxholm affair, which some saw as calling into question the Swedish social model. (Tuesday)
Chile. The President of Chile, Ricardo Lagos, will address Parliament in a formal sitting. (Tuesday)
Environment. Waste shipments and fluorinated greenhouse gases are on the agenda, as Parliament holds second reading debates on relevant legislation. (debate Monday, vote Tuesday)
Culture and education programmes. MEPs will deal with the first reading for the future framework for EU programmes in the fields of culture, education, youth and the audiovisual sector. (debate Monday, vote Tuesday)
Sakharov Prize winner. Away from the plenary, the Conference of Presidents will decide the winner of Parliament's annual award for freedom of thought. The three candidates are: Nigerian lawyer Hauwa Ibrahim, Cuban activists 'Ladies in White' and Reporters without Borders. (Wednesday)
20051021IPR01696 For full details see 'The Agenda'
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20054300AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
