President of Chile Ricardo Lagos addresses the European Parliament
External relations
2005-10-25 - 16:49
The President of Chile, Ricardo Lagos, delivered an upbeat assessment of his country's progress in democratisation and reform when he addressed a formal sitting of the European Parliament on Tuesday 25 October.
President LAGOS - who was first elected in 2000 - contrasted his present visit with his first visit to the Parliament fifteen years ago. Then he came as a political opponent of the Pinochet regime; this time he was invited as the democratically elected President of Chile. He remembered the support the Parliament had shown him on that occasion and thanked MEPs, telling them that "our history would have been different without you ".
Mr Lagos said he was " honoured and moved" to be invited to speak to the Parliament. He stressed the similarities between Europe and Chile - and said that shared both a "common cultural heritage" and a "close historical bond" . He also thanked MEPs for unanimously approving the 2002 Association Agreement between the EU and Chile that covers trade issues.
He began his address by giving positive assessment of the social progress that Chile has achieved in the last fifteen years. He said that poverty decreased by 40 per cent and that one in four houses in Chile have been constructed during these years. He also noted that seven out of every ten children in Chile now attend high school. Mr Lagos said this was helping to improve social cohesion in the country.
Nevertheless, he acknowledged that "chronic inequality" still exists in Chile and that the country was striving to have a proper balance between social protection and a market economy. Mr Lagos said that while his country had followed the so-called "Washington consensus" of free markets and deregulation, it was also trying to wed this to a network of social protection. He warned that countries incapable of a minimum level of social cohesion will end up with internal conflict.
President Lagos went on to say that Europe offered an interesting paradigm and European society represents " the kind of society we want to create". Regarding the debates over which type of social model to follow, he said that in Chile the arguments were similar. "Your debates are our debates," he told MEPs. He also applied this to environmental policy - particularly as the south of his country is under threat from ozone depletion.
The President told the House that Chile was keen to play a role in a world dominated and governed by multilateral organisations. He drew particular attention to the Chilean mission to Haiti which was carried out under UN auspices.
Finally, President Lagos told MEPs the kind of Europe he wanted to see - a Europe committed to free trade, giving a human face to globalisation, promoting internal and external social cohesion, and an important part of the "alliance of civilizations".
20051020IPR01663
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
