The Fall of the Berlin Wall: the anniversary of a reunited Europe
Human rights
2005-11-09 - 15:11
The Berlin Wall
November 9, 1989, saw the fall of the Berlin Wall, the symbol of a Europe torn apart. In the 16 years since then Europe has changed a great deal. But for things to move forward, November 9 has to be seen not just in terms of the anniversary of a return to freedom but also as the departure point for the Europe of the future.
It was 16 years ago, amid scenes of jubilation, that the “wall of shame” came tumbling down. Erich Honecker, the East German leader, had said that it would stand for another 100 years. But it was unable to resist the blows of the thousands of Berliners who came with their picks as soon as they heard the Communist Party Politburo’s announcement that “borders are open with immediate effect”. Intellectuals and artists rushed from across Europe to show their support for freedom and German unity. Among them was the cellist, Mstislav Rostropovitch, who came to play a Bach suite at the foot of the wall. Hundreds of thousands of East Germans drove through the makeshift border posts in their Trabants to see the free world at the other side of the wall. Before that time, it would have meant risking their lives if they wanted to cross from east to west.
As chance would have it, the European Parliament’s Legal Affairs Committee was meeting in Berlin. MEPs were thus among the first foreign politicians to witness these events as they happened. But it was not just the personal experience of some MEPs which accounted for the speed and determination that the Chamber showed in supporting German reunification. Parliament quickly realised that there was a European dimension to the wall coming down. Indeed, for the Germans themselves, it was the end of the division of an entire nation - and of separation experienced by many families. For Europe, November 9, 1989, marked the return of its eastern part to the road to democracy and freedom from the communist yoke. It also marked the end of a cold war that had lasted half a century and, above all, it marked the start of the continent’s unification. The fall of the wall represented the crowning point of a peaceful revolution that had started much earlier. As Nicole Fontaine, the then President of the European Parliament, said in a speech given on the tenth anniversary of the fall of the Berlin Wall, “it was made possible thanks to the courage of....various western and east European countries who fought determinedly for freedom, democracy and respect for human rights.”
In 1998, nine years after the wall came down, six candidate countries (Hungary, Poland, Estonia, the Czech Republic, Slovenia and Cyprus) started negotiations to join the EU. They were followed in 2000 by a further six countries (Romania, the Slovak Republic, Latvia, Lithuania, Bulgaria and Malta). The soon-to-be 27-member strong EU now has the task of creating the future for a free and united Europe.
20051109STO02119
EN
1
PHOTO
20051108PHT02094.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
