Ireland's National Forum on Europe
Constitution
Ireland
2005-11-08 - 13:50
Ireland's National Forum on Europe
Following the rejection of the Nice Treaty by the Irish electorate in 2001, the Taoiseach (Prime Minister), Bertie Ahern, established the National Forum on Europe under the independent chairmanship of Senator Maurice Hayes. It works to promote a national debate on the European Union, on its future and on Ireland's role in it but does not advocate any particular policy or course of action. It ceases to meet in the 30-day period immediately before a referendum.
The Forum, which is attended by members and observers, holds its plenary sessions in Dublin Castle. Members of the Forum are members of the Oireachtas (Parliament) and those nominated by parties represented in the Oireachtas. The 'Observer Pillar' is made up of various NGOs and social partners, as well as political parties represented only at local level, parties from Northern Ireland, representatives of the main Christian churches and bodies of religious minorities, and campaigning groups on both sides of the EU debate. The Forum frequently invites informed observers from abroad to promote wider public participation, and to inform the Irish public in a non-partisan and neutral manner about developments in the EU. In order to encourage young people to engage in the European debate, the Forum organises competitions for secondary school students (with a visit to participate in Euroscola in Strasbourg provided by the European Parliament Office in Ireland as the main prize), and has produced videos/DVDs on the EU for schools. The Forum's budget for 2005 is € 1.1 million.
In 2004/2005, the Forum concentrated on the European Constitution, publishing a summary of the Constitution in both English and Irish, which includes a glossary of 'Euro-Jargon'. This year, its meetings and plenary sessions have dealt with subjects such as "The EU Constitution - How can national parliaments have their say?", "What the Constitution says about security and defence", and "The Challenges of Communicating the EU Constitution". During the current 'period of reflection', the Forum is now debating the broader issues facing the EU and Ireland. Themes on the Forum's agenda for next year include enlargement, the European Social Model, globalisation, security and defence, agriculture, environment, and human rights.
In September 2005, Senator Hayes addressed the European Parliament Committee on Constitutional Affairs - the first person invited by the Committee to contribute to the constitution debate. He said that given their critical role as democratically elected representatives, MEPs had an important part to play as the Union begins the process of re-engaging with its citizens in the wake of the No votes to the European Constitution in France and the Netherlands.
Addressing the Forum on 20 October 2005, Irish Minister for Foreign Affairs, Dermot Ahern, stated; "as the period of reflection gets underway, the Forum is required to deliver once more and I have every confidence that it will do so" . He added "[the Irish Government] will not set a date for a referendum until the picture becomes clearer at the European level. Meanwhile, we will proceed with our national debate, with this Forum playing a leading role".
The Forum's website www.forumoneurope.ie provides information on its meetings, competitions and upcoming events.
20051108IPR02082 The Forum's website provides information on its meetings, competitions and upcoming events.
EN
1
PHOTO
20051108PHT02084.jpg
EN
2
A
http://www.forumoneurope.ie/
EN
3
LINK
http://www.forumoneurope.ie
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
