EP President Borrell: "I see how much 1 Jan 2007 matters to Bulgaria"
Delegations
2005-11-08 - 13:10
EP President Borrell meets Bulgarian PM Stanishev on November 3
"Bulgaria's accession will complement and improve the European project." That was the upbeat message delivered by European Parliament President Josep Borrell when he visited Bulgaria last week. He told the Bulgarian Parliament in Sofia that "this country should put in a lot more effort to resolve the problems it faces," both before and after it joins the European Union.
During his visit President Borrell pointed out that the European Parliament has always firmly supported Bulgaria's accession to the European Union, and that more should done to explain to people in Europe that EU enlargement "is not a matter of generosity but a matter of common interest."
Seeking to play down local fears about possible resistance to Bulgaria's membership of the EU, Mr Borrell told a discussion group on Europe that "there is no anti-Bulgarian plot in Europe or a desire to postpone Bulgaria's accession to the EU."
Mr Borrell was in Bulgaria on an official visit from 2-4 November. During the visit he held discussions with President Georgi Parvanov, Prime Minister Sergey Stanishev (who called his meeting with the President "very encouraging") and speaker of the Bulgarian Parliament Georgi Pirinski. He also visited several cultural sites that have been restored with European Union money.
The visit came just days after the Parliament debated the European Commission's annual report on Bulgaria's progress towards EU membership - set for 1 January 2007. The report delivered a generally upbeat assessment of Bulgaria's progress towards meeting European Union standards - although the Commission warned that unless progress is made in improving the workings of the justice system and in tackling crime and corruption, then it would, if necessary, "recommend postponing accession" by one year when it reviews the situation in the Spring.
In a Parliamentary debate in Strasbourg on 25 October, MEPs gave the report a cautious welcome and were generally supportive of the EU aspirations of Bulgaria and Romania. The European Parliament's rapporteur for the country, British MEP Geoffrey Van Orden (EPP-ED), said that he saw "no reason" why the 2007 accession date should be missed. Referring to Bulgaria's signature of the Accession Treaty in April, he observed that "we now seem to be in a situation where the wedding has taken place, the marriage register has been signed and presents have been received, but the bride and groom cannot walk out of the church together just yet, partly because we are not sure what the situation is like outside."
20051108STO02069 Report on Bulgaria's progress towards EU membership Bulgaria: Report by the European Parliament' s Rapporteur
EN
1
PHOTO
20051108PHT02071.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/enlargement/report_2005/pdf/SEC1352_CMR_MASTER_BG%20COLLEGE.pdf
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A6-2005-0078 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
