Armistice Day: Europe as a model of peace
Human rights
2005-11-11 - 09:31
The white dove symbolises peace
It is now 87 years since the guns of the Great War fell silent. Sadly, we know it as the "first world war" rather than "the war to end all wars" as it was called then. Today, there are just a handful of veterans left alive who recall the horror of trench warfare. Around the world, 11 November and the Sunday that immediately follows it are marked by reflection and remembrance of the casualties not just of that conflict, but also of the Second World War.
As the European Parliament said earlier this year in its resolution on the sixtieth anniversary of the end of the Second World War, it is important to keep the memories of the past alive as "there cannot be reconciliation without truth and remembrance". Bearing in mind our history, we have to realise "that the process of European integration and the further development of the European Union as a model of peace are the result of a free decision by the people to determine their own destiny and commit themselves to a shared future," it said.
The list of reasons for the First World War is long. Indeed, it was the combination of several factors that contributed to the outbreak of the war. Exacerbated nationalism, long-standing unresolved disputes, the intricate system of alliances, misunderstandings in diplomatic communications together with the arms races all added fuel to the flames.
The so-called "war to end all wars" was new in many ways. The industrialisation of Europe, principally the development of the railway, made it possible to supply the frontline with vast amounts of men and material. This intensified the conflict and made it a gruesome war of attrition. The war became infamous for the trenches, the first large-scale bombing from the air and the use of tanks and poison gas. The number of casualties surpassed 31 million including more than 9 million killed on the battlefield.
The war led to a dramatic redrawing of the European map. Four empires (the German, Ottoman, Russian and Austro-Hungarian) were shattered and replaced by several succession states. Unfortunately the wholesale bloodshed did not lead to an era of peace. Europe had to suffer through another world war before it was forced to recognise that disputes should be settled through enhanced communication and cooperation rather than through fighting. It was not until the end of World War Two that the Old Continent was ready to exchange suspicion for confidence and aggression for peace as the time for European integration drew near.
20051110STO02207 EP resolution on the sixtieth anniversary of the end of the Second World War in Europe on 8 May 1945 Statement on the commemoration of the end of the Second World War in Europe
EN
1
PHOTO
20051110PHT02201.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/president/Presidents_old/president_borrell/speeches/en/files/sp0041.htm
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2005-0180 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
