Higher targets for energy efficiency
Energy
2005-11-24 - 12:18
Given the growth in world energy demand and the decline in resources, there is an increasing need to save energy and use it more efficiently. A step in the right direction was taken today when members of Parliament's Industry Committee adopted a second reading report on a directive on energy end-use efficiency and energy services.
In the report by Mechtild ROTHE (PES, DE), adopted today by 42 votes to 1 with 5 abstentions, MEPs voted to raise the indicative targets for the amount of energy to be saved by Member States through energy services and energy efficiency measures. Whereas the Council wants an overall target of 6% to be reached six years after the directive enters into force, the EP Industry Committee is calling for Member States to save 11.5% after nine years.
However, MEPs adopted further measures to ensure that these indicative targets are reached - including a requirement for Member States to establish three 3-year intermediate national targets . They want Member States to be obliged to adopt long-term energy efficiency plans to pressure them into achieving energy efficiency and energy savings. Should the measures taken not lead to the envisaged improvements, the Commission will be able to require the Member State to take additional measures to reach the targets, which will cease to be indicative and become binding.
To ensure that the public sector sets an example, MEPs are calling on Member States to set higher indicative targets for the public sector - contrary to the Council which would delete any reference to public sector targets. The public sector, says the committee, must also devise and publish guidelines for including energy efficiency as a criterion for assessing competitive tenders for public contracts.
Since a lack of information is often a key reason why energy efficiency services are not used, MEPs wish to strengthen the right of the customers to be informed about possible energy savings.
The committee calls for the directive to be implemented by Member States one year after its entry into force, whereas the Council is asking for two years.
The aim of the directive is to increase savings when energy is sold to end-users - whether private households or the public sector. It covers the distribution and sales of most types of delivered energy to final customers, including electricity, gas, heating oil and transport fuels and covers most final (or "end use") energy consumers. The directive was tabled as part of the Commission's energy package in December 2003.
20051121IPR02656
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
