MEPs back moves to simplify exports of generic drugs to poorer countries
Public health
2005-12-01 - 13:17
The European Union must do everything it can to enable the world's poorest people to have access to medicines. This is the main thrust of a report by Johan VAN HECKE (ALDE, BE) on a draft regulation on compulsory licensing for the export of generic medicines to developing countries, adopted by the European Parliament on Thursday with 543 votes in favour, 21 against and 35 abstentions. This regulation should now quickly enter force.
What problem is the legislation trying to tackle? Under the World Trade Organisation's Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS), countries with major public health problems can issue "compulsory licences" for the manufacture of patent-protected drugs. But most developing countries do not have a pharmaceuticals industry to produce the generic drugs. On 14 November 2001, a declaration was adopted at Doha, during the WTO ministerial conference, to make the application of TRIPS more flexible not only for developing countries without the manufacturing capability but also for exporting countries. A decision of the WTO General Council of 30 August 2003 lays down the conditions under which countries without manufacturing capabilities can import generics that are still patent-protected. It also allows manufacturing countries to export drugs under a compulsory licence even where these drugs are patent-protected on their territory.
The European Commission's draft regulation is intended to transpose the decision of 30 August 2003 into Community law. It lays down conditions for the granting of compulsory licences for the manufacture in Europe of generic drugs intended for export to developing countries. The text is based on a multilateral decision, so the EU institutions have only limited freedom for manoeuvre as it was not easy to agree a compromise within the WTO and, in Mr Van Hecke's words, "we must not open a Pandora's box".
The Trade Committee adopted its position on the proposals in July. Since that time Mr Van Hecke and representatives of the Council have been involved in informal negotiations aimed at reaching a compromise text to allow the measure to be adopted at first reading. This has led to a set of compromise amendments which were adopted by the plenary, which will allow the measure to become law at this first-reading stage.
Among other points, the text adopted ensures that poor countries (those with a per capita GNP of under USD 745) who are not members of the WTO can take part in scheme, whether or not they are formally classed as Least-Developed Countries (LDCs). It is made clear that requests for licensing can come from Non-Governmental Organisations authorised by importing countries or from UN bodies or other international health organisations.
Other points deal with efforts to prevent pharmaceuticals made under the scheme being illegally diverted back to developed countries. They should normally be in distinctive packaging and authorities can seize them - they could then be sent on to the country for which they were intended. The text also deals with the amount of remuneration to be paid to the licence holder, with a reference point set at 4 per cent of the amount paid.
20051128IPR02948
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
