More effort needed to integrate migrants and minorities in Europe
European citizenship
2005-11-23 - 19:02
Migrants and minority communities in the EU still suffer major inequalities in housing, education and employment. Many steps have been taken to tackle these problems but a lack of statistics in many Member States makes it impossible to show the whole picture. These were among the main points of the 2004 annual report by the EU Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia, which was presented to Parliament's Employment Committee on Tuesday and its Civil Liberties Committee on Wednesday.
This year’s annual report is the first overview of racist, anti-Semitic and anti-Muslim discrimination to cover all 25 EU Member States. " The Roma emerge as the group most vulnerable to racism in the EU. They face discrimination in employment, housing and education – as well as being regular victims of racial violence. Other groups facing high levels of discrimination in many Member States are migrant workers from Africa, the Middle East, Asia, and Latin America. Muslim groups face particularly challenging conditions in many Member States. Also recent migrants from Russia or the Ukraine may be subject to discrimination ", the EUMC says in its report.
In the legislative field, the report adds that most of the 25 Member States have transposed the two EU directives on racial equality and equal treatment in employment in 2004, although four - Germany, Luxembourg, Austria and Finland - were referred to the European Court of Justice for their failure to do so. France, the Netherlands, Finland, Lithuania and Slovenia have introduced legislation and other measures to combat and punish illegal Internet use by extreme right-wing groups. But in Hungary a law on race hate crimes was successfully challenged as a limitation on the freedom of speech.
Employment
Migrants and minorities are overrepresented in the less prestigious employment sectors, according to the report. The EUMC quotes examples of discrimination in Germany or Hungary which were tested by journalists. In Denmark, journalists also found that both public and private sector employment agencies were willing to accept employers' instructions not to send immigrant applicants for jobs.
Emine Bozkurt (PES, NL) said "Apparently the European Parliament employs five Turks, of whom four work as cleaners. This is no doubt indicative of what happens in other European countries as regards job discrimination. In the Netherlands, the unemployment rate is very high and we know the difficulties young Moroccans have in finding a job or even getting on training courses, which are known to be useful for breaking into the jobs market."
Elisabeth Schroedter (Greens/EFA, DE) asked the EUMC about its response to the recent street violence in France and Ria Oomen-Ruijten (EPP-ED, NL) stressed the need to place the fight against discrimination in employment as a priority within the Lisbon Agenda.
Housing and education
Discrimination in the housing sector is particularly prevalent in some Member States. Examples from the report include discriminatory housing advertisements or discrimination in the administration waiting lists. It seems that territorial segregation in housing is particularly acute for the Roma population in the Czech Republic, Spain and Hungary. Martine Roure (PSE, FR) said that " hatred and violence are all the fruit of this kind of discrimination, and racism in our societies is the direct cause of it ".
Educational achievements of migrant and minority groups lag behind the majority population. " The whole issue of racial discrimination has to do with education ", said Timothy Kirkhope (EPP-ED, UK). The issue of religious symbols in schools has become rather controversial, not only in France but also in other cases, like the conflicts reported in a school in Belgium or in a French school in Madrid. The report also mentions positive initiatives by some Member States, mainly the introduction of a new inter-cultural education syllabus and new courses designed to address racism and anti-Semitism.
Lack of statistics
Lastly the EUMC director Beate Winkler stressed that gaps in data may lead to serious discrimination in key areas going unnoticed. " Improving the quality of data is a crucial measure ", said Ms Winkler. Sarah Ludford (ALDE, UK) believed her country was a good example to follow as regards the identification of ethnic minorities. She said " Ethnic monitoring is taken for granted In the UK. We should generalise the collection of data on racial origins ". However, Ewa Klamt (EPP-ED, DE) replied that the collection by the government of data on the ethnic origin of individuals was a sensitive subject. " In Germany we tend to do the opposite. The German police sometimes deliberately keep back any data on crimes by non-Germans to avoid feeding a wave of hate and creating negative feelings towards migrants ", she explained.
Beate Winkler concluded: " The key message is that we have come some way – quite a long way in some States – but we still have a long way to go and we should accelerate the pace of implementing non-discrimination policy and measures".
The full annual report can be downloaded in English and French at: www.eumc.europa.eu
20051121IPR02658
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
