Parliament and Council close to agreement on energy efficiency
Energy
2005-12-06 - 19:20
Agreement has been reached between a European Parliament delegation, made up of representatives from the main political groups, and the Council on a directive aiming to encourage Member States to save energy and use it more efficiently when it is sold to private households or the public sector. This agreement is expected to be formalised by the plenary session, when a second reading vote is held on 13 December in Strasbourg.
"The directive will kick off an energy efficiency offensive in the Member States," said Mechtild ROTHE (PES, DE) on Tuesday at a joint press conference with the members of the Parliamentary delegation and the Energy Commissioner, Andris PIEBALGS.
The compromise asks Member States to save 9% of the energy supplied to end users in the nine years following the directive's entry into force. The Council had been arguing for a 6% reduction over six years. Some of the MEPs regretted that the goals were not binding, but merely advisory, in accordance with Member States' wishes. Nevertheless, "the Member States will have to adopt multiannual Energy Efficiency Action Plans, in which they must set out intermediate goals and the measures needed to attain them," said Mrs Rothe.
The agreement sets out that Member States will have a period of two years to transpose the directive into national laws - nevertheless, they will have to send the Commission their first action plans before 30 June 2007.
Another positive point for Parliament is that the public sector will have to give an example. Member States are invited to develop guidance aiming to include energy efficiency as a criterion for public procurement processes. More information will be provided to consumers - they will receive detailed and regular statements on their energy consumption, something the rapporteur welcomed.
This directive, which aimed to encourage energy saving, covers the great majority of forms of energy sold to end users: electricity, gas, heating oil and transport fuels. It was tabled as part of the Commission's December 2003 energy package.
2005-12-06 Rapporteur Mechtild Rothe PES DE Shadow Rapporteur Alejo Vidal-Quadras Roca EPP-ED ES Shadow Rapporteur Fiona Hall ALDE UK Shadow Rapporteur Claude Turmes Greens/EFA LU Shadow Rapporteur Umberto Guidoni GUE/NGL IT
Press Conference
20051206IPR03236
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
