VAT in the spotlight
Taxation
2005-12-01 - 13:17
Parliament has adopted two reports and one resolution on the VAT system, covering minimum standard rates, reduced rates for labour intensive services and the refund system for businesses trading outside their home Member State.
Both reports were drawn up by Zsolt László Becsey (EPP-ED, HU). The first deals with the minimum standard rate of VAT in the EU. This is currently fixed at 15 per cent until the end of 2005. The Commission is proposing to extend this minimum rate until the end of 2010. Parliament approved this extension, under the consultation procedure, but MEPs also voted to set a maximum rate at 25 per cent. This would have the aim of preventing an further divergence in the standard rates applied by the Member States, thereby avoiding structural imbalances in the EU. (At present, Cyprus and Luxembourg have standard rates of 15 per cent, while Denmark, Hungary and Sweden are at 25 per cent, with the others ranged in between.) Parliament is also asking the Commission to make a general assessment of the macro-economic impact of implicit and standard VAT rates in the Member States, which should also consider allowing all Member States the same opportunity to apply reduced rates on certain goods and services.
The second report which was adopted with 512 votes in favour, 81 against and 10 abstentions d eals with the final aspect of the VAT one-stop-shop scheme, which aims to simplify the VAT system in particular for small businesses trading outside their home Member State - the particular issue here being the detailed rules of VAT refunds due to companies from VAT authorities outside their own Member States. Parliament is being consulted on this particular measure some time after the rest of the package because of a change to the legal base. Under the proposed procedure, requests for refunds would continue to be dealt with by the Member State where the VAT was paid, the amount refundable would be determined under the deduction rules of the Member State where the expenses are incurred, and the repayments made directly by that Member State to the requesting taxable person. MEPs adopted a few amendments aimed in particular at clarifying the various deadlines within which VAT authorities must respond to applications for refunds.
Since both of the above items come under the consultation procedure, the final decision is now up to the Council.
The resolution relates to the lack of progress in the Council of Ministers in agreeing what to do next regarding the experiment introduced in 1999 which allows some Member States to apply reduced rates of VAT to certain labour intensive services. This provision expires at the end of 2005, and was only open to the nine Member States who originally took up the opportunity so none of the new Member States joining in 2004 were able to use it. Ireland has not applied these reduced rates, in the UK jurisdiction they apply only for housing repairs on the Isle of Man. MEPs are urging the Council to prolong the experiment until the end of 2006, by which time the Commission is requested to present a comprehensive evaluation - they say the previous evaluation was based on insufficient data. They point to the alarming situation regarding the expiry of the provisions and an immediate switch to standard VAT rates that might lead to price increases job cuts in the sectors concerned. They call for the Commission and Council to avoid legal uncertainty after the end of the year. Following the evaluation, Parliament supports making these exemptions permanent for those sectors where results are satisfactory. In other sectors, the reduced rates should be phased out in a planned way. Parliament also calls on the Council to allow new Member States to apply reduced rates to certain labour-intensive services if they so wish, putting an end to the current discriminatory situation.
20051128IPR02958
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
