Services directive clears first hurdle
Free movement of services
2005-11-24 - 10:25
Plans to facilitate the provision of services in the EU single market took a major step forward at Parliament on Tuesday, when the Internal Market Committee voted at first reading on the report tabled by Evelyne GEBHARDT (PES, DE). Among other points, MEPs decided services of general economic interest should be included in the scope of the directive. This had been one of the most hotly debated issues.
The committee had thoroughly scrutinised the text of the directive, which has aroused much controversy and which even became an issue in the French referendum on the Constitution. No fewer than 1600 amendments were tabled. Members of the committee agreed a compromise on several aspects of the directive in line with proposals made by rapporteur Evelyne GEBHARDT (PES, DE). MEPs accepted the principle of a framework directive rather than a number of sectoral directives. They agreed on a range of clauses concerning the purpose of the directive, its relation to other Community legislation (including the directive on the temporary posting of workers), administrative cooperation between Member States and clauses seeking to make it easier for a company providing services to set up shop in another Member State.
However, the agreement between the political groups did not resolve the two most contentious issues: the country of origin principle (by which a service provider is broadly subject to the legislation of his country of establishment and not the country where the service is provided) and the scope of the directive, i.e. precisely which services it will cover.
On the first point Mrs Gebhardt had proposed distinguishing the right to provide crossborder services from the practical exercise of this right. The right to exercise a service activity would be acquired by the provider in his country of origin, i.e. his country of establishment. But the provision of a service in another Member State - the host country - would be subject to the legislation of that State. "I am in favour of a free market in services" , said Mrs Gebhardt, "but labour legislation must not be brought into question by the directive on the liberalisation of services. On labour issues, the law of the country in which the service is provided must apply. This is a fundamental matter" . Mrs Gebhardt was supported by the Socialist and Green groups. However, the Internal Market Committee finally voted (by 21 votes to 16, with 3 abstentions) in favour of a solution closer to the Commission's initial proposal. The amendment in question was jointly submitted by members of the EPP-ED, ALDE and UEN groups.
As to the scope of the directive, nobody questioned the exclusion from the directive of public services "of general interest" (something which in any case is laid down in the Treaty). But members of the ALDE and EPP-ED groups strongly opposed a broader exclusion of "services of general economic interest" (those provided for payment by private companies), as proposed by Mrs Gebhardt. According to Malcolm HARBOUR (EPP-ED, UK) "It would be unfair to prevent some private companies taking advantage of the free market on the grounds that the services they provide are of 'general interest'". At the vote, the committee backed this view and Mrs Gebhardt's amendments on this point were rejected by a narrow majority (17 votes in favour, 19 against and 3 abstentions).
However, the committee voted in favour of Mrs Gebhardt's proposal that the directive should not apply to certain services including gambling and lotteries, audio visual services including the cinema, professions and activities connected with the exercise of official authority (such as notaries), lawyers and above all health care.
In its amended version the report was adopted by a large majority (25 votes to 10, with 5 abstentions including that of the rapporteur herself). Despite this vote, the debate is not over. Negotiations between the political groups will continue up to the first reading vote by the full Parliament, which is scheduled for January or February 2006.
Following the plenary vote the Council of Ministers, as co-legislator with Parliament, must decide its position on the directive (which is sometimes known at the "Bolkestein Directive" following the name of the Commissioner who presented it in January 2004) and the amendments introduced by Parliament. The text will then return to Parliament for a second reading.
20051118IPR02599
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
