European Neighbourhood Policy: a tool for promoting democracy
External relations
2005-11-30 - 15:19
MEPs are pushing for the European Neighbourhood Policy to be used as a strong tool for consolidating democracy and the rule of law in the EU's neighbouring countries and promoting democratisation in non-democratic countries such as Belarus. The European Commission should give vigorous support to democratic forces in neighbouring countries, in particular by providing access to independent media and information.
In a report by Charles Tannock (EPP-ED, UK) adopted on Tuesday, members of the Foreign Affairs Committee call for clear priorities and evaluation criteria. If countries violate international and European standards of respect for human rights and democracy, the EU should be ready to restrict or suspend aid and even to cancel agreements, says the report. A week earlier, the committee had voted to increase funds for the ENP from €15 million to €16 million per year, starting on 1 January 2007.
MEPs welcome the idea of providing European neighbourhood agreements at the end of the ENP process, adding that such agreements can encourage step-by-step progress towards full access to the internal market, participation in the European security and defence policy and close cooperation in the field of justice and home affairs. However, they say the ENP should not only strengthen ties between the EU and the neighbouring countries but also promote regional integration between these countries.
The committee believes the EU should leave its door open to membership for Ukraine and Moldova . It also proposes a European stability pact for the Southern Caucasus, modelled on the EU stability pact for South-eastern Europe.
Other points mentioned in the report are an improvement in energy network links as benefiting both the EU and its partner countries; an increase in trade and tourism, which will mean enhancing transport networks and will probably improve links between the partner countries; cooperation in environmental matters, such as water management, waste management, air pollution and combating desertification; and cooperation on legal and illegal immigration.
The European Neighbourhood Policy covers Algeria, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Egypt, Georgia, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Libya, Moldova, Morocco, Syria, Tunisia, Ukraine and the Palestinian Authority.
2005-11-28 Committee on Foreign Affairs Chair Elmar Brok EPP-ED DE
Procedure: Own-initiative
Plenary vote: Strasbourg, January 2006
20051130IPR03052 See also Info on the EU Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument adopted on 23 November
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20051124IPR02851 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
