Juncker: rate rise not essential - Almunia emphasises structural reforms
Economic and monetary affairs
2005-11-29 - 17:30
The widely trailed rise in European Central Bank interest rates is not essential according to Jean-Claude Juncker. Speaking to MEPs on Tuesday, the chairman of the Eurogroup and Luxembourg Prime Minister repeatedly stressed that to make such comments was not to call into question the ECB's independence. On Monday, Commissioner Joaquin Almunia avoided commenting on rates, preferring to stress structural reform.
Mr Juncker told the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee: "The ECB is getting ready to raise interest rates. Eurogroup members believe this rise is not essential. Inflation indicators are not so worrying as to trigger a monetary policy reaction." He said core inflation, which does not count oil price rises or tax changes, was relatively benign and there was no sign of second round effects from high oil prices, although the ECB was right to be vigilant regarding growth in monetary aggregates.
The Eurogroup chairman added: "No-one should be surprised by this virtuous dialogue between the Eurogroup and the ECB. For me it is obvious that the ECB is independent (...) it makes its own autonomous decisions. I co-wrote the Maastricht Treaty and was one of those insisting on independence of the bank when others disagreed." He went on to say that if the Bank did arrive at the conclusion that a rate rise was essential, this meant it had decided that growth prospects were sufficiently robust not to be threatened by a rate rise. "I take this as a sign of confidence" he said.
There was no question of an "open war" between the Eurogroup and the ECB - it was, he said, a normal democratic process of people having their say, just as the ECB commented on Eurogroup matters such as the reform of the stability pact. Mr Juncker pointed out that he had not joined those who had called for a rate cut earlier in the year.
Responding to questions from MEPs, Mr Juncker said it was good news that the new German government was aiming for a full implementation of the stability pact. He also said it was not possible to argue that governments were not respecting the revised pact, as the first decisions under it were still to be taken in the months ahead. He argued that European countries had in fact made more structural reforms than they were given credit for - France and Germany had both made important changes, for example, but the eurozone seemed perversely attached to downplaying its achievements during international meetings. On the issue of greater macroeconomic coordination between Eurogroup members, he stressed the need for a system for better links between the eurozone and non-EU institutions; the group would be discussing its policy over the next few months and would address structural issues.
Almunia: structural reform the key
On Monday, Economics Commissioner Joaquin Almunia told the same committee of MEPs that economic growth prospects for the EU are improving but structural reforms and sound fiscal policies are essential if growth is to be sustained and accelerated.
The Economic and Monetary Affairs Commissioner updated MEPs on the latest forecasts for the EU economy, which were relatively encouraging: growth in 2006 should be 1.9 per cent in the eurozone and 2.1 per cent for the EU as a whole. For 2007, the Commission predicts growth of 2.2 per cent for the eurozone and 2.4 for the EU. But this was not satisfactory, said Mr Almunia: "We are staking everything on structural reform and implementation of the renewed Lisbon strategy. Without this, the recovery will peter out and we will not see the gains in employment, productivity and competitiveness we need for the future."
On the Stability and Growth Pact , the Commissioner said the challenge ahead was the application of the revised rules to the largest economies, with assessments pending on Germany, France, Italy and the UK. The first three were already in the excessive deficit procedure (EDP), while Britain, having had a deficit over 3 per cent for two years, would now also be getting EDP recommendations. The response to earlier recommendations to Greece, Hungary and Portugal would be assessed by March. "This will be the litmus test of the revised Pact: the Commission's proposals and the Council's decisions (...) If the Member States who adopted the rules are willing to implement them we can hope for a positive outcome, an environment of budgetary discipline and stability in public spending."
On eurozone enlargement, Mr Almunia noted that Lithuania, Slovenia and Estonia were aiming to introduce the euro on 1 January 2007, with the ECB and Commission assessing whether the conditions were all met. No decision could be made before June 2006, when the three countries would have spent the required two years in the ERM II. "This will be the first wave of enlargement of the eurozone, with more to follow," said the Commissioner. "We must have detailed reflection on how to improve the functioning of the eurozone, to see what changes need to be made and how we could improve and enhance the advantages of the euro."
Poul Nyrup Rasmussen (PES, DK) raised the issue of closer coordination of national finance ministers' investment policies. Mr Almunia said, "Everyone agrees that we need to improve investment capacity, public and private, but the problem is exactly how to work together. It can be hard to muster the will in ECOFIN for coordination, but budget decisions should be more in concert." Wolf Klinz (ALDE, DE) asked Mr Almunia's opinion of the plans of the new German government. The Commissioner said he would be meeting Peer Steinbrück, the new Finance Minister, in the next few days to discuss implementation of the stability pact: "The fact that the programme is focused on fiscal restructuring is a good sign." Ieke van den Burg (PES, NL) wanted to know his views on the expected ECB interest rate rise, but he would only say that "Under present conditions, the fiscal and monetary policy mix is not a brake on growth. The brakes are structural issues." Reacting to questions about the new Polish government's idea of a referendum on joining the euro, Mr Almunia said citizens had known about the commitment to adopt the single currency when they voted to join the EU: "There is no need to ask the citizens again."
2005-11-28 In the Chair Pervenche Berès PES FR
Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee
Macro Economic Dialogue
2005-11-28 In the Chair Pervenche Berès PES FR
Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee
Parliamentary dialogue with the Eurogroup
20051125IPR02873
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
