Port services: no decision yet
Transport
2005-11-22 - 16:44
The Transport Committee was unable to reach a decision on the new port services directive when it voted this Tuesday. An attempt to throw out the directive completely was narrowly defeated, as was a compromise seeking to approve the directive albeit in modified form.
Market access to port services is a contentious issue within the Parliament. Two years ago, a majority of MEPs rejected at the final stage the outcome of the Parliament-Council conciliation negotiations on the first port services directive. The Commission then brought forward a new draft directive which has now come before Parliament.
Advocates of liberalising port services say there is a need for greater competition in this sector to promote growth and job creation, while opponents believe there would be a risk of massive job losses and deteriorating working conditions.
In today's vote, the committee first voted by 26 votes 22 with 1 abstention against amendments aimed at rejecting outright the Commission's draft directive. These amendments were tabled by the PES, Greens/EFA, GUE/NGL and IND/DEM groups, British EPP-ED Members and Parliament's Industry and Social Affairs committees.
However, in the vote on the overall report by Georg JARZEMBOWSKI (EPP-ED, DE), although most compromise amendments were adopted, the final report was rejected by 24 votes to 23. A key point of the compromise package was that it sought to exempt pilotage services from liberalisation.
In the final vote of the day, a legislative resolution was adopted which for the moment leaves the Commission's proposal unchanged.
The ball is now in the court of the full Parliament. MEPs will have to take a decision at the plenary session of January 2006, when compromise and other amendments are likely to be retabled. The outcome of the vote in plenary cannot be predicted, with MEPs in favour and those against the Commission proposals both claiming this morning that they had a fair chance of achieving a majority in Strasbourg.
2005-11-22 Committee on Transport and Tourism chair Luís Queiró EPP-ED PT
Procedure: Co-decision, first reading
Plenary: January 2006
20051118IPR02600
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
