Support for EU Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument
External relations
2005-11-25 - 09:04
The Foreign Affairs Committee gave its backing on Wednesday to plans to streamline assistance policies for the EU's neighbouring countries. However, MEPs are calling for increased funding for this policy area and for Parliament to have more say over how EU money is spent.
The committee was voting on a co-decision report by Konrad SZYMÁNSKI (UEN, PL) on establishing a European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument (ENPI). The aim of this instrument is to group all of the different financial programmes in use today (such as TACIS and MEDA) into one coherent framework. MEPs supported the general idea of streamlining the external assistance policies of the Union but several amendments to the Commission text were also adopted.
Most importantly, the report seeks to strengthen Parliament's role in decision-making about ENPI spending. The report calls on the Commission to submit a proposal for a Multiannual Policy Framework (MPF), establishing guidelines and priorities for the instrument. The proposal would then be subject to the codecision procedure.
The report also raises the amount of funding available for ENPI from the Commission's proposed €14,929 million to €16,978 million per year, starting on 1 January 2007. This is in line with the Parliament's negotiating position on the 2007-2013 financial perspective.
Furthermore, MEPs noted that the Commission's approach of having a "one country-one instrument" policy needed to be fine-tuned. They supported giving some countries the possibility of benefiting from ENPI programs as well as from the Development Cooperation and Economic Cooperation Instrument (DCECI) and potentially even the Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance (IPA), if any of them receive the status of potential candidate for EU accession.
Finally, the committee argued for connecting the ENPI to international law and EU values, by insisting that " the formation, interpretation, application and implementation of all agreements and measures taken under the Instrument should accord with the acquis communautaire, the international conventions to which EU Member States are party and the provisions of general international law. "
2005-11-28 Committee on Foreign Affairs chair Elmar Brok EPP-ED DE
Procedure: Codecision
Plenary vote: Strasbourg, January 2006
20051124IPR02851
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
