MEPs protest at plans to deregulate liberal professions
Free movement of services
2005-11-30 - 17:15
Competition Commissioner Neelie Kroes came to the Legal Affairs Committee on Tuesday to discuss the deregulation of the liberal professions. MEPs gave a frosty response to her call for more competition in this field, arguing that the work of a lawyer or a notary is not like any other service.
In a paper of 5 September 2005 on the reform of professional services, the Commission reaffirmed the Lisbon strategy's commitment to deregulation of the liberal professions, focusing on lawyers, notaries, engineers, architects, pharmacists and accountants - professions governed by strong and often time-honoured regulations. Although action in this area depends chiefly on goodwill by the Member States, the Commission raised the possibility of implementing action against them under Article 86 of the EC Treaty.
Opening the debate, Legal Affairs Committee chair Giuseppe Gargani (EPP-ED, IT) voiced his disagreement with this approach, saying his view was "almost unanimously shared by the members of this committee" . The September paper, he said, was "cheeky" and "clumsy" as "the professions concerned are a complex reality involving cultural and social factors" . He reinforced this point, saying "these professions cannot be regarded as supermarket goods, given their importance to the social fabric" . He warned the Commissioner "you are going to hear the voice of politics" .
Klaus-Heiner Lehne (EPP-ED, DE) believed the Commission should alter its perspective. "Doctors and lawyers each have their own vocations and special responsibilities. You are not taking account of the specific nature of the legal professions. The Commission's view is completely one-sided" . On the question of legal costs, he gave the example of the Netherlands, where deregulation, he said, far from lowering costs, had increased them. "If fee levels are not fixed by law that does not improve the citizen's access to justice - on the contrary" , he argued.
Toine Manders (ALDE, NL), spoke of his experience as a lawyer in the Netherlands, where the system has already been reformed. He was more favourable to the Commission's proposals. "For a long time, with fixed fee rates, I was not competitive with big firms" , he explained. "Fixed fees are restrictive and lead to distortions of competition" . It was important to acknowledge that "what consumers want is to get something for their money" .
Francesco Enrico Speroni (IND/DEM, IT) was against the principle of advertising by lawyers. "No lawyer can claim to be the best" , he said. He spoke against deregulation and emphasised the cultural differences between Member States. He pointed out that "justice is a monopoly of the state" and argued that "you cannot choose between two judges as you can between two doctors. So how can you introduce competition?"
Hans-Peter Mayer (EPP-ED, DE) stressed one specific feature of the legal profession: "When I build a house, if there is a problem I can use the guarantees included in the contract. But the payment of fees by client to lawyer does not guarantee winning the case. This is a fundamental difference compared to other professions" . Since costs are laid down by the judge in a case, "there are many uncertainties which are not mentioned" in the Commission proposal.
Antonio Masip Hidalgo (PES, ES) also voiced reservations: "If we want to limit fee levels, that is one thing, but we mustn't turn everything upside down" . He added that it was important to "keep points of reference so as not to leave judges with a free hand" . He stressed the differences between Member States as regards the calculation of fees.
Neelie Kroes stressed once more the aims of the Commission's paper. "We must achieve the Lisbon goals and reform regulations" , she said. Denying there was any plan for sweeping deregulation, she went on "That would be irresponsible and inappropriate. But some deregulation is needed, in the interests of consumers and for the governance of the professions" . As to the best approach, "our action must be targeted, since the same rules cannot be applied to everyone." "Greater competition will lead to more innovation and more consumer choice. I think there has to be a very good reason for fixing a price which is not in the consumer's interests" . However, she added "in some limited areas, such as clients on low incomes, a very limited form of price regulation could be preserved" . Mrs Kroes was in favour of a manual or guide for judges who set fee levels, although "without that being a general rule" .
2005-11-29 Committee on Legal Affairs Chair Giuseppe Gargani EPP-ED IT
20051130IPR03070
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
