MEPs support a "social globalisation"
Social policy
2005-11-16 - 14:43
To a social globalisation
If globalisation has certainly had positive effects on the economy, then there should in turn be advantages for everybody. Its negative effects, notably in the social sector, need to be offset by policies that make globalisation work for mankind. These sentiments were reflected in the report by Slovenian MEP Mihael Brejc (EPP-ED, SI) on "globalisation and its social dimension".
The report went on to say that EU actions in this field could, if successful, serve as an inspiration to other parts of the world.
To contribute significantly to the ongoing debate of how to counteract the negative effects of globalisation worldwide, the European Union needs to act in a coherent way through its internal and external policies. This the key message of the report on the social dimension of globalisation.
Certain actions of good practice could even serve as an example to other parts of the world; other EU policies have to be reformed to be compatible with the development policy. MEPs highlight various actions they believe to be taken at EU level and expect the Commission to come forward with concrete proposals and the necessary resources.
For the Parliament, globalisation must be a process with a strong social dimension based on universally shared values, respect for human rights and individual dignity which is fair, inclusive and democratically governed, provides opportunities and tangible benefits for all countries and people and is linked to the Millennium Development Goals.
Social rights, social dialogue and human rights should be given greater importance in the EU's various external programmes. The EU's partnerships should include a social pillar covering among other things labour standards. Through bilateral agreements the Commission should ensure that, at the least, ILO (International Labour Organisation) standards are respected in order to ensure humane working conditions.
The EU should use its bilateral relations to ensure that jobs which are moved off -shore or relocated outside the EU do not end up being performed in sweat shops in the third world but instead, jobs of high quality are created.
MEPs support the Commissions efforts to raise awareness among multinational companies of their social responsibility, which have as yet had limited effect. They consider that the social and environmental responsibilities of multinationals should be clearly established, and that EU action in this area should be stepped up.
20051116IPR02345
EN
1
PHOTO
20051115PHT02319.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
