Strategies to prevent trafficking in women and children
Women's rights/Equal opportunities
2005-11-25 - 12:08
Trafficking in women and children is a growing world-wide problem which needs to be tackled on a global, EU and national level. On Thursday the Committee on Women's rights adopted a report proposing strategies to tackle this dreadful problem, including measures to deal with the supply and demand sides as well as the traffickers.
The own-initiative report , drafted by Christa Prets (PES, AT) , was adopted unanimously. Women and children are particularly vulnerable to this modern form of slavery. Of the estimated 600 000 to 800 000 men, women and children trafficked across international borders each year approximately 80 percent are women and girls and up to 50 percent are minors (according to the 2005 Trafficking in Persons Report by the US Department of State office to Monitor and Combat Trafficking in Persons).
Successful strategies need to deal with the main causes of trafficking. It is however not possible to address the prevention of trafficking through individual action by each Member State, notes the committee. Instead it suggests a holistic and integrated multidisciplinary approach at EU and international level. The committee also calls for research, at national and European level, into the underlying causes, particularly of trafficking in women and children for sexual exploitation, i.e. what factors place people at risk and what factors affect demand for sexual services and sexual exploitation of women and children.
Prevention also means looking at the "triangle of trafficking": victim, trafficker and client. The committee suggests practical actions, such as awareness raising campaigns to inform of the dangers and educate the vulnerable members of society in the countries of origin, to alert the public about the problem and reduce demand in the countries of destination. Another measure could be national and international telephone help-lines. MEPs also highlight the need to tackle the tendency to use new technologies, in particular the Internet, for sexual exploitation.
To take action against traffickers, the committee calls on the Member States to implement and enforce legislation that would strengthen the prosecution and punishment of traffickers, both natural and legal persons, their accomplices, persons encouraging, arranging or using sexual services from minors and persons attempting to institute such activities and to prosecute the laundering of the proceeds of trafficking.
MEP say a "right of residence" for victims after the traffickers have been tried, which now exists only in Belgium and Italy, could encourage victims to give statements and help secure the conviction of offenders. And the giving of anonymous statements must be allowed in the context of investigations into trafficking.
2005-11-24
24/11/2005 Anna Záborská (SK) - EPP-ED - Chair
Procedure: Own-Initiative
20051121IPR02667 *According to Trafficking in Persons Report (Department of State. United States of America, 2005):
EN
1
LINK
http://www.state.gov/g/tip/rls/tiprpt/2005/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
