Half of Arctic ice lost by 2100 Meteorologist tells MEPs
Environment
2005-12-06 - 00:01
Climate change on the increase
It is now too late to wonder whether climate change is taking place - even if CO2 emissions ceased today the effects would be felt for decades and possibly centuries to come. That was the message that leading Meteorologist Guy Brasseur brought to MEPs when he visited the Parliament on November 23rd.
The weather forecasts that we see nightly on our TV screens (with their moving images taken by satellite) are nothing compared to those used in the models developed by the Hamburg-based Max Planck Institute for Meteorology, headed by Guy Brasseur. These models, whose predictions MEPs were able to see, are the real thing in terms of global-level weather forecasts for the century.
Guy Brasseur was speaking at STOA’s fourth Annual Conference, held on November the 23 rd . STOA is Parliament’s Scientific and Technological Options Assessment unit and provides scientific support for legislators. Professor Brasseur’s comment that “good government needs good science” would serve as an ideal motto for STOA.
Major Regional Variations
According to the models, the Earth’s temperature will have increased by between 2.1°C and 4.1 °C by 2100. Half the ice in the Arctic will have disappeared and, from 2080, it will be possible in the summer for ships from Europe to reach Japan via the North Pole without seeing so much as a block of ice. For the world as a whole, temperatures will continue to increase after 2100. As Professor Brasseur pointed out, “if all CO2 emissions ceased today, the temperature would continue to rise for another 200 to 300 years.” In Europe, the effects will vary. In the Mediterranean Basin, it will be a case of more droughts and even the beginnings of desertification. Central Europe will see more severe rain and floods and it will become colder in Northern Europe because of the slowing down of the Gulf Stream.
With a weather forecast like this, getting out an umbrella or a parasol will not be enough. What then should be done? While Professor Brasseur supports efforts to reduce CO2 emissions under the Kyoto Protocol, he believes that “Kyoto won’t be enough. Emissions will need to fall by 80 or 90%, rather than 5 or 10%, to have an effect on the models. In terms of a response, Kyoto is only a start.”
Replying to a question from one MEP about the recommendations that he would make to world leaders, Professor Brasseur replied that “while impact-reducing measures were necessary, new energy policies had to be implemented, particularly in the United States. I would tell Europeans not to be content with the Kyoto Protocol but to go on and develop new technologies.” He added that we should not neglect research, which could provide us with new weapons. A neat way of saying that good science also needs good government.
20051202STO03140
EN
1
PHOTO
20051125PHT02897.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
