Youth Takes the Floor
Youth
2005-12-07 - 12:42
Young people from all Member States debate with MEPs
Some 200 of them came to Brussels from all the Member States to make their voices heard. Yes, they want to play an active role in building Europe. No, you cannot devise a European youth policy without young people. They need Europe and Europe needs them. These were the points that arose in discussions between young people and representatives of EU institutions during a debate in the chamber of the European Parliament. Now words have to be transformed into deeds.
For many of the young people who assembled at Parliament on 6 December it was the first time that they had experienced anything like this. As 27-year-old Jana Tikalová from Prague said: “frankly, before coming here I didn’t realise how important this event was.” She is a member of a Czech NGO working to achieve greater inclusion and integration for minorities and is involved in a project funded by the European Youth Programme. She was clear about why she was here. “We want to be involved in all EU policies, not just youth-oriented ones such as employment, training, education but also those concerned with terrorism and social policy.”
The EU – For and About Young People
Events like the European Commission-organised European Youth Week enable young people to get a better understanding of how they can become involved in the EU’s activities. That is all they are asking. As one participant said: “We’ve left behind our daily routine, our exams and our jobs to come here. Isn’t that proof enough?” Another added: “Through our organisations we are the best way of building bridges between citizens and governments, we just need to be heard.”
Alejo Vidal Quadras, Vice-President of the European Parliament, and a Spanish Christian Democrat, agrees. In his view the failure of the referendums on the European Constitution in France and the Netherlands is, amongst other things, a telling sign of poor communication. Young people need to be better informed and to become more involved.
Cutting Back Support for Young People? – An Unacceptable Measure
Lissy Gröner, a German Socialist MEP did not beat about the bush when the issue of young people’s involvement in politics came up. “We cannot wait until cars are set on fire, as in Paris, before launching a policy aimed at young people”, she said. The Youth Programme contributes to getting young people involved in European affairs. But several MEPs, including Mrs Gröner and German Green MEP Helga Trüpel, are sounding the alarm. “The budget proposals put forward by the UK Presidency are unacceptable and would mean, amongst other things, a reduction in support for the Youth Programme,” said Mrs Gröner. Going by what the young people who spoke had to say, the opposite needs to be done. More resources are needed if the objectives of the European Youth Pact and the Lisbon Strategy, in areas like integrating young people into the workplace and their training and mobility, are to be achieved.
20051207STO03250 The Second European Youth Week, December 5-11 European Youth Forum European Youth Programme 2000-2006
EN
1
PHOTO
20051207PHT03244.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/youth/youthweek/index_en.html
EN
3
LINK
http://www.forumjeunesse.org/en/
EN
4
LINK
http://europa.eu.int/scadplus/leg/en/cha/c11603.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
