CIA detention camps in Europe? MEPs keen to start a formal investigation
Justice and home affairs
2005-12-02 - 13:13
At a meeting of the Civil Liberties Committee on Thursday, a majority of the MEPs who spoke were in favour of launching a formal investigation into the existence of CIA detention camps in Europe. They expressed the wish to find the appropriate legal basis to launch an investigation, whether or not this takes the shape of a formal 'committee of inquiry'.
Members supporting this idea included Sophia in 't Veld (ALDE, NL), Kathalijne Maria Buitenweg (Greens/EFA, NL), Stavros Lambrinidis (PES, GR), Giusto Catania (GUE/NGL, IT), Alexander Nuno Alvaro (ALDE, DE), Sylvia-Yvonne Kaufmann (GUE/NGL, DE) and Sarah Ludford (ALDE, UK). "There is a lot of pressure across Europe at a national and international level to find out more about the existence of CIA detention camps. It would be an added value to ask for an investigation in the parameters of the European Union" , said Ms Ludford. She proposed that the EP should invoke Articles 6 and 7 of the Treaties (protection of fundamental rights) as the legal basis for requesting a committee of inquiry.
"Did torture happen? We don't know but we know already that very worrying things have happened. The US senate wanted to investigate by a large majority but the US president threatened them with a veto because he thinks that in some cases torture is justified " , said Mr Lambrinidis.
However, other Members argued that there was insufficient evidence for an investigation. Barbara Kudrycka (EPP-ED, PL) and Genowefa Grabowska (PES, PL) asked MEPs to be prudent and claimed there was no proof or sufficient evidence of the existence of these secret jails in countries such as Poland. " I don't want Poland to be stigmatised by this issue in the European Union ", said Ms Grabowska. Timothy Kirkhope (EPP-ED, UK) agreed, while Michael Cashman (PES, UK) feared that by setting up a committee of inquiry into the alleged CIA jails the EP would be in danger of becoming "a piece of theatre" .
When Ms Grabowska added that the allegations of secret jails in Europe came from a confused source and from a leak in the media, Sophia in 't Veld (ALDE, NL) replied that many major scandals in history were uncovered by the press, like the horrors at the Abu Ghraib jail in Iraq.
Closing the debate, the chair of the Civil Liberties Committee Jean-Marie Cavada (ALDE, FR) also spoke in favour of investigating the issue but urged MEPs to be very prudent in choosing the legal basis and the form of the investigation: "I am not really sure if we can stick out a foot and demand a committee of inquiry. I am not sure if there is sufficient legal basis for this. However, we can definitely claim our sovereignty to start up some kind of investigation and draw some conclusions" .
The Civil Liberties Committee will hold an extraordinary meeting to discuss this issue on 12 December in Strasbourg. Commissioner Frattini and a Council of Europe representative will be invited to address the meeting. Parliament's political groups will also request that the Council of Ministers and the Commission make statements during the Strasbourg plenary.
2005-12-01 Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs Chair Jean-Marie Cavada ALDE FR
20051130IPR03072
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
