Stars and Stripes
Delegations
2005-12-08 - 10:44
Darrell Issa (US Congress) and J. Evans (EP) at the meeting
MEPs and United States Congressmen have pledged themselves to strengthening ties between Europe and the US - particularly after the differences over Iraq and the recent controversy over alleged CIA flights using European airbases to transfer terrorist suspects. They were meeting in London from 1-4 December under the umbrella of the "Transatlantic Legislators Dialogue" (TLD), to discuss issues ranging from the fight against terrorism to preparations for the forthcoming WTO meeting.
Representatives of the US and the European Parliament have been meeting since 1972 and this relationship is the longest such one the Parliament enjoys. It is the largest of the 34 delegations the European Parliament has at present - a reflection of the importance of transatlantic relations. Delegations consist of cross-party groups of MEPs who specialise in a particular country or region. The delegation to the US meets with their counterparts from the Congress twice a year - once in America, once in Europe.
At present, every specialised committee in the Parliament has a specific person designated to assessing the transatlantic implications of any legislative measures that are being considered. Trade issues are always high on the agenda as the two sides constitute about 40% of total world trade. Also discussed in London was the situation in the Middle East, measures to deal with natural catastrophes, constitutional developments in Europe and the UN's convention on cultural diversity.
Both sides pledged to support recent EU-US developments - especially the informal ministerial on economic affairs held in Brussels 30 November which stressed cooperation on intellectual property rights, regulatory cooperation, trade, security and improving innovation. The TLD will meet again in Vienna in April two months ahead of the 2006 EU-US Summit. The stated aim is to influence the agenda of the meeting between President Bush, European Commission President Barroso and the then President of the Council - Austrian Chancellor Wolfgang Schüssel.
The meeting was jointly chaired by British Conservative MEP Jonathan Evans and the Republican US Congressman Darrel Issa. Speaking after the event Mr Evans said that this was one of the "highest quality" such meetings he had attended.
20051208STO03350 Website of the interparliamentary meeting Parliament's Foreign Affairs Committee A list of European Parliament delegations
EN
1
PHOTO
20051208PHT03353.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/intcoop/tld/home_en.htm
EN
3
LINK
/activities/expert/committees/presentation.do?committee=1232&language=EN
EN
4
LINK
/activities/expert/delegations.do
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
