One size doesn't fit all: MEPs back deregulation of pre-packed product sizes
Free movement of goods
2005-12-13 - 17:42
The European Parliament's Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection gave its qualified approval on Monday to newly proposed legislation aimed at deregulating package sizes for pre-packed products. Once implemented, the law is certain to affect a wide range of products available to all European consumers.
By deregulating current rules on packaging for all but a few basic product groups (and consolidating existing legislation in a single act), the Commission aims to optimise competition for industry and to ensure freedom of choice for consumers. The legislation, if adopted, would give industry the opportunity to produce -- and customers the chance to buy -- goods in a potentially infinite range of sizes. In doing so, it would simultaneously prevent Member States from legislating on pack sizes other than those still regulated by EC law.
Such across-the-board deregulation, in the Commission's view, is in line with its global aim of simplifying internal market legislation.
However, argued committee rapporteur Jacques Toubon (EPP-ED, FR), "better regulation" should not necessarily mean "no regulation at all". Fellow MEPs agreed and, while welcoming the Commission's initiative, decided to cut away at some of its scope. While the Commission had proposed to retain mandatory sizes for only a handful of goods (spirits, wines, soluble coffee, white sugar and most products sold in aerosols), committee members voted to retain them for six other product groups: drinking milk, butter, ground or unground roasted coffee, dried pasta, rice and brown sugar. Products such as these, as staples of the average consumer's diet, should only be sold in a restricted number of sizes, argued MEPs -- otherwise, consumers (especially the most disadvantaged ones) risk being misled into buying a cheaper bottle of milk or a cheaper stick of butter without realising that it contains a smaller volume. Selling milk only in 100, 200, 250, 500, 750, 1000 and 1500 millilitre containers, the Internal Market Committee believes, would help eliminate such a risk.
Whereas the Commission had pushed for a 20-year limit on all such derogations, committee members adopted a more flexible approach, introducing a clause that would oblige the Commission to revisit the legislation after 8 years. This, they claimed, is a more appropriate solution, given that no-one today can possibly predict the market conditions in 2025.
The Commission proposal, as amended, was passed by 28 votes to none, with one Member abstaining.
2005-12-12 Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection Chair Phillip Whitehead PES UK
Procedure: Codecision, first reading
Plenary vote: February 2006
20051213IPR03679
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
