Payment Orders: the European way
Justice and home affairs
2005-12-13 - 12:34
The European Parliament decided to support the creation of a European payment order (EPO), a new procedure designed to speed up resolution of cross-border payment claims. By adopting a report by Arlene MCCARTHY (PES, UK), MEPs backed the Commission proposal to establish a cheaper and less complex system to recover debts than the existing national ones.
The new EPO should allow citizens and businesses to enforce uncontested payments through a harmonised process applicable in the whole of Europe. According to the proposed regulation, it will be possible, for instance, to claim the payment of unpaid bills for purchases made via mail orders or Internet retailers through a simple procedure.
Indeed, the current situation is harmful for economic operators, which are encountering difficulties in dealing with legal procedures in foreign countries and are experiencing delays in recovering debts, due to unfamiliar procedures and unexpected costs. Particularly, the small business sector should benefit from a simple and cheaper procedure for pursuing payments across the EU. In this light, MEPs approved an amendment to ensure the free circulation of the European payment orders throughout all Member States, by setting up specific rules to avoid any intermediate proceedings. Moreover, they adopted a number of amendments aiming to simplify the procedure.
The approved amendments are the result of an agreement between the European Institutions to approve this regulation at first reading. Some exceptions to the use of the new system are also included in the report. For instance, the EPO could not be used in case of contested property arising out of a matrimonial relationship, including wills and succession.
Finally, MEPs asked the Commission to present a cost-benefit analysis of the EPO, after five years of its entry into force. The EPO would only apply to payment claims that are not subject to legal controversy in any Member state.
20051207IPR03312 Civil judicial cooperation : recovery of uncontested claims, European order for payment procedure
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=242002
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
