UK MEPs air their concerns at beginning of December Strasbourg session
Institutions
United Kingdom
2005-12-14 - 16:37
UK MEPs raising issues of concern
At the beginning of each plenary session, MEPs have the opportunity to make one-minute speeches on issues of concern. On Monday 12 December, 4 MEPs from the UK took this opportunity and raised the following issues: ".sco" domain name for the Internet, the recent elections in Kazakhstan, fighting racism in football and the fire in Hemel Hempstead.
.Sco possible domain name?
Alyn Smith (Greens/EFA Scotland) Mr President, at this time of looming budget crises and an increasingly depressing outlook for the Hong Kong talks, I would like to bring to the attention of the House an EU success story. The internet domain name .eu. has been available for businesses across Europe to register for since only 7 December and there have already been 100 000 applications from across our European continent. To my mind, this demonstrates an interest in a European designation for our companies and I look forward to many more applications when citizens can individually register in spring next year. As a proud Scot, I would like to see a specific Scottish presence in cyberspace and I believe your own country, Mr President, has shown us the way with the .puntCAT. designation, which you so recently achieved for Catalonia. I would like to lend my support to the .sco. campaign, as a wider presence for Scottish language and culture in cyberspace could only be helpful for us. I look forward to us joining you in cyberspace, if not geographically.
Kazakhstan elections - criticism of the OSCE
Nirj Deva (EPP-ED South East) Mr President, I recently monitored the presidential election in Kazakhstan with a group of senior British politicians and academics. I have some experience in these matters, having monitored the election in Indonesia last year, which was probably the most complicated election the world had ever seen. The British group came to the conclusion that the elections in Kazakhstan were free and without coercion. Several other groups from Belgium, France, the CIS, the USA and Indonesia came to the same conclusion. The spokesman of one of the opposition candidates said after the election that the opposition had blown it by concentrating on personalities rather than policies. We completely disagreed with the conclusions of the OSCE monitoring group, which produced an expensive, dismissive and academically pompous report condemning the election process. The OSCE also contradicted the previous statement of the Members of this House following last year's parliamentary election, which concluded that the Kazakh electorate is now sophisticated and beyond coercion or intimidation. I believe the OSCE report was influenced by its internal bureaucracy on the future chairmanship of the organisation. Bureaucrats should not attempt to play politics, nor try to dictate who the chairman should be. It will bring the OSCE into disrepute, a state of affairs not desired by this House. I would now call on this House to have an inquiry into the workings of the OSCE.
Fighting racism in football
Claude Moraes (PES London) Mr President, Italian colleagues will know that, a few days, ago, the international football player Marc Zoro had to leave the football pitch because of persistent racist abuse. This is something within the beautiful game, the European game, which is making the game ugly. Every day we see incidents across all our Member States of racist abuse: some of it organised, some of it isolated. There is no country in the European Union which is exempt from this phenomenon. UEFA and MEPs are determined to stamp it out. We have practical measures, working with the media, to stamp out this cancer from the game. Recently, Italian television played some of its matches in black and white rather than in colour to make the point to Italian society and to all of European society that we must not tolerate racism in football. We have the World Cup next year: let us send a unified message from this House that we will not tolerate the beautiful game becoming ugly.
Fire in Hemel Hempstead
Christopher Beazley (EPP-ED Eastern) Mr President, early yesterday morning I was present at the unprecedented fire near Hemel Hempstead. It is perhaps worth recording that not a single fatality was reported as a result of this extraordinary incident. I would hope that the Commission might find itself in a position to liaise with the British authorities when it comes to investigating what might have been the cause, so that any wisdom that emerges could be shared throughout our 25 Member States. Let me, on behalf of my constituents, send my thanks to the emergency services, firemen, the police and ambulance crews and indeed to local residents, who behaved, as you might imagine, with tremendous courage and dignity. Those British people who queued up at petrol stations, fearing that there might be a shortage of petrol, behaved with rather less dignity.
20051213IPR03568 One-minute speeches Monday 12 December
EN
1
PHOTO
20051121PHT02684.jpg
-//EP//TEXT CRE 20051212 TOC NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
