"Policies delayed are policies denied" - MEPs press for ambitious deal on EU budget
European Council
2005-12-15 - 15:28
One day before the European Council of Heads of State and Government start in Brussels, the European Parliament set out its position in a debate on the summit. The EU financial framework for 2007-2013 and the UK presidency of the EU were the key issues in the debate.
The President of the European Commission, José Manuel BARROSO opened the debate on the forthcoming European Council by recalling the challenges of globalisation addressed at the Hampton Council. Mr Barroso also stated that the Commission had recently concluded its revision of its sustainable development strategy, stating that all community policies would be guided by sustainable development.
The Union, the President said, could count on his " personal commitment " to ensuring sustainable development. He welcomed the success of the Montreal conference saying that it demonstrated the EU's leadership and had already " borne fruit ".
On growth and employment, Mr Barroso welcomed the development of national strategies taking into account the economic challenges already identified. The Commission, he said, would report in January on the strong and weak points of the national Member State strategies as well as recommendations on sharing best practice. President Barroso welcomed developments in the fight against global terrorism as well as the new European consensus on development.
Turning to the financial perspective (EU financial framework for 2007-2013), he said the summit was an " opportunity for Europe to show it could live up to citizens' expectations ". The Commission and the Parliament had set out its proposals and now it was time for the Council to reach an agreement. Any further delay would mean delay in implementation; as the President put it "policies delayed are policies denied ". He recalled that the Commission had set out proposals on how to move forward and reach an agreement. He welcomed Parliament and Member States' support for the Commission's proposals on the financial perspective.
Mr Barroso said that there needed to be an " ambitious Europe ". The Member States needed to provide the means for an enlarged European Union. The means for Europe to be able to react to the challenges of globalisation and immigration. Mr Barroso welcomed the proposed review clause on the entire EU budget on both the income and spending sides. The President strongly rejected any " parallel rules " on cohesion policy. The rules should be the same for all Member States and no division made for the EU-15 and the EU-10. Rules on the application for cohesion funds for competitiveness and net transfers should not be different. The rules should apply equally to all Member States. The proposed reforms of cohesion policy, he said, would also undermine sound financial management. President Barroso also strongly attacked the proposed cuts in the budget for administration - calling them " dogmatic " and, he said, that the proposals made zero allowance for the entry of Romania and Bulgaria into the EU and their impact on all the EU institutions.
Overall, he said that the Commission needed an ambitious financial perspective and he hoped that next week when he would be addressing the Parliament once more, that he would be explaining a budget agreement for the next seven years.
Douglas ALEXANDER , (UK Minister for Europe) for the UK Presidency of the Council welcomed the opportunity to have this " important and timely debate ". He said 2005 had been a " tumultuous year for the European Union " with the rejection of the EU Constitution by voters in France and the Netherlands, the growing challenges posed by globalisation and terrorist attacks across the continent. Mr Alexander said that Europe has responded by asserting itself in a global role through involvement in assistance missions in places such as Aceh, the Rafah border crossing, by organising Euromed Summit and continued support for the United Nations.
Turning to the forthcoming European Council, he noted that " key challenges " faced the EU after the failure of the June Council and that the Presidency had listened to MEPs in the ensuing debate. Mr Alexander said that first task of the UK Presidency was the financial perspectives for 2007 to 2013. He noted that the discussions which had followed the UK proposals issued on Monday 5 December had been " very challenging " and that the Presidency would be unveiling a revised proposal later today (Wed 7 Dec). However, Mr Alexander warned MEPs that "the room for negotiation is very narrow," and that the revised proposals would still be based on reviewing all budgetary expenditure in 2008-2009. He went on to say that the "fundamental prize" of substantial funding for the new member states would still be in place with 260 billion Euro available to them over the next seven years.
Regarding other issues on the forthcoming Council's agenda, he said the Presidency would continue the work of following-up from the informal Summit in October at Hampton Court - notably on boosting research, improving Europe's Universities and examining how migration can be harnessed to boost Europe's economy. The Presidency would also pursue economic reform which would help the EU's " jobs and growth " agenda. They would also continue to support measure to simplify EU legislation. In the fight against terrorism Mr Alexander said the Presidency would table a proposed action plan to "combat radicalisation and recruitment."
On EU development aid he noted that EU policy remained dedicated to the eradication of poverty and that at correct rates the EU would provide two-thirds of aid by 2015 - up from the correct 50%. In pursuing policies that aid development in Africa Mr Alexander said that " we must not rest on our laurels " but continue to focus policy on development. Finally, he repeated earlier EU condemnation of the comment by Iranian President Ahmadinejad about wanting to " wipe Israel of the map ."
European Parliament President Josep BORRELL regretted that the Council had not taken the opportunity to table its latest proposals to the European Parliament rather than wait until later. President Borrell said that it had diluted the importance of the debate.
Political group speakers
Hans-Gert POETTERING (DE) of the Conservative/Christian Democrat European Peoples Party (EPP-ED), welcomed the June speech in the Parliament from President of the Council Tony Blair but said " style alone is not enough. " He was also highly critical of the fact that the revised proposals on the 2007-2013 financial perspectives were going to be made today after the debate (12 noon) and said that the " parliament must be taken seriously ." Mr Poettering called for " cohesion and solidarity " in Europe, said the UK rebate was "no longer timely" and that the new member states must not end up picking up the tab for Europe. He did however strongly support a review of expenditure in 2008-2009 as advocated by the Presidency.
Martin SCHULZ (DE) for the Socialist PES praised the " right approach " of Commission President Barroso. He said that the EU and the Parliament cannot accept a situation that "undermines the cohesion and credibility of the Union." Mr Schultz went on express his frustration with the way every Presidency tries to talk Europe down. He drew a contrast between the " active " ("though not always correct") decisions taken by the Parliament and the Commission with the European Council "which is often the only Institution that does not agree." Finally he used the metaphor of the ship the Titanic, its Captain and the iceberg to describe Mr Blair's options in the days ahead, "the iceberg is staring him straight in the face. ...he can avoid it."
Graham WATSON (UK) for the Liberal ALDE Group was scathing about the wishes of some of the larger EU members in their attempts to limit spending; "they demand policies they are unwilling to support" he told MEPs. He said that the present proposal would "paralyse the EU's priorities" and that the budget was "not just for tomorrow but a framework that would bind us until 2013." Finally he said the position of his Group on the financial perspectives was that "no deal is better that a bad deal."
Daniel COHN-BENDIT (DE) for the Greens (VERTS/ALE) was critical of the "vacuum" of the UK Presidency which he said "spoke volumes" about their vision of Europe. Mr Cohn-Bendit went on to say that that the Presidency of the Union "was only as strong as the governments that hold it up." On Iran he reminded the House that its controversial President had been directly elected by the people.
Francis WURTZ (FR) for the GUE/NGL group said that there were high hopes for the UK presidency back in June, but six months later, the leaders of the political groups in Parliament had unanimously rejected the UK's budget proposals because of lack of solidarity. The Commission and the new Member States, he said, had also rejected the proposals. The UK could not argue that it championed enlargement given its proposed reduction in funding for the new Member States. He called the proposed budget a " Thatcherite deal " and rejected any comparison to the Marshall plan. The Council should find a way out of its " one-way street " of continually reducing the EU budget.
Nigel FARAGE (UK) for the IND/DEM group said that if the UK presidency had sat down and deliberately tried to plan " the family Christmas of hell " it could not have done a better job. The arguments over the budget were a prime example, he said, of how isolated and alienated the UK was in Europe. He said that Mr Blair did not have " the guts to turn-up to the debate ". Mr Farage said that the UK was spending £30 million per day on the EU and recalled that the budget had not been signed off by the Court of Auditors for the last 11 years. The only winner in the budget negotiations, he said, was Mr Barroso. He said that there would be probably be a deal on the budget, but the whole of the EU rebate would be put on the table in 2008. Mr Farage proposed extending the UK presidency for a further six months and, at the end of this period, it would be even more clear that " the UK is a square peg in a round European hole ".
Cristiana MUSCARDINI (IT) for the UEN group said that the EU needed a budget to face up to the challenges of globalisation. A proper debate needed to be carried out on the entire budget. Resources were needed in particular for the fight against terrorism.
Ashley MOTE (UK),a non-aligned MEP, said that he almost felt sorry for the UK Minister for Europe Douglas Alexander. The whole of the UK Presidency, he said, had been a disaster. He said that former UK Prime Minister Edward Heath " had lied through his teeth " on the EU. He said that the EU was not a parliamentary democracy but rather the new " Soviet " ruled by smoke and mirrors.
UK and Irish speakers in the debate
Timothy KIRKHOPE (EPP-ED, UK), leader of the British Conservatives in the European Parliament, said that the UK presidency had been unable to comprehend events and had not achieved what it set out to do. There was a " yawning gap " between the rhetoric of Mr Blair and reality. Mr Blair had succeeded in alienating central and Eastern European countries, failed to get any agreement on the reform of the CAP and reneged on his promise to defend the UK rebate. He also regretted that the UK's new budget proposals could not have been made to Parliament.
Bairbre de BRÚN (GUE/NGL UK) made a special plea for continued EU financial support for the peace process in the North of Ireland so that "the opportunity for peace in Northern Ireland is not squandered in 2006."
Gary TITLEY (PES, UK), leader of the UK Labour group in the European Parliament, welcomed the recent arrest of General Gotovina saying that it showed that Croatia was co-operating well with the ICTY in The Hague. He congratulated the UK Presidency for making progress on REACH, and reaching a deal on the " euro-vignette " and data retention directives. He also wanted to know what progress had been made on transparency in the Council. Mr Titley posed several questions including: which net payers apart from the UK are prepared to pay more? Which net recipients are willing to receive less? Which Member States wanted further reform of the CAP? Which recipients of CAP funding were willing to publish who receives the money? Which finance ministers were willing to sign a declaration of assurance on the spending of EU funds in Member States in order to avoid the annual lack of approval of the EU accounts by the Court of Auditors?
Responses to the debate
In his response to the following debate Mr ALEXANDER defended the level of consultation the UK Presidency has carried out - both with governments and 80 ministerial visits to the Parliament alone. He highlighted the development agenda and the significance of the recent Montreal conference on climate change. Speaking as a UK Minister, he stated that on the budget the UK " would pay its fair share but not more ."
In his response to the debate, Mr BARROSO said that there was a consensus in the Parliament, Council and Commission on the new EU development strategy that would be endorsed by the European Council and would strengthen the EU's leadership on aid and development.
He said that the debate had shown a lot of " disquiet " about the financial perspective and Mr Barroso recalled that there had to be an agreement by all three institutions. Turning to the UK presidency, he asked whether it was concern for the presidency that the leaders of Parliament's political group had unanimously rejected the UK's proposals. " Does it mean so little for the UK presidency ?" Mr Barroso said that it was the narrow-minded and nationalistic elements in the Parliament that supported the UK's proposals. There was a contradiction between a forward looking, modern and competitive Europe and the proposals of the UK presidency on the financial perspective. There was a gap between the policy objectives identified at Hampton Court and the proposed means to reach these objectives. Mr Barrsoso also warned that a lack of an agreement on the financial perspective could serve to undermine the World Trade talks. The new Member States would not support an open-liberal Europe if the EU could not demonstrate solidarity to the new Member States with a good deal on the financial perspective.
On the UK rebate, President Barroso said that the UK rebate would grow by 60 per cent if not adjusted at the expense of the poorest Member States. The EU had to signal that it stood by the new Member States in solidarity.
In order to reach a deal, there had to be a higher level of spending, a fairer deal for the new Member States, adaptation of the UK rebate in the light of enlargement, a review clause which would deal with both the income and spending sides of the budget and the use of Parliament's suggestions on flexibility including the adjustment fund for globalisation. If a deal was to be done, it would require statesmanship from all sides. Finally, he recalled that all institutions needed to agree in order to have a new inter-institutional agreement.
President of the European Parliament, Josep BORRELL said that what has been described as unacceptable on the financial perspective will not be accepted because if it were to be, it could act as a boomerang. The border line between what is and what is not acceptable was not small, he said.
20051215IPR03787
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
