Death of Phillip Whitehead MEP
Institutions
United Kingdom
2006-01-03 - 11:56
Phillip WHITEHEAD MEP who died on 31 December 2005
Phillip Whitehead, a highly regarded Labour MEP died on 31st December 2005 in Derbyshire. Mr Whitehead was the President of the influential Internal Market Committee in the European Parliament.
Phillip Whitehead was taken ill on New Year’s Eve at his home at Rowsley near Matlock, Derbyshire and was taken to hospital in Chesterfield where he later died. He was born in 1937 in Derbyshire and went to Lady Manners School, Bakewell and later Exeter College, Oxford where he read philosophy, politics and economics. He also became president of the Oxford Union. He later worked as a journalist and television producer, becoming editor of This Week and Panorama. In 1974 he won an Emmy Award for his TV series "The World at War".
He was elected Labour MP for Derby North from 1970-1983 and was Labour MEP since 1994. For five years he was chair of the European Parliamentary Labour Party. Following his re-election as MEP for the East Midlands in June 2004, he became chair of the European Parliament’s Internal Market and Consumer Protection Committee. In November 2005 he was personally presented with the Solidarity medal by Lech Walesa.
He leaves a widow Christine, two sons Joshua and Robert, a daughter Lucy and three grandchildren.
European Parliament President Josep Borrell addressed a message of condolences to the family of Mr Whitehead and will ask for the observation of a minute's silence at the beginning of the next part-session on Monday 16 January 2006 in Strasbourg. President Borrell said: " Phillip was a highly respected Member of this House for his hard work, both in the House and with his constituents, and for his strong and unwavering support for an active role for the UK in the European Union during 11 years service as an elected Member.
He will be fondly remembered by Members, both for bringing his experience and expertise on television to legislation on the media, for his defence of the rights of consumers, and for his work in helping to make the historic enlargement to Central and Eastern Europe a reality.
As a lifelong campaigner on consumer rights, he was deservedly promoted in this legislature to Chair of the powerful Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection. In this role, he will be remembered for the wisdom, political skill and good humour he brought to bear in dealing with the controversial and complex Services Directive.
He will be missed by all of us . "
Gary Titley , Leader of the European Parliamentary Labour Party said: "Phillip was one of the most respected members of the European Parliament. He had a fine analytical mind which combined with his vast experience in politics and the media made him a formidable parliamentarian. His sagacity, open mindedness and sense of fair play won him the respect of all sides of the political spectrum. Phillip had a lifelong commitment to the Labour Movement and to improving the lives of his constituents. He was a passionate European who believed that Europe's nations should work together for the prosperity, stability and peace of the continent. "All in the European Parliamentary Labour Party regard him as a friend. His death leaves a huge void which we will never properly fill."
20060103IPR04015 Phillip WHITEHEAD MEP
EN
1
PHOTO
20060103PHT04013.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.phillipwhiteheadmep.net/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
