Complete the Doha round on time, say parliamentarians
External/international trade
2005-12-15 - 14:04
The final declaration of the Hong Kong session of the Parliamentary Conference on the WTO urges the ministers taking part in the Hong Kong talks strongly to confirm their commitment to the conclusion of the Doha Development Round by the end of 2006.
Nearly 400 members of parliaments from 69 countries, including 30 MEPs, took part in the Parliamentary Conference, which is jointly organised by the European Parliament and the Inter-Parliamentary Union. The declaration stresses their concern not least at the insufficient progress made in dealing with all key sectors, particularly the major development issues of utmost interest to developing countries - especially the Least Developed Countries.
"We urge WTO members to bear in mind that the very lives and livelihoods of literally hundreds of millions of persons depend on the achievement of balanced, fair and equitable results in multilateral negotiations. The attainment of the Millennium Development Goals, whose implementation is already at risk, would be further jeopardised by protracted blockage," says the declaration.
On agriculture, the parliamentarians say that from a standpoint of development of the poorest countries, "we must see substantial improvements in market access and the phasing out in parallel by all countries, by the dates agreed by WTO members at the end of 2006, of all forms of agricultural export subsidies." There should be special treatment for sensitive products, but also duty-free and quota-free market access for LDC products.
They say there is also a need for "substantial progress " on non-agricultural market access, and for a much greater effort from all WTO members in the field of trade in services, with as much transparency and flexibility as possible. While trade in services can be important in transferring knowledge to developing countries, liberalisation of public services should be approached with caution, specifically when it comes to health, education and services meeting the basic needs of the population.
Among other points, the declaration also emphasises the importance of environmental protection and calls for the WTO process to be compatible with the obligations under multilateral environmental agreements. The parliamentarians underscore the importance of making the WTO a truly universal organisation and support those countries currently in the process of accession. Finally, they reiterate their view that "the days when trade policy was the exclusive domain of the executive branch are over." They say governments should explicitly refer, in the outcome document of the current meeting, to the need to enhance WTO transparency by associating parliaments closely with its activities. The declaration will now be presented to WTO Director General Pascal Lamy.
20051215IPR03763
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
