Parliament urged to seek answers from Member States on CIA detention centres
Human rights
2006-01-05 - 14:32
The European Parliament can play an important role in the investigation into the alleged existence of CIA detention flights and centres in the EU by getting information from the Member States, MEPs were told on Wednesday. At a meeting of the Human Rights Subcommittee, Lotte Leicht, director of Human Rights Watch in Brussels, called for the EP to make full use of its powers of parliamentary scrutiny in order to obtain answers to questions raised by the secretary-general of the Council of Europe.
Parliament's Conference of Presidents has proposed that a temporary committee be set up to investigate the alleged existence of CIA detention centres in Europe. The full Parliament is expected to decide at the Strasbourg plenary session later this month whether to approve this proposal.
Ms Leicht said her organisation was shocked by the fact that " Europe only woke up when these issues were brought home, whereas in fact kidnappings and torture by the US authorities have been going on for years ". She added that Human Rights Watch had been able to document 26 people who have been held in secret locations since 2002. She stressed that if the EU, and especially the European Parliament, did not address this issue, it would have no legitimacy or authority to criticise human rights violations elsewhere in the world.
In reply to a question put by Raül Romeva i Rueda (Greens/EFA, ES), Ms Leicht confirmed the names of Poland and Romania as countries which were believed to have CIA detention centres, referring specifically to the Szymany airbase in Poland. She said that the evidence, albeit circumstantial, was quite clear. It consisted of statements made by detainees who have been released from Guantánamo Bay, flight records and information from security sources. She added that there was a clear allegation against a third country, but that this had so far not been corroborated.
Although there is ample evidence of "renditions", such as the kidnapping of a Syrian from Milan, Charles Tannock (EPP-ED, UK) said it was doubtful that the European Parliament would be able to extract information from intelligence services, given the fact that not even national parliaments were able to get this information. Richard Howitt (PES, UK) argued that the Parliament should avoid duplication of work done by the Council of Europe and that the two should therefore work closely together.
Subcommittee on Human Rights
In the chair: Hélène Flautre (Greens/EFA, FR)
20060105IPR04102
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
