The Week Ahead 16 - 22 January 2006
Institutions
2006-01-13 - 10:17
The weekly summary of the main events at the European Parliament over the next seven days is now available
Strasbourg plenary session
Port services. Parliament is due to give its verdict at first reading on the hotly disputed proposals to inject greater competition into the port services industry. The Transport Committee has, unusually, not reached a clear position on this legislation. After adopting compromise amendments it rejected the final report by a very narrow majority. At the same time it approved a draft legislative resolution which leaves the Commission proposal unchanged (debate Tuesday, vote Wednesday).
Austrian presidency. MEPs will have a debate with the Austrian presidency on its work programme for the next six months. In this context a resolution will be adopted on the financial perspective for 2007-2013 following the deal reached at the European Council in Brussels in December. Parliament's President Josep Borrell will discuss the financial perspective at a trialogue with Commission President José Manuel Barroso and Austrian Chancellor Wolfgang Schüssel (Wednesday) .
Future of Europe. The House will discuss the future of Europe and vote on a report containing proposals to relaunch the constitutional debate. The report is an initial contribution by Parliament to the "period of reflection" decreed by EU governments following the no votes on the draft constitutional treaty in France and the Netherlands (debate Wednesday, vote Thursday) .
Temporary committees. The full Parliament's approval is needed for the establishment of a committee of inquiry into the Equitable Life case in the UK as well as a temporary committee to investigate allegations that the CIA has used European countries for the transport and illegal detention of prisoners (votes on mandates - Wednesday; votes on membership of committees - Thursday) .
Gas. Following the crisis between Russia and Ukraine over gas supplies, MEPs will discuss the security of the EU's energy sources with the Council and Commission (debate Tuesday) .
20060113IPR04271 For full details see 'The Agenda'
EN
1
LINK
/news/expert/event_top_page/default/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
