Highlights of Strasbourg plenary session 16-19 January 2006
Institutions
2006-01-16 - 09:10
MEPs will debate issues from the Austrian EU Presidency to alleged CIA camps
During its first plenary of the year, the European Parliament has a lot of big issues on the agenda including the constitution and the EU's long-term budget, both of which will doubtless be discussed when MEPs debate the Austrian Presidency programme with Chancellor Wolfgang Schüssel. Also on the agenda are the alleged CIA detention centres, a report on the trafficking of women and plans by the European Commission to liberalise services at Europe's ports.
The session opens on Monday with a Commission statement on homophobia in Europe, with reports on EU citizenship and the trafficking of women and children also on the agenda. MEPs will then have their first opportunity formally to react to December's WTO ministerial conference, as they debate a Commission statement on the subject. Tuesday sees the first reading debate on the Commission's latest plans to liberalise port services in Europe - the last attempt was thrown out by MEPs and the issue remains highly controversial. Introducing greater openness to the EU's environmental activity by applying the Aarhus Convention comes to second reading, while the results of two (third reading) conciliation agreements with Council come to their final vote - the issues concerned are the handling of mining waste and bathing water standards. On Wednesday, Austrian Federal Chancellor Wolfgang Schüssel, the new President-in-Office of the Council, will set out his agenda for the next six months to MEPs. One of the Austrian Presidency's aims is to move towards agreement on the future of the EU constitution project, and MEPs will be debating just that when they consider an own initiative report - by Johannes VOGGENHUBER (Greens/EFA, AT) and Andrew DUFF (ALDE, UK) - giving Parliament's assessment of how the debate should be taken forward. Wednesday will also see a debate on the report from Charles TANNOCK (EPP-ED, UK) on the European neighbourhood policy. Thursday's sitting opens with a debate on the Lisbon Strategy from a gender perspective, followed by an oral question to the Commission on disability and development issues. The session will close, as usual, with three short debates on current human rights issues from around the world. Following the approval by the Conference of Presidents, Parliament will vote on proposals for the composition and terms of reference for two special parliamentary committees - one a committee of inquiry to examine the Equitable Life affair, the other a temporary committee to look into claims that the CIA has illegally held prisoners in EU countries - both need the approval of the plenary to be set up. MEPs will also get the chance to vote on a resolution on the European Council's proposals for the next Financial Perspective. Finally, Commission and Council statements on security of energy supply are likely to be added to Wednesday's agenda.
20060113STO04265 Briefing - detailed information on the Strasbourg plenary session 16-19 January 2006 Agenda of the Strasbourg plenary session 16-19 January 2006
EN
1
PHOTO
20060113PHT04261.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/omk/sipade3?PROG=AGENDA&L=EN&QUERY=ALL-SIT&NAV=S&REF=2006-01
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20051219BRI03841 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
