Ending bear bile farming in China
Human rights
United Kingdom
2006-01-17 - 12:38
Ending bear bile farming - UK MEPs lead the way
A campaign to end the practice of bear bile farming in China has received the support of more than half the total number of MEPs, which means that the written declaration supporting the campaign has now become European Parliament policy. The MEPs are: Neil Parish (Conservative, South West), Peter Skinner (Labour, South East) and Terry Wynn (Labour, North West).
UK MEPs have put further pressure on the Chinese government to end the torture of bears in advance of the 2008 Olympics. MEPs have garnered support from over half the European Parliament to call on the Chinese government to end the barbaric practice of bile extraction.
News of the declaration prompted the Chinese government to hold a press conference defending bile extraction but the MEPs want the Chinese to ban it completely. Despite the availability of herbal and synthetic alternatives, bear bile is still used in traditional Chinese medicines and occasionally found by police in raids on Chinatown in London.
MEPs have secured the signatures of over half the European Parliament - 377 MEPs - to take forward their written declaration on bear farming to the European Commission to demand action.
Condemning the practice Peter Skinner MEP said: "These farms are still legal in China, and the barbaric torture continues. We intend to keep this issue alive so the Chinese government will have to close the farms before the international press descends on them in 2008.
Neil Parish MEP said: "I am delighted MEPs have given this resolution their strong backing. The whole European Parliament will send a clear message from Strasbourg today demanding that China halts this barbaric and totally unnecessary trade. "Bear bile farms are not illegal in China if operated under license and if anyone were to watch some of the videos I've seen, they would be horrified by the brutality.
Jill Robinson CBE, the CEO of Animals Asia said: "This groundbreaking declaration shows the overwhelming support from the European Parliament for our Government partners in China who are helping Animals Asia to close down bear farms across the country. We now implore the Central Government to take a firm stance against this barbaric industry and to announce a date when it will end once and for all."
Asiatic Black Bears (Moon bears) are incarcerated in tiny wire cages with rusting metal catheters implanted in their abdomens through which bile is extracted for use in traditional medicines.
There are more than 7,000 bears imprisoned in cages on over 200 farms across China. Moon bears can expect to live up to 30 years in the wild, but life expectancy falls to 10-12 years for caged bears. Bear bile is illegal throughout the European Union.
Written declaration on rising international concern over the farming of bear bile in China adopted with 377 signatures The European Parliament, – having regard to Rule 116 of its Rules of Procedure, A. acknowledging that 7002 Asiatic Black Bears (Moon Bears) are currently 'milked' for their bile in China; whereas these bears are endangered, listed under Appendix I of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Flora and Fauna (CITES), B. whereas new 'humane' bile extraction methods used continue to cause agonising suffering and the death of bears on Chinese farms, with at least one new method directly contravening new regulations, C. welcoming the acknowledgement by eminent Traditional Chinese Medicine Practitioners of the existence of at least 54 herbal alternatives to bear bile, together with a synthetic version, D. welcoming the action taken by the Chinese Government since 2000 in closing over 40 bear farms and confiscating 188 bears into the care of the Animals Asia Foundation (AAF), E. noting serious concern, internationally and within the Chinese media, public and Government, at the fact that such a cruel and uncivilised practice exists, 1. Calls on the Chinese Government to consider this grave worldwide concern as the 2008 Beijing Olympics approach, taking a clear stance on bear farming, initiating a countrywide ban forthwith on the breeding of bears on farms and setting a time-limit for the ending of bear farming; 2. Requests that the Chinese Government liaise with the AAF in accelerating the closure of all bear farms through programmes benefiting bears currently held captive and farmers reliant on the industry; calls also for cooperation with the AAF in developing far-reaching education programmes to deter consumers of bear bile; 3. Instructs its President to forward this declaration, together with the names of the signatories, to the Council, the Commission, the Member States and the relevant Chinese authorities.
20060116IPR04321 Peter Skinner MEP (Labour South East) Neil Parish MEP (Conservative South West) Terry Wynn MEP (Labour North West) Animals Asia - Hong Kong-based charity, dedicated to ending cruelty and restoring respect for all animals in Asia.
EN
1
PHOTO
20060117PHT04395.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/members/expert/alphaOrder/view.do?language=EN&id=2081
EN
3
LINK
/members/expert/alphaOrder/view.do?language=EN&id=4528
EN
4
LINK
/members/expert/alphaOrder/view.do?language=EN&id=1295
EN
5
LINK
http://www.animalsasia.org/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
