MEPs bitter about sugar reform - demand more moderate price cuts
Agriculture
2006-01-19 - 13:25
White sugar prices should be cut by no more than 30% and restructuring aid should be made available for the most deeply affected workers in the sector. Sugar imports from third countries should be monitored and new outlet sources such as bio-ethanol found for sugar production. These were the main points in a report adopted by the European Parliament on sugar reform.
The European Parliament adopted three reports by Jean-Claude FRUTEAU (PES, FR) on the European Commission's proposal for a reform of the community's sugar sector. It calls for a more moderate reduction in the price of white sugar (30% instead of 39%), raw sugar (26% instead of 36%) and quota beet (11% over four years instead of 24% over two years). MEPs also demand that the intervention mechanism stay in place during the four transitional years, to help prevent disruption to the industry.
MEPs also call for stricter control of sugar imports into the Community. In order to avoid triangular trade that would take advantage of the EU's intervention mechanism, the House demands to limit the quantities of exported sugar from least developed countries (LDCs) to be the difference between their annual production and annual consumption. Parliament also approved a measure to give the Commission power to suspend imports. This six-month suspension would be possible for any country whose sugar imports increase substantially from one year to the next.
The House calls on the Commission to "carry out a study in order to identify transitional outlets for sugar surpluses for energy use," and strongly emphasised "bio-ethanol for energy purposes" as an alternative use of European sugar production.
In a report on the support schemes for sugar, Parliament suggests making funds available for switching from sugar to different crops, in the amount of 80 euros per hectare with a maximum of 2.2 million hectares eligible for such aid. In addition, Members approved an amendment asking for an extra 200 million euros of annual financial assistance to ACP countries who will be affected by the price cuts.
In order to ensure that the most vulnerable receive the majority of the community aid, the House called for "at least 50%" of the total restructuring aid proposed by the Commission to be made available for sugar beet and chicory growers. Responding to a question by Friedrich-Wilhelm GRAEFE ZU BARINGDORF (Greens/EFA, DE) the Commission representative indicated that a minimum amount of 10% of the restructuring funds going to sugar farmers and machinery workers would be acceptable, with the possibility of Member States providing additional aid.
In November of 2005, Council had reached a political agreement on a 36% cut in the price of white sugar. The Parliament "considers it unacceptable that the EU Council of Ministers announced a political agreement on sugar reform, with far-reaching implications for the future of the industry in many Member States, without first having obtained the opinion of the European Parliament. The Council may never reach a final political agreement before consultation of the European Parliament has been completed."
20060117IPR04405 Common organisations of the markets in the sugar sector Common rules for direct support schemes under the common agricultural policy and establishing certain support schemes for farmers Restructuring the sugar industry
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5260112
EN
2
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5260122
EN
3
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5260132
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
