MEPs call for a Constitution by 2009
Constitution
2006-01-19 - 14:51
EP calls for a Constitution to enter into force by 2009
The European Parliament has given its view on how to overcome the constitutional crisis. The report adopted argues that no further enlargement, after Romania and Bulgaria, is possible on the basis of the Treaty of Nice and calls for a Constitution for 2009, to ensure a democratic and effective EU. MEPs also stress the need of a broad public debate on the future of European integration guided by common topics and with clear political goals.
After four months of impassioned debate following the French and Dutch no votes, the EP launched a Europe-wide debate to find a solution to the deadlock. Responding to the decision by the European Council in June 2005 to set in train a period of dialogue or reflection, MEPs stressed the need to involve all European citizens in the process of building Europe's future. Members also criticised the Council and Commission for failing to ensure that the reflection period has a clear focus. By approving, by 385 in favour, 125 against and 51 abstentions, the report by Andrew DUFF (ALDE, UK) and Johannes VOGGENHUBER (Greens/EFA, AT), MEPs want to ensure that the new debate delivers tangible results. Comprehensive institutional reform is seen as necessary to ensure that an enlarged EU functions properly, since the Nice Treaty is inappropriate for the continuation of the integration process. MEPs also criticise the suggestion that a core group of Member States could start implementing reforms, leaving the other countries behind. The EP also confirmed its endorsement of the Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe and asked the Council to declare its commitment for a settlement on the future of Europe. Different outcomes of the debate are envisaged in the report, from abandoning the constitutional project to continuing with ratification, from seeking to clarify the present text to complete re-drafting. Although Members agree that it is important not to pre-empt the outcome of such a debate, there were differences of views among the groups that supported the report. Richard CORBETT (PES, UK), and Alexander STUBB (EPP-ED, FI), shadow rapporteurs for their groups, considered that a positive outcome of the debate would be to keep the current text, although only if accompanied by significant measures. Eventually, these measures could be declarations or extra protocols to be added to the constitutional Treaty. On the contrary, the two co-rapporteurs support the idea of keeping only the constitutional core of the current text and use it as a basis to substantially improve the Treaty. Finally, Members opted for the first alternative. Format for the new public debate Members agree that, to increase public participation, the proposed European debate should be guided by common topics and have clear political goals. The Parliament wants to play a leading role in the debate. As part of the process, MEPs are calling for a number of conferences and meetings to be held as a way of advancing the debate on the future of the EU. These would be known as Parliamentary Forums and Citizens' Forums. Moreover, the EP Constitutional Affairs committee will prepare a series of 'European Papers' to be used as basis for discussion. Under the proposed schedule, the Parliamentary Forums, a number of conferences between national parliaments and the EP, would be held in Spring this year. The first forum is scheduled for 9 May 2006. These events would also provide an opportunity to hear reports from the French and Dutch parliaments about their suggestions for a way forward. At the same time, to ensure public participation, the EP asks to Member States to hold a large number of Citizens Forums, i.e. public meetings and media debates at national and local level. The two co-rapporteurs stressed that all these debates should be structured around specific topics to deliver clear results. They should involve political parties, employers' and employees' representatives, civil society, the academic community and the media. According to the approved report, the public is concerned more about the context, i.e. the EU's political role and policies, than the constitutional text itself. MEPs believe the main issues on which the debate should focus are: the integration process, the EU's global role, the European social and economic model, security and justice and the financing of the Union. Therefore the EP asks for the prolongation of the period of reflection. In fact, after taking into account the results of the debate, a clear decision on the way forward should be taken by second half of 2007. The European Parliament will monitor the whole process and summarise the proposals put forward during the debates.
20060119IPR04542
EN
1
PHOTO
20060111PHT04200.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
