The Week Ahead 23 - 29 January 2006
Institutions
2006-01-20 - 11:26
The weekly summary of the main events at the European Parliament over the next seven days is now available
Committee week - Brussels
Lisbon strategy. Commission President Barroso and Commissioner Verheugen will present to the Conference of Presidents the integrated economic and employment guidelines for the Lisbon strategy, immediately after their approval by the Commission (Wednesday).
Future funding of the EU . Following the rejection by MEPs in Strasbourg last Wednesday of the proposed financial perspective for 2007-2013, a trialogue of Parliament, Council and Commission is scheduled for Monday 23 January to seek common ground. The EP Budgets Committee will discuss the outcome of the trialogue at its meeting on Tuesday.
Bird flu . Following latest developments in Turkey, Commissioner Kyprianou will update the Environment Committee on the bird flu situation (Monday). The Commission will also report to the Agriculture Committee on this topic (Thursday).
Austrian presidency . Parliament's committees will hear details of the Austrian presidency's plans for the next six months from various ministers, including Vice-Chancellor Gorbach and Foreign Minister Plassnik.
Palestinian elections . A delegation of 27 MEPs will be in the Palestinian territories to observe the legislative elections of 25 January (Monday to Thursday).
Budget discharge . MEPs will continue their examination of the EU's accounts for 2004 with Commissioner Louis Michel and members of the Court of Auditors (Wednesday and Thursday).
Enlargement strategy . The Foreign Affairs Committee votes on a report which gives a global assessment of the state of play in candidate countries and potential candidate countries (Thursday).
Parliament and the environment . A declaration committing Parliament to meeting European eco-management standards in its own activities will be signed by President Josep Borrell and Secretary-General Julian Priestley (Tuesday).
20060120IPR04550 For full details see 'The Agenda'
EN
1
LINK
/news/expert/event_top_page/default/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
