The Week Ahead - 20-26 February 2006
Institutions
2006-02-18 - 12:53
Committee week - Brussels
Iran. Iranian Foreign Minister Manouchehr Mottaki will appear before the Foreign Affairs Committee a few days after the adoption by Parliament of a resolution on Iran's nuclear programme (Monday). The committee also has a meeting with Amre Moussa, Secretary General of the Arab League, to discuss relations between the EU and the Arab League and the situation in the Middle East (Wednesday).
The euro. Amid speculation that another interest rate rise is on the way, the Economic Committee will quiz European Central Bank President Jean-Claude Trichet about the future of monetary policy (Monday). The committee also holds a hearing on ways of raising growth in the euro area (Monday and Tuesday).
Food standards. Traditional food specialities and the labelling of regional food products are the subject of two reports to be adopted by the Agriculture Committee (Tuesday). The nominee for director of the European Food Safety Agency undergoes a hearing at the Environment Committee (Thursday).
CIA. The temporary committee investigating allegations that the CIA illegally transported prisoners around Europe will hear from representatives of the Council of Europe, Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch (Thursday).
Protection of children. The Civil Liberties Committee will vote on proposals for the EU-wide recognition of sanctions imposed for sexual offences against children (Wednesday).
Armed conflicts and the use of force. The Women's Rights Committee hosts a hearing on the situation of women in armed conflicts (Monday), while the Security and Defence Subcommittee will hear experts' views on the use of armed force by the EU in international affairs (Thursday).
President Borrell. Parliament's President Borrell makes an official visit to Slovenia, where he will meet the president and prime minister and address the National Assembly (Monday to Thursday).
N.B. During the week beginning 27 February there are no parliamentary activities. The next edition of The Week Ahead will be published on 1 March.
20060218IPR05363 For more details, please read our Press Agenda.
EN
1
LINK
/news/expert/event_by_week/8-2006/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
