President Borrell on the events following the publication of cartoons
Institutions
2006-02-07 - 10:59
Following the events surrounding the publication of a series of cartoons and the attacks on several European embassies in some Muslim countries, Josep Borrell, President of the European Parliament and of Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly (EMPA), made the following statement:
‘The European Union upholds the values on which it was founded. Freedom of expression is one of those values, but this must be within the boundaries of respect for the religious beliefs and cultural sensitivities of others.
Freedom of expression must avoid any insult, especially by those who are specifically responsible for upholding its values. I understand that, for many Muslims, the cartoons that have been published are an insult to their beliefs.
I wholeheartedly condemn the use of violence and incitement to violence against the property and citizens of the EU. I also consider it unacceptable that the publication of the material concerned has been exploited so as to stir up violent responses.’
During a meeting of EMPA’s Bureau held in Brussels on 6 February, Josep Borrell pointed out that ‘dialogue, cooperation and mutual respect are the pillars of our Alliance of Civilisations, and the only ways to settle differences between those involved’ .
Mr Borrell emphasised ‘the importance of the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly as a forum for constructive dialogue between the parties concerned’ . These events are to be discussed at a full session of EMPA on 26-27 March in Brussels.
Statement by the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly Bureau
The EMPA Bureau adopted a statement in which it strongly deplores the offence given to the religious feelings of the Muslim community, calls for a responsible use of the freedom of the press and of expression and condemns any disrespect for religions as well as any attempt to incite religious hatred, xenophobic or racial remarks. At the same time, the Bureau strongly condemns the use of violence against European diplomatic representations and calls for the return to a peaceful and constructive atmosphere of dialogue.
The EMPA brings together MEPs and their counterparts from ten countries around the Mediterranean (Algeria, Morocco, Tunisia, Egypt, Israel, Jordan, the Palestinian Authority, Lebanon, Syria and Turkey) as part of the Euro-Mediterranean partnership.
20060207IPR05036
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
