Iranian nuclear dispute: MEPs support UN Security Council involvement
External relations
2006-02-15 - 12:54
International tension grows over Iran's nuclear programme
Tension is growing between Iran and the international community over Iran's decision to resume its nuclear research programme, and due to lack of confidence that the nuclear programme is exclusively meant for peaceful purposes. In a resolution adopted on Wednesday, the European Parliament affirms that this issue must be resolved in accordance with the rules of international law, and considers that the involvement of the UN Security Council is a necessary step.
Parliament reiterates its condemnation of President Ahmadinejad ’s threatening remarks against Israel, which are not conducive to trust in the intentions of the Iranian Government to adopt a peaceful and constructive role in the Middle East. MEPs criticise in consequence President Ahmadinejad’s recent meeting with representatives of the Palestinian Islamic Jihad during his trip to Syria and demands that Iran immediately cease all its support for terrorist groups. The House expresses its deep concern regarding the present attitude of the Iranian authorities to Iran’s nuclear programme, notably to the removal of seals at several nuclear installations, and its decision to resume enrichment-related activities.
Parliament reiterates its call on the Government of Iran to refrain from any threat against any state and to act with respect for the principles of the United Nations Charter. The House supports the IAEA Board of Governors’ decision to ask the Director General of the IAEA to report to the UN Security Council and elaborate on all the reports and resolutions adopted by the IAEA in relation to this issue.
MEPs consider that the involvement of the UN Security Council, as proposed by the IAEA, constitutes a necessary step in order to assess the present situation and agrees with the Council’s conclusions which call for a strengthening of the role of the IAEA. Parliament takes the view that this move should prevent a further deterioration of the present situation.
The House considers that, in accordance with the IAEA resolution, it is necessary for Iran to re‑establish full and sustained suspension of all enrichment-related and reprocessing activities, to reconsider the construction of a research reactor moderated by heavy water, to ratify promptly and resume full implementation of the Additional Protocol and, in general terms, to implement the transparency measures requested by the IAEA Director General.
The House stresses the importance of cooperation with the USA, Russia, China and non-aligned countries in order to consider complementary concepts with a view to achieving a comprehensive agreement with Iran on its nuclear facilities and their use which takes account of Iran’s security concerns.
Finally, MEPs call on Iran to take advantage of its enormous energy reserves and the technological know‑how which exists in the country in order to invest in the development of renewable energies and the modern and rational use of fossil energies.
2006-02-15 20060210IPR05174
EN
1
PHOTO
20060214PHT05252.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
