Cartoons controversy: President Borrell calls for halt to violence and return to dialogue
Fundamental rights
2006-02-09 - 10:02
EP President Josep Borrell calls for dialogue.
MEPs will discuss the controversy surrounding the publication of cartoons satirising the Muslim Prophet Muhammad and the ensuing violence during their plenary session in Strasbourg next week. The events will also be discussed by the European Parliament and counterparts from 10 Mediterranean countries, including Lebanon, Tunisia, Syria and Morocco in March.
Commenting on the issue Tuesday, European Parliament President Josep Borrell said, "The European Union upholds the values on which it was founded. Freedom of expression is one of those values, but this must be within the boundaries of respect for the religious beliefs and cultural sensitivities of others." He asked for "violence to cease and to allow time for dialogue and cooperation" and pointed out that "dialogue, cooperation and mutual respect are the pillars of our Alliance of Civilisations, and the only way to settle differences between those involved".
Discussions with Mediterranean Counterparts in March
The cartoons were first published by a Danish newspaper and reprinted in other newspapers and have led to violent anti-Danish protests across the Muslim world, resulting in deaths and attacks on European embassies. Mr Borrell said "freedom of expression must be exercised responsibly, especially by those who are specifically responsible for upholding its values. I understand that, for many Muslims, the cartoons that have been published are an insult to their beliefs." But he condemned the use of violence and incitement to violence against the property and citizens of the EU. He also considered it unacceptable that the publication of the material concerned has been exploited to stir up violent responses.
The President will visit the northern town of Chefchauen in Morocco on 10-11 February to participate in an event bringing together Spanish and Moroccan representatives of civil society, as part of his aim to "establish dialogue and understanding."
Mr Borrell is also currently head of the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly (EMPA), which brings together MEPs and their counterparts from 10 countries around the Mediterranean (Algeria, Morocco, Tunisia, Egypt, Israel, Jordan, the Palestinian Authority, Lebanon, Syria and Turkey). The EMPA Bureau issued a statement 6 February, after a meeting in Brussels, strongly deploring the offence given to the religious feelings of the Muslim community, calling for a responsible use of the freedom of the press and of expression and condemning disrespect for religion as well as any attempt to incite religious hatred, xenophobic or racial remarks. It also strongly condemned the use of violence against European diplomatic representations and called for the return to a peaceful and constructive atmosphere of dialogue. The EMPA will discuss the events during a meeting on 26-27 March in Brussels.
20060209STO05090 The President of the European Parliament: Euro med website:
EN
1
PHOTO
20060208PHT05087.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/president/Presidents_old/president_borrell/defaulten.htm
EN
3
LINK
/president/Presidents_old/president_borrell/euromed/en/default.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
