Strasbourg Plenary 13-16 February 2006 - Debates and votes
Institutions
2006-02-20 - 16:19
Summary of various debates and results of main votes from Strasbourg plenary.
Free movement of services: MEPs take a big step forward
President of the Republic of Austria addresses Parliament
Iranian nuclear dispute - MEPs support UN Security Council involvement
Cartoons controversy: respect freedom of expression and religious beliefs, say MEPs
MEPs call on Member States to open up their labour markets
Tighter control on welfare of chickens kept for meat production
Strategic guidelines for rural development 2007-2013
MEPs support the retention of the Shetland fisheries box for a further three years
Confiscation of vehicles by Greek authorities - MEPs call for compliance with EU law
20060209BKG05095
Free movement of services: MEPs take a big step forward
After two years of work, the European Parliament adopted, by a large majority, a first-reading report on legislation opening up the EU single market for services, a major issue for the Union. The Commission's initial proposal has been thoroughly revised. The objective however remains the same: the elimination of obstacles to the free movement of services. Parliament also clarified that the directive will not alter workers' social rights nor will it change existing labour law.
The legislative resolution was adopted by 394 votes in favour to 215 against, with 33 abstentions. Rapporteur Evelyne GEBHARDT (PES, DE) said during the debate preceding the vote, "We are dealing with the most important piece of EU legislation apart from the Constitution. Services in Europe must be as free and open as goods and capital."
From "country of origin principle" to "freedom to provide services clause"
The crucial "country of origin principle" has been dropped from the key article. In its place MEPs have put a clause with the title "freedom to provide services". Parliament also voted to limit the scope of the directive. It now covers fewer services than the original text. MEPs expanded the list of reasons allowing Member States to restrict the freedom of a service provider from another Member State to provide services on their territory. The text also now clearly says that the directive does not affect labour law in the Member States.
The clear result will strengthen Parliament's position vis-à-vis the Commission and Council. Commission President José Manuel BARROSO has already announced that the Commission will revise its original proposal as quickly as possible on the basis of the text adopted by Parliament.
If the free movement of services in the European market - a principle laid down in the EC Treaty - is to become a reality, certain barriers must be removed, for example the obstacles preventing a service provider from setting up shop in another Member State or imposing an obligation on the provider to possess an identity document issued by its competent authorities specific to the exercise of a service activity
Compromise between Socialists and EPP-ED political groups
A terminological, legal and political battle resulted from differences between political groups on the aim of the directive. A few days before the plenary session, a compromise was reached between the PES and the EPP-ED which overturns the approach proposed by the Commission. This compromise was backed by the Parliament in its first-reading vote.
In the key article of the text adopted by Parliament, devoted to the freedom to provide services, neither the country of origin nor the host country are now specifically mentioned.
The rule of the freedom to provide services replaces the country of origin principle. It requires the Member States to respect the right of the service provider to supply services and to guarantee the provider "free access to and free exercise of a service activity within its territory". This guarantee is underpinned by a ban on a number of obstacles to the free movement of services. For example, in general it will no longer be possible to require a service provider to open an office in the country where he/she is temporarily providing a service nor to prevent him/her from setting up "certain infrastructure" in that country. The provider must not be forced to register with a professional body nor be banned from using his normal equipment at work. In addition, Member States must not apply "contractual arrangements between the provider and the recipient which prevent or restrict service provision by the self-employed".
Thus on the one hand the text bans the Member States from erecting obstacles to the free movement of services. But, at the same time, it stipulates grounds which would allow Member States to limit this freedom through national rules. These grounds are public policy, public security, environmental protection and public health.
Member States will also continue to apply their own rules on conditions of employment, including those laid down through collective bargaining agreements. Nevertheless the requirements imposed on cross-border service providers by the Member States using the above justifications must comply with the principles of the treaty: non-discrimination (for example on grounds of nationality), necessity (public policy, public security or protection of health or the environment) and proportionality (the requirements must be appropriate for achieving the objective).
In certain provisions of the text adopted by the Parliament the reference is made to "overriding reasons relating to the public interest" which allow the Member State to limit, on its territory, the freedom to provide services both by the way of permanent or temporary establishment.
Lastly, the text adopted by the Parliament opens up the prospect of harmonisation of national legislation on the provision of services five years after the directive enters into force.
What's covered and what's not by the proposed directive
The following sectors are covered by the proposed directive:
Services of general economic interest, as defined by the each Member State, such as postal services, water supply, electricity, waste treatment are included in the scope of the directive. Nevertheless these services are not subject to the rule of freedom to provide services. Consequently, only the stipulations relating to establishment in another Member State would be applied there and not those relating to the temporary cross-border services' provision. Business services such as management consultancy, certification and testing, facilities management (including office maintenance and security), advertising, services of intellectual property rights and the services of commercial agents.
Services provided both to businesses and to consumers, including real estate services such as estate agencies, construction (including the services of architects), distributive trades, the organisation of trade fairs, car rental, and travel agencies. Consumer services such as tourism, leisure services, sports centres and amusement parks are also included.
The following sectors are not covered by the proposed directive:
First of all, services of general interest have been excluded from the future directive's scope. The power to decide which services belong to this category has been stipulated to the Member States. Parliament voted also to exclude both public private healthcare and social services (such as social housing, childcare and family services) from the directive. Industries covered by legislation specific to their sector are also excluded, e.g. financial services, electronic communications services and networks, and transport. Other areas excluded are legal services, audiovisual services, gambling and lotteries, and professions and activities linked to the exercise of public authority (e.g. notaries) and tax services.
What's next?
It is now up to the Council of Ministers, as joint legislator with Parliament, to decide its position on the directive and the amendments adopted by MEPs. If all Parliament's amendments are acceptable to the Council, the legislation will be adopted in its modified form. If the Council rejects any of Parliament's amendments or adds any of its own, the text will return to Parliament for a second reading.
DEBATE
Almost two years after the Commission published its draft directive on the internal market in services, after months of controversy, and after no fewer than ten parliamentary committees had dealt with different aspects of the proposal, Tuesday 14 February was the day when the issue finally had its first reading debate in plenary. President Borrell said that a demonstration of around 30 000 people was taking place in Strasbourg at the same time as the debate.
Rapporteur Evelyne GEBHARDT
"Today, we are dealing with the most important piece of EU legislation apart from the Constitution," said the rapporteur Evelyne GEBHARDT (PES, DE). "Services in Europe must be as free and open as goods and capital." It was, she said, good that the Commission had made proposals in this area, but these had been so unsuccessful as to give the impression that the interests of the 'old' EU15 states were being played off against the 'new' EU10. In fact, she said, all Member States have the same rights and obligations - the EU should serve the welfare of all 450m citizens. "People must be central," she said, "workers and their families should be the centre point, not major companies and their profits." The Commission's draft had needed serious revision by Parliament. Despite the ideological differences, she urged the plenary to take decisive steps for the Directive without too much red tape, which respects the special features of each Member State, with no downward spiral of wages and working standards and environmental protection. "We needed to get away from the devastating form of the Country of Origin principle. I proposed a simple answer that it should be legal to provide services applying the rules of the country of destination," she said. It should apply only to proper marketable commercial applications, but it should not trample or underfoot people setting up businesses, she said. The original proposal had been turned on its head and could now be adopted. "We can adopt legislation for liberalised services which also works towards a social Europe. I am confident we will reach solutions that command large majority, obliging Council and Commission to follow the path set down by Parliament."
Council Presidency
Speaking for the Council Presidency, Austrian Federal Minister for Economics and Labour, Martin BARTENSTEIN said implementation of the Services Directive would help reach the Lisbon goals. The internal market had created 2.5 million jobs, but the remaining loopholes needed to be closed. "Legal and bureaucratic barriers split the market, leading to higher prices, less competition in interests of consumers, and a failure to create jobs," he said. The original proposal had led to intensive debate and much criticism, some valid, but many worries were unnecessary. "We can support the basic principles of removing unfair barriers. Parliament's vote will be the major basis for review of the proposal which the Commission needs to carry out." The Directive, he said, will help service operators and service users, and would not call into question the European Social Model. Europe's citizens, he continued, were entitled to an internal market without social or wage dumping. It needed to be neutral on labour law and there needed to be controls. Quality, coverage and availability of services must not be reduced. "The Presidency will work closely for a balanced directive, which takes account of peoples' concerns, but which lays the basis for a well functioning market in services," he said.
Before turning to the leaders of the political groups, EP President Josep BORRELL pointed out that an enormous demonstration was taking place outside Parliament, with some 30,000 people peacefully taking part. "This is a strong encouragement for us to work responsibly", he said.
European Commission President
President José Manuel BARROSO stated that the Services Directive was crucial to European growth and employment prospects. He congratulated the European Parliament for its work and its readiness to vote. Mr Barroso said "a lot of work has still to be done for Europe to fully enjoy the fundamental freedoms enshrined in the Treaties".
The Directive would be a test to see if the EU-25 was able to find solutions to difficult issues which are particularly sensitive to public opinion. "Europe needs a strong consensus in the European Parliament on the Services Directive."
While the fears expressed about the Directive in some cases were legitimate, some were based on misunderstandings and some had nothing do with the proposed directive.
It was important for the EU not only to translate the four fundamental freedoms enshrined in the Treaties but also to respond to the legitimate concerns. The Commission's revised proposal would take on board Parliament's amendments that were based on a broad majority. A strong Services Directive would show that the EU of 25 Member States was capable of reaching pragmatic solutions. "The Union needs a real market for services and needs to support SMEs. Europe needs a balanced directive based on the four freedoms enshrined in the Treaties"
Commissioner for Internal Market and Services
Commissioner for the Internal Market and Services, Charlie McCREEVY, stated that the proposed Services Directive had long been in the headlines. In many areas, there was broad agreement on the proposed Directive. First, administrative simplification would make it easier for businesses by establishing single points of contact and reducing cost. Second, he said, it would be good for consumers because the Directive would lead to greater consumer confidence as information on businesses could easily be more easily shared. Thirdly, greater administrative co-operation would also mean that businesses could be more efficiently supervised.
Commissioner McCreevy also said that the Commission would take on board amendments adopted by the European Parliament by a large majority. He welcomed the vote in the Internal Market Committee and particularly the parts on the services of general interest. However, he stated that services of general economic interest should be included within the scope of the Directive.
On the posting of workers directive, the Commissioner stated that if Parliament voted to delete reference to this directive, the Commission would publish guidelines on how the directive should be implemented. On healthcare services, he said that the Commission had to take into account the jurisprudence of the European Court of Justice and, therefore, the Commission would come up with, if necessary, a separate proposal on patient mobility.
The Services Directive represented a forward step to an internal market on services. The Directive should be compatible with the four freedoms enshrined in the Treaties and the jurisprudence of the courts. Any measures taken by Member States had to be based on non-discrimination, necessity and proportionality.
The Commission, he said, would come forward with a revised proposal following the vote in the European Parliament with a view to common position from Council "hopefully before April".
Political group leaders
Hans-Gert POETTERING, leader of the EPP-ED group, said what the proposal had changed. Freedom of movement of services was one of the four freedoms that were the basis of Union, but it had lagged behind the others. The core of the Lisbon strategy was to make European services more competitive and improve choice for consumers. "This is a political decision for clear implementation of treaty. It is a test of the seriousness of our commitment to Lisbon." The proposal had been subject to criticism, both justified and unfair. Some had tried to use the debate to strengthen barriers to services. "Our group has practically rewritten the proposal - it shows we are willing to compromise, to reach a broad agreement, but not at any cost." This should now, he said, seek more cooperation between states, help combat the illegal trafficking in labour, benefit consumers, improve international competitiveness, and speed up the integration of new Member States into Europe's social market economy. "We want the Council's spring summit to come to a political agreement on the basis of our vote. Any delay mean less employment and growth. We must take people's concerns seriously, but also show leadership to show the European project has a future, and the EU a common project to take forward."
For the leader of the Socialist group, Martin SCHULZ (PES, DE), this Directive was the most controversial and hotly disputed of recent times, because it asked the question 'What social model should Europe have?' The answer was about to come. "For us, as social democrats, it is clear that economic and technical progress was linked to higher wages, social security and consumer protection. Bolkestein aimed for growth created by lowering wages and standards. But Bolkestein no longer exists - that is the first good message to take from this debate. Europe cannot be divided into groups and the attempt to divide us has been removed." The thinking had been to lower wages and standards, competing downward, playing off old Member States against new. That attempt, he said, had failed. "In our group, and in the EPP, the old and the new have been working together to solve the problem. This is another good message." Many, he said, had attempted to use the directive in their own interests to shape the internal market on the basis of a purely liberal model. But there was now a broad majority in favour of a new Services Directive based on a guarantee of free market access but under the conditions of country where the services were provided, maintaining the standard acquired up to now. "If anyone wants to change or destroy the European Social Model, it is clear they will have to reckon with the European Socialists," he said.
Graham WATSON (UK), leader of the ALDE group, said Frits Bolkestein was still alive and kicking. There was, he said, a choice to reform and create wealth and opportunity, or to use protectionism in the short term interest of some, but with a long term loss for all. "We risk having a mindless mass of regulation - we support the Country of Origin principle because we think about the needs of small businesses. Doing away with it reduces the growth potential by half." He said a compromise between mutually exclusive positions was not a consensus; it was a 'Berlin blockage.' There was, he said, no risk of social dumping as the posting of workers directive was still in force. The directive should transform the founding principles of Union into reality, not making second class citizens of the new Member States. The new compromise, he said, left Member States able to justify barriers on social policy and consumer protection grounds. "We would not be contemplating such an emasculation unless Barroso and his Commission had defended their draft, rather than tilting at windmills... the Commission cowers in the shadow of public opinion and Member State hesitation." He said greater growth, more jobs and stronger companies were within grasp. He called on MEPs to vote to create dynamic market for services.
Heide RÛHLE (Greens, EFA) started her speech by noting how very few proposals have polarised the citizens of Europe as much as this one. She spoke of the need for a European directive on services but that the Parliament was not in the position to deliver this time and instead merely "watered-down" the Commission's directive at the cost of clarity. She further noted that services of general interest as well as services of economic interest should be dealt with separately and not in the directive. She lamented the lack of clarity when it came to the definition of social services and the non-transparent "patchwork left". Ms. Rühle also disputed the country-of-origin principle asserting that when a service is provided locally, the local legislation should be complied with. She spoke of the problematic local-level restrictions that she considers the directive to cause and urged this element to be questioned. She concluded by saying that the directive could not be supported.
Francis WURTZ (GUE/NGL, FR) noted and welcomed the "exceptional political and social mobilisation around Europe" that the discussion of the directive has caused. He stressed that his group have not "turned their noses up at the various improvements made" but denied that the changes in the directive have been for the overall good. Mr Wurtz expressed concern at the "open door left to the court nibbling away" at European social rights created by the changes in the directive. He talked of the potential it creates to offer services through bogus independents and the problems of contradictory working hours per week. In the "context of these ambiguities", Mr. Wurtz considered that "the right thing to do at this stage is to reject the directive", and if not now, he assured that he would strive to reject it further down the line. He finished by declaring that he was "in favour of equality, in favour of solidarity, in favour of the rights of everyone", and therefore that he would "say no to Bolkestein".
Nigel FARAGE (IND/DEM, UK) spoke against the directive by commenting that despite the Lisbon Agenda's objectives, "we have 20 million people unemployed" throughout Europe, that growth rates are "desperately low" in the euro-zone, that we are "stumbling around in an economic desert" and that the Bolkestein directive is merely a "mirage". He talked of his fear that the Directive's application will vary from country to country, and the potential it provides for the European Court of Justice to preside over the judicial powers of Member States. He concluded by criticising the directive's plan to remove power from the Member States and give it to the "failing institutions" of Europe.
Speaking for the UEN group, Adam BIELAN (PL) asserted that one of the fundamental goals of the EU - to create a free-flowing market - has not yet been achieved, but that the Directive has the potential to do this. He supported the proposal by noting that the vast empirical evidence shows that the implementation of the directive would create 600,000 new jobs, that it would cause a reduction in prices, many benefits for customers and "higher unemployment, higher productivity, higher wages". Mr. Bielan urged the Parliament not to consent to the reprimand of the directive, but instead to support it and show what he believes Europeans are: "courageous, responsible and wise".
Marine Le PEN (NI, FR) called the amended Directive "modified, amended but still contested". She asserted that agreement on the directive had only been reached by some individuals of the two major groups rather than the groups as a whole. She commented on the loss of the authorisation system only to be replaced by the "one-point-of-contact approach", she noted how the directive had gone away from the country-of-origin principle but not from social dumping or the threat of weighing up comparative advantage. She declared the directive to be "complex, ambiguous, unclear, contradictory and dangerous", and in view of protecting culture and education, she said she was against it.
British and Irish speakers
Christopher HEATON-HARRIS (EPP-ED, UK), who authored an opinion on the Services Directive for the Budgetary Control Committee, said: "there is quite a lot of St Valentine's spirit around in Parliament". There were times when concessions were needed, but this was not such an occasion. Those protesting wanted to protect the market in the short-term, but it would not help them in the long-term. If Europe did not liberalise services, the current 20 million unemployed would increase and Europe's economy would stagnate. He agreed with the UK government's position that the proposed directive had been watered down too much already. The aim of the Directive was to create jobs and not protect the status quo.
Anne Van LANCKER (PES, BE), draftsperson for the Employment and Social Affairs Committee, praised Parliament's transparent way of working. Parliament had a great responsibility: to show there could be an internal market in services, bearing in mind the European Social Model and without social dumping. "We should not undermine social provisions - this directive is often seen as a blank cheque for social dumping and wage cuts. We have seen examples in Sweden and with Irish Ferries which are unjustified. We need measures for better access to information for employers, less red tape, and also actually to apply posting of workers directive which is too often side-stepped." She said all services of general economic interest should be excluded and the country of origin principle abandoned. The present compromise was a good one, she said.
Malcolm HARBOUR (EPP-ED, UK), the shadow rapporteur for the EPP-ED group, said many of the fears had been overplayed. Mr Harbour said that he wanted to concentrate on the opportunities that the Directive offered and paid tribute to the rapporteur Mrs Gebhardt. He stated that three-quarters of the amendments to be voted on Thursday had been drawn up by the EPP-ED group. The idea of chapter in the proposed Directive on the freedom to provide services came from the EPP-ED group at the time of the vote in the Internal Market Committee. SMEs had continually been frustrated by administrative burden and this directive would eliminate 81 separate barriers to the freedom of establishment. Businesses should not be subject to disproportionate and unnecessary duplicate rules or restrictions as the case-law of the European Court of Justice had underlined. Mr Harbour stressed the importance of the Commission and Commissioner McCreevy in making the proposal more business friendly. He also stated that the Council could get a common position on the Services Directive during the Spring European Council.
It was clear that the Directive needed a rewrite stated Jean LAMBERT (Greens/ EFA, UK) but it was "a pity that it was Parliament who is doing it". She said that, along with many others, she had found the Commission's behaviour "highly problematic" during the course of the discussion on the directive. She spoke of the Commission's lack of clarity and the fact that it did not give answers to specific questions asked. Furthermore, she lamented the absence of an impact assessment. Although she conceded that there were "few" issues of disagreement, she pointed out that the issues that did arise were "extremely important" ones. She talked of the country of origin "theory" and questioned where it fitted in with the pursuit of higher standards. She declared her support for the removal of health from the directive, saying that "it should never have been in there in the first place" and asserted the need to distinguish between "patient mobility" and "service mobility".
On the balance between the protection of indigenous employment and liberalisation, James ALLISTER (NI, UK) said he favoured the former. The country of origin principle was a "bridge too far" and he stated that competition had to be "not only free but also fair". He also could not agree with the scope of the Directive saying that it should not apply to core public services. Each Member State, he said, had a duty to provide these services to its citizens and it could not be "substituted by the cheapest cowboy provider". He said he could not support the Directive.
Minister Bartenstein responds
Responding to the debate at the end of the afternoon session, Minister BARTENSTEIN said "There is now a better directive in front of us, which is able to garner a broad majority at first reading. I largely agree with the compromise proposal." He said that Parliament could be proud of its work on this dossier, as it could of its work on REACH. Given the stance of six Member States, it was important to have a large majority, he said, to send a clear opinion from Parliament. "The compromise gives high added value in terms of freedom of services in the internal market, and a gives a clear 'no' to social and wage dumping." He said this directive, having been a symbol of the gap between EU institutions and citizens was also now a symbol of whether the EU was able to go forward for growth and employment. "We in the Presidency will work hard over next weeks, we will listen to the Parliament, we will listen to the social partners and, at the end of March, we will take the debate to the European Council. We will take on board Parliament's position and will take it seriously," he said.
British and Irish speakers continued
Eoin RYAN (UEN, IE) stated that politics was too often based on the politics of fear and the fear of change and this had also been the case in Ireland. There were barriers available that would protect Europe from the forces of globalisation and it was about Europe avoiding a race to the bottom. He quoted an economist who had said that there was a risk with all the amendments in Parliament that the services directive "would suffer a death by Parliament".
Bairbre de BRUN (GUE/NGL, UK) urged the House to reject the Services Directive. The Directive, she said, commercialises almost all services within the EU and will deprive millions of quality public services. It will, she continued, disproportionately affect women, both as the majority of workers in the service sector and as users of those services. Ms de Brún was in agreement with points made earlier about decisions ending up with the Court of Justice. The struggle, she said, will be at its most intense at national level.
Arlene McCARTHY (PES, UK) started by making reference to the late MEP, Philip Whitehead who, she said, would have been proud of the work done by the rapporteur Mrs Gebhardt and all Members who have worked so hard to improve and amend the Commission proposal.
The Bolkestein proposal, Mrs McCarthy stated, was flawed because it failed to recognise that if you want the public to support the opening up of the market, you have to convince them of the benefits and reassure them that it will not undermine working or consumer rights.
"So let us make it simple. We need to end the ludicrous discriminatory practices that are stopping our businesses from getting a foothold in the European market. Why should a business have to apply to join a local chamber of commerce, only to be told there is a five-year waiting list? Why should a business have to set up four offices and pay a EUR 500 000 deposit? The black economy is thriving in Europe in the services sector because these complex and costly barriers are encouraging businesses to engage in undeclared and illegal work. Let us make them legal with these rules. Let us get rid of protectionism, but protect consumers and working rights. "
Consumers, she believed, can see the benefit of choice and competition if they can be sure that if something goes wrong they can have a speedy remedy in a local court and they do not have to chase down a bad provider to Lisbon, Paris, Warsaw or London to have their rights recognised. This is what we are trying to achieve in these compromises, she stated.
Those working in the service sector need the guarantee that their employment rights are protected. This is not about old or new Europe. Citizens are looking to us to make the right choice, to get rid of crippling protectionism in the single market in services and protect working and consumer rights.
Concluding, Mrs McCarthy asked the Commission to look at ensuring that these single points of delivery, these one-stop-shops that are so vital to delivering, monitoring and supervising the kind of services needed – that it should look at setting up an EU trust mark or an EU quality assurance scheme to give the consumer the trust and the confidence to use these services which respect consumers' and working rights.
Avril DOYLE (EPP-ED, IE) stated that in relation to services, there has been over 50 years of Member State protectionism and restrictive practices, from complicated bureaucratic hurdles and time delays to financial penalties to obscure qualification requirements. This, in turn, has encouraged a rampant black economy. Mrs Doyle stated that in fact countries that have embraced the enlarged EU market have grown from strength to strength. Since 1993, she said, the free movement of goods, capital and persons has yielded enormous economic and social gains. Nearly 70% of the working population in Europe is involved in the services sector, which represents 55% of the EU's GDP, but at present services account for only 20% of trade between Member States. The incomplete market has created nearly EUR 1,000 billion of prosperity and 2.5 million additional jobs in Europe. The Services Directive could, she said, deliver 600,000 jobs more.
However, she continued, there are a limited number of services, especially the health services, that should have sector-specific measures. She welcomed Commissioner McCreevy's undertaking to propose a separate directive on patient mobility on the whole issue of cross-border health service provision. However, she supported the remaining provisions of what is already an emaciated directive. It is, she said, particularly important that the temporary workers' agencies are not excluded from the scope, given the extent to which staffing and recruitment agencies are used in a modern, flexible labour market. She wholeheartedly supported the provisions of Article 16.
Diana WALLIS (ALDE, UK) stated that a matter of such importance deserves thorough and long standing preparation, particularly preparation of Europe's public, "the citizens we seek to represent and who in large numbers we seem to have managed to antagonise over this proposal."
Reflecting back to 1992, the years of preparation leading to the final and general excitement to welcome the free market in goods and contrasting this with the present situation - one far-reaching proposal for a directive literally dumped on the table at the end of the last mandate. She hoped that a lesson would be learned from this for the future about communicating Europe.
Proinsias DE ROSSA (PES, IE) congratulated the rapporteur, Mrs Gebhardt, and Mrs Van Lancker, and their shadows in the other groups for the excellent work they have done in seeking to strengthen the services directive.
It is obvious, he stated, that a race to the bottom in any area will not win the allegiance, or indeed build the confidence of European citizens in the European project.
Mr De Rossa urged the House to support the broad progressive majority in this Parliament to deliver a 'de-Bolkesteined' directive by supporting the key compromise amendments which have been painstakingly negotiated. This House, he said, will be abdicating its responsibility by refusing to adopt the amended directive now on offer and leaving our services market, our labour rights, our consumer rights and our environmental rights in this area to the uncertainty of case-by-case decisions of the European Court of Justice. "It is not elected to make law - we are" he stated
Simon COVENEY (EPP-ED, IE), stated that this directive is attempting to achieve a massive amount in one brave step. With all the work put into this directive in recent months, in this regard, he recognised the work of Malcolm HARBOUR (EPP-ED, UK) in particular, who has put an enormous amount of effort into bringing the compromise wording this far on behalf of the EPP-ED Group.
"In the intensity of debate, however, on specific amendments, in particular relating to Article 16 on the freedom to provide services, let us not lose sight of the overall objective of what we are trying to achieve. This is the first stage of a process that aims to create a directive that will promote a more open and better functioning internal market for services. If adopted in the right form, this directive can facilitate growth, job creation and increased economic activity in the services sector."
The reality, Mr Coveney stated, is that the EU economy needs a kick-start and this directive can contribute to this. Sixty-eight per cent of EU employment and over 60% of wealth creation comes from the services sector and, therefore, services are the key driver for the sluggish EU economy. In short, this new compromise directive may not give all political groups all of what they want, but it will remove many barriers to cross-border trade and services and reduce the red tape that businesses encounter when they try to expand into other EU countries. A balance between the protection of employment law and collective agreements within the EU Member States and opening up a more efficient market for services has been achieved through compromise.
Concluding, Mr Coveney hoped Parliament will give a strong mandate to the Commission to carry this directive forward with renewed momentum following Thursday's vote, and he looked forward to seeing a further improved version of this directive in the not too distant future coming back before Parliament.
John PURVIS (EPP-ED, UK) recalled that Parliament, from its very first directly elected plenary in 1979, has championed the cause of a truly free and open single market as envisaged in the original Treaties. It is now, he said, the opportunity to emulate the courage and foresight of our predecessors and make sure that a real single market in services is implemented. "Trade unionists, French 'no' voters, French plumbers: truly there is nothing to be afraid of. Just as a single market in goods has provided new, more and better jobs, so will the services directive, if we vote through a strong and liberal version. It can provide the opportunities which we all seek, especially in SMEs, as the essential element of a successful, competitive and prosperous European economy."
Noting that the Opinion of the Committee on Industry, Research and Energy, which took a liberal line, was supported by 34 votes to 6 and was supported by Conservatives, Liberals and even most of the Socialists. Mr Purvis hoped that Parliament as a whole will repeat such a courageous and far-sighted position. A free and open market in services will work and get more and more Europeans back into work.
Commissioner McCreevy responds
Commissioner for Internal Market and Services, Charlie McCREEVY, thanked all participants for their contributions representing various perspectives.
"We have heard all the arguments for and against this proposal. What is clear to me is that despite the divergences there is a strong body of opinion in support of a services directive; a common wish to arrive at a broad understanding of how we should go forward. I welcome that. It demonstrates the vital role that the European Parliament can play in reconciling the many different opinions expressed in this house.
On the basis of today's debate, I feel confident that Parliament can lead the way forward in building the consensus that this proposal needs if it is to be adopted. We owe a debt of gratitude to the rapporteur, the shadow rapporteurs and group leaders for their constructive approach.
I said that the Commission will take full account of those amendments that find a broad consensus here. I believe we are close to that consensus, particularly in regard to the scope of the proposal and the freedom to provide services as set out in Article 16.
I was heartened to hear so many speakers say that they wanted a services directive with real value added. That is why we should limit to the minimum any further sectoral exemptions from the scope, and we need to pay particular attention to the wording of Article 16. There can be no going back on treaty provisions or court jurisdiction.
In reply to Mr Watson's criticism of our efforts to help build bridges on Article 16, it is a pity he did not check the source of the draft text that he found fault with. It did not come from my Cabinet, but then I am used to being accused of many things, good and bad, for which I have no responsibility.
Turning to the substance of the debate and the posting of workers, I have much sympathy for those who are concerned about what they see as unnecessary administrative burdens placed on workers who are posted to another Member State. There is Community law and court jurisprudence which must be respected. If you vote by a large majority to delete Articles 24 and 25, then the Commission will come forward quickly with guidance on that key initiative.
It is important that the message which comes with this debate and the vote on Thursday is one of Europe moving forward; moving forward in proposing a framework for a better services directive; a better services directive which will provide the incentives and confidence necessary for businesses, entrepreneurs and consumers, take full advantage of our internal market by investing in new opportunities, developing and buying new services which will create more jobs and growth." Text adopted
Dr Heinz Fischer - President of the Republic of Austria - Formal address to Parliament
Dr. Heinz FISCHER , President of the Republic of Austria, was warmly welcomed by President Borrell, who expressed his great honour and pleasure to have Dr. Fischer speaking in the Parliament. Dr. Fischer spoke with certainty about the European project, and began by mentioning how the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 had given him more confidence in the possibility to achieve the seemingly impossible, and considered such confidence as relevant to many tasks that the Union faces today.
( Working translation from German )
A few days ago a well-meaning Member of this House – from Austria – advised me not to spend too much time on introductory commonplaces in my speech before the European Parliament today.
She pointed out that you, Ladies and Gentlemen, quite often welcome Heads of State or Government from the widest variety of countries as guest speakers on this rostrum and were more interested in politics than in being paid elaborate compliments.
Well, I will follow her advice. But let me state one thing: I am myself an old parliamentary warhorse who is happy to breathe the air of Parliament. I was elected to the Austrian Parliament for the first time in 1971 and was active there until I was elected Austrian Federal President in 2004. For 12 years I held the office of President of the Austrian National Council.
For a large part of that time the division of Europe into East and West by the Iron Curtain seemed to be an unalterable fact.
Admittedly, Andrej Amalrik had written a fascinating book entitled “Will the Soviet Union Survive Until 1984“, in which he prophesied the collapse of the Soviet system, but this seemed to be out of touch with the political reality at the time. Hence for me, and I assume most of us, the year 1989 and the months before and after the fall of the Berlin Wall were something of a political miracle.
Today we know much more about the real causes of these developments.
Nevertheless, this chapter of our history has left a lasting impact on me. Since that time I believe in the possibility of political miracles, or at least that what appears initially to be a difficult or even forlorn endeavour can in fact be accomplished.
At all events, the enthusiasm for the European project received an enormous boost at that time and took an additional dimension. Alongside the principles underlying the European project as conceived by its founding fathers, namely the idea of peace and the ideal of personal and economic freedom of movement in the largest possible European area, for millions of people who had had to live with four decades of Communist dictatorship after the end of the Second World War, it opened up the prospect of being able to lead a life in democracy and freedom after all.
It was almost inevitable that after the collapse of Communism and the enlargement of the European Union from 12 to 15 Member States on 1 January 1995 the topic of a large round of enlargement, which was also seen as a kind of reunification of Europe, would appear on the agenda.
This enlargement was successfully achieved in 2004 and Bulgaria and Romania are also scheduled to join soon.
In the wake of this development the issues of the borders of Europe and the European identity are increasingly being raised.
Much has been said and written about the borders of Europe.
But sometimes the answers to complex issues are relatively straightforward.
The western, northern and southern borders of Europe are very simple to define. They are uncontested. In the East the geographic borders of Europe neither correspond to the cultural and historical borders nor are they identical with the existing national borders. For the European project of the future we are therefore obliged to draw meaningful political borders and to develop these borders into partnerships through intensive cooperation with the neighbouring countries (keyword: wider Europe).
At all events, both the fulfilment of the accession criteria and the European Union’s ability to admit new members are decisive factors in the definition of the political borders of the European project.
It is my firm conviction that the Western Balkan states, too, deserve to be offered a membership perspective, provided that they fulfil the accession criteria when time comes. But it would be unrealistic to give binding deadlines or dates, because there are numerous factors that still come into play.
For the perspective that I have just tried to outline we are in urgent need of an improved set of rules. It is to be hoped that everybody now realises that an EU of 25 plus cannot work ideally, or perhaps not even satisfactorily, with the structures of the EU of 12.
The European Convention was established as a response to this problem and it impressively elaborated the draft Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe.
The willingness to compromise eventually made it possible for agreement to be reached by all governments and the European Parliament on a text that while not satisfying all of our wishes, is or would be important and useful for the European project as a whole.
The negative outcome of the referendums held in two EU Member States has not only brought matters to a halt for the moment but has also put a huge damper on the pro-Europe mood. And moods do play an essential role in politics.
We are now in a phase of reflection, but this reflection must be made visible and audible in order to give people the opportunity to agree with or oppose to the ideas presented.
My personal reflection leads me to the conviction that it would be a mistake to lie down meekly and allow the project of a Constitutional Treaty to perish and to more or less escort it to the cemetery.
I also realise that there are powerful arguments against starting the entire procedure all over again.
Which leads me to share the view of all those who believe that once this pause for reflection has come to an end, it would be useful to refocus in a mature manner and with fresh energy on the objectives of the Constitutional Treaty, which will also contribute to strengthening the EU’s democratic parliamentarian system. The Austrian EU Council Presidency is committed to making an effective contribution and to preparing the ground in this respect.
I mentioned the term “referendum” before.
Frankly, I am not a supporter of plebiscitary democracy and in Austria we deliberately make sparing use of referendums.
But if we make or want to make use of referendums in EU Member States on major European decisions, I consider the current practice of holding a referendum in some Member States and not in others, thereby creating a sort of “patchwork of referendums” across Europe, to be rather unsatisfactory.
I would prefer to carry out an EU-wide referendum on specific matters of particular importance to Europe and to apply the system of double majority, where the referendum would be passed if the majority of all voters and a majority of the Member States were in favour. If this idea were generally welcomed in Europe it would of course also be necessary to reach agreement on the modalities for adopting a decision on an EU-wide referendum.
One topic of vital importance that I should like to discuss is the issue of the social dimension, i.e. the role played by the social component in European politics.
The market economy has become established in Europe. But the acceptance of both the market economy and the process of integration require a market economy with an adequate social component. In other words, a social market economy that does not regard the individual as a mere cost factor and that is committed to the principle of sustainability.
Frankly, the term “human capital” has always aroused suspicion in me.
The figure of 19 million unemployed is quite simply unacceptable.
If we want to increase acceptance of the European model rather than put this acceptance at risk, the reduction of unemployment, which is like a millstone around Europe’s neck, must be a priority at both the national and the European level.
Europe needs to stand on two legs: a sound economy and a sound social symmetry.
In this spirit I would welcome it if you were really to succeed tomorrow in adopting a compromise on the issue of the Services Directive that also takes account of the concerns and unease of employees and many businesspeople. And I also believe that it is important to find viable answers to the question of opportunities for control and enforcement capabilities.
At the beginning of Austria’s Presidency Salzburg hosted a large discussion on Europe entitled “Sound of Europe“, also alluding to the 250th anniversary of the birth of Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart.
First, the politicians took the floor, then the artists.
Naturally the artists made use of their right to hold up a mirror to politicians and to point to the imperfections of politics.
Not everything that was stated in this context actually convinced me.
But one thing is true:
The cultural dimension of the European project contains many buried treasures and still has a lot of untold reserves.
It has been pointed out time and again that Europe is more and more able to keep pace with the United States in economic terms but that in military terms – as they say – it is a dwarf, although the latter irritates me less than the lopsided social situation.
But shouldn’t we concern ourselves in more detail with the way these relations look like in the field of culture?
The consistency and volume of Europe’s cultural output, from the Iliad to present day works of art, represent an incredible wealth of treasures. In that respect we can hold our heads up high.
So let’s use this wealth to strengthen the European identity and to raise awareness of what we share and let’s not forget that Modern Art, today’s artistic expression, will form part of tomorrow’s cultural heritage.
And what holds true for art also applies to science and education.
Less than two weeks ago, the German Federal President Horst Köhler invited seven European Presidents of State for a dialogue to Dresden. At the end of this meeting a discussion was organised with students from more than a dozen of countries. The students had prepared very carefully for this discussion and were passionate and informed Europeans. They handed over to us a “Dresden Manifesto” which outlined very concrete demands regarding Europe. One of these demands was for an increase in expenditure for research and development not just to three but to five per cent of the gross national product; a very bold target indeed, but one that is well worth striving for if we are to develop a knowledge-based society in Europe.
The Dresden Manifesto prepared by young students from a large number of European countries also included another demand: it called for the establishment of a common house for European contemporary history that would report objectively on the history of the 20th century and on Europe today and describe the European project in detail so as to promote public understanding of Europe.
I am sharing the content of this manifesto with you today not only to demonstrate to these young people that their requests and concerns are taken seriously by being presented to this highest European forum but also because education and research – as you are all aware – are factors of production of very special quality. Martin Walser once wrote that the existence of utopia was the prerequisite for utopia to stop being a utopia.
The very real utopia of European peace and the utopia of a sustainable and ecologically responsible economic order need to be supplemented by a cultural utopia and an educational utopia with the elaboration of very specific goals and their implementation as a priority consideration.
Austria has held the Presidency of the EU Council for exactly one and a half months now and will hand it over at the end of June to the reliable hands of Finland with whom we are cooperating excellently.
It is exactly four weeks since Federal Chancellor Wolfgang Schüssel addressed the European Parliament and presented the objectives of the Austrian EU Presidency.
I do not intend to repeat what was said then but would only like to add that there have been a lot of activities and developments in these four weeks.
This relates for instance to the Balkan priority set by the Austrian Presidency, but also to the progress made with respect
to the preparations for the EU-Latin America/Caribbean Summit which will be held in Vienna in the middle of May 2006.
We have been particularly dismayed by the enormous tensions and acts of violence which were triggered apparently by the Mohammed caricatures.
There appears to be a clash here of two irreconcilable positions: the principle of the freedom of opinion and of the press on the one hand, and the strong need to protect religious sensitivities and values on the other.
I take respect for religious feelings and what people regard as holy, in the truest sense of the word, as self-evident, as an important element in the coexistence of people and nations and not as an unacceptable restriction of a fundamental right. If a ban on pictorial representation constitutes an essential element of a religion one ought not and must not offend against this principle twice - not only by disrespecting this ban, but also by reinforcing this hurtful violation of a taboo in the form of a caricature. Journalistic freedom, like the inalienable freedom of art, is nevertheless subject to legal restrictions and demands consideration and respect. If billions of people are to live together peacefully on a planet, consideration for the values of the others and mutual respect should not be regarded as an expendable luxury. This, by the way, holds true in all directions.
However, violence and the systematic incitement to violence and taking the law into one’s own hands are certainly not an appropriate response. I respect and think highly in particular of those Muslims who, as in Austria, have made their protest in a clear but peaceful manner.
And I strongly and unreservedly condemn the attitude of governments who allow diplomatic missions, embassies and innocent people to be attacked and exposed to danger. The willingness and the honest intention to further intensify dialogue between cultures, religions, civilisations and people remains a priority in this context. This is my appeal to all concerned.
Let me conclude by sharing with you the following conviction:
The European project which is based on the many things we have in common will be a success. We therefore have the right and the duty to strengthen the confidence that we will succeed in our endeavour of shaping both the “old” and the “new” Europe into the Europe of the future.
I thank you for having given me the opportunity to speak up for this vision from such an important rostrum as the European Parliament .
Iranian nuclear dispute : MEPs support UN Security Council involvement
Tension is growing between Iran and the international community over Iran's decision to resume its nuclear research programme, and due to lack of confidence that the nuclear programme is exclusively meant for peaceful purposes. In a resolution adopted on Wednesday, the European Parliament affirms that this issue must be resolved in accordance with the rules of international law, and considers that the involvement of the UN Security Council is a necessary step.
Parliament reiterates its condemnation of President Ahmadinejad’s threatening remarks against Israel, which are not conducive to trust in the intentions of the Iranian Government to adopt a peaceful and constructive role in the Middle East. MEPs criticise in consequence President Ahmadinejad’s recent meeting with representatives of the Palestinian Islamic Jihad during his trip to Syria and demands that Iran immediately cease all its support for terrorist groups. The House expresses its deep concern regarding the present attitude of the Iranian authorities to Iran’s nuclear programme, notably to the removal of seals at several nuclear installations, and its decision to resume enrichment-related activities.
Parliament reiterates its call on the Government of Iran to refrain from any threat against any state and to act with respect for the principles of the United Nations Charter. The House supports the IAEA Board of Governors’ decision to ask the Director General of the IAEA to report to the UN Security Council and elaborate on all the reports and resolutions adopted by the IAEA in relation to this issue.
MEPs consider that the involvement of the UN Security Council, as proposed by the IAEA, constitutes a necessary step in order to assess the present situation and agrees with the Council’s conclusions which call for a strengthening of the role of the IAEA. Parliament takes the view that this move should prevent a further deterioration of the present situation.
The House considers that, in accordance with the IAEA resolution, it is necessary for Iran to re‑establish full and sustained suspension of all enrichment-related and reprocessing activities, to reconsider the construction of a research reactor moderated by heavy water, to ratify promptly and resume full implementation of the Additional Protocol and, in general terms, to implement the transparency measures requested by the IAEA Director General.
The House stresses the importance of cooperation with the USA, Russia, China and non-aligned countries in order to consider complementary concepts with a view to achieving a comprehensive agreement with Iran on its nuclear facilities and their use which takes account of Iran’s security concerns.
Finally, MEPs call on Iran to take advantage of its enormous energy reserves and the technological know‑how which exists in the country in order to invest in the development of renewable energies and the modern and rational use of fossil energies. Text adopted - Strasbourg plenary 13-16 February 2006
Cartoons controversy: respect freedom of expression and religious beliefs, say MEPs
Vote - 16 February 2006
Freedom of expression and independence of the press are "universal rights" but ones which must be "exercised with responsibility", "within the limits of the law" and with "respect for religious feelings and beliefs". That was the message Parliament delivered in a joint resolution in the wake of the furore which has surrounded the publication of cartoons of the Prophet Mohammed in some European newspapers.
MEPs also expressed solidarity with Denmark and condemned the burning down of embassies of EU Member States.
In the resolution, the European Parliament "condemns in the strongest possible terms the burning down of embassies of EU Member States (...), deplores the failure of some governments to prevent violence and that other governments have tolerated violent attacks". Furthermore, the Parliament "strongly regrets that there seems to be organised extremist groups both in Europe and in the Muslim world which see an advantage in escalating the present tensions and using the cartoons as a pretext for incitement to violence and discrimination". Some of the protests and violent unrest had been "orchestrated", MEPs said.
Support for Denmark
MEPs also expressed their "full support and solidarity" with Denmark and recalled Article 11 of the Treaty of European Union, which establishes that Member States shall support the Union's external and security policy "actively and unreservedly in a spirit of loyalty and mutual solidarity". Boycott against one Member State is in contradiction with trade agreements concluded with the EU as a whole, MEPs stressed.
Regret for anti-Semitic propaganda
Parliament also "regrets the renewed and increased anti-Semitic and anti-Israeli propaganda in some Arab countries and Iran. The House points out that in these countries degrading and humiliating cartoons of Jews are regularly printed, thus showing they obviously do not apply the same standards to all religious communities".
Finally, the resolution recalls that the Euro Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly (APEM) "is the appropriate forum" for promoting dialogue and working together with the southern bank of the Mediterranean countries and called for its next session (26-27 of March) "to deal with this problem as a priority".
Debate - 15 February 2006
In the wake of the cartoons controversy, MEPs debated freedom of expression and respect for religion on Wednesday, 15 February 2006. There was wide agreement on the need to condemn violence, defend freedom of speech and also to respect people's freedom of belief.
Hans WINKLER , State Secretary in the Austrian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, spoke for the Council. He said the controversy about the cartoons had been a most regrettable development, because they touched on something EU members have striven for over many years; that is, reciprocal trust between religious communities. This had been badly shaken. There had been violent demonstrations and deaths. EU representatives and others had been under threat and material damage caused. "This was all deeply regrettable. We need to ask what has gone wrong and how to prevent such events in the future?"
"A number of principles of our co-existence are at stake. Firstly, we must reject any type of violence and violent reaction. We condemn violent attacks. We expect from responsible governments that they understand responsibility in a legal sense and take protective measures under international law. Where there are violent demonstrations, we should seek to calm and defuse the situation." The Council, he said, had assured Denmark, Sweden and other countries affected of their full solidarity.
"At same time we have emphasised the importance of freedom of expression and of the press. This is a pillar of the Union; a valuable asset we fought long to achieve. Use of that right, like any other entitlement, calls for high degree of individual and institutional responsibility."
Responsible use of freedom of expression falls to press. Governments may not dictate to the press and that is a good thing. But what appears in print should meet international standards and the principles of the European Convention on Human Rights. We have been careful to include Turkey in our efforts - Turkey has a key role to play in promoting dialogue between Europe and the Islamic world.
"We intend to pursue dialogue with Islamic world. The path of dialogue will continue to link civilisations. We will continue to take steps to calm the situation. We will explore further measures to link the EU and Islamic world. Leadership is called for - but that cannot mean governments telling the press their business. We have freedom of the press and we do not want censorship. The Court of Human Rights has made clear that controversial ideas may be explored. One has the right to make mistakes and to criticise those mistakes. People may be shocked and offended. There must be a limit when it encroaches on religious freedoms of others. Freedom of expression must be compatible with freedom to practice religion. We need to tell our Islamic citizens in the EU that they are respected too."
He said the presidency would continue dialogue and stand firm by values of defence of freedom of expression.
European Commission President
European Commission President José Manuel BARROSO made the following statement in the debate on the right to freedom of expression and respect for religious beliefs:
"The publication of cartoons in Danish and other European newspapers and the reactions to this have revealed sensitive and fundamental issues. The cartoons have aggrieved many Muslims all over the world. We must respect these sensitivities and the expression of them through peaceful protest – which is a fundamental right in any open society.
I share the views expressed by Prime Minister Fogh Rasmussen, where he made clear that his government respects Islam as one of the world’s major religions and that it has no intention to insult Muslims and does not support activities in this sense. I want, personally today, to emphasise my deep respect for Islamic civilisation and the contribution it has made and continues to make to Europe.
The Commission’s concern is not with the peaceful response of the majority to the cartoons. It is with the violent reactions of a minority. Reactions which have been disowned by many Muslims.
Therefore the Commission condemns, in the strongest possible terms, the violence perpetrated against our office in Gaza, and against the missions of the Member States, in particular those of Denmark. It is ironic that the aim of these missions is to bring real benefits to the lives of the people of their host countries.
Nor is a trade boycott an appropriate way of addressing the issue. It would hurt the economic interests of all parties and could damage the growing trading links between the EU and the countries concerned. Trade, and the greater interconnections it brings, is a means to promote mutual understanding. And let us be clear; a boycott of Danish goods is by definition a boycott of European goods.
I have spoken with the Prime Minister of Denmark and expressed the solidarity of the Commission. I want here today to send my solidarity to the people of Denmark as well; a people who rightly enjoy the reputation as being amongst the most open and tolerant not just in Europe but in the world. I welcome here today their representatives, in the form of a delegation from the Danish Parliament.
I have also spoken with Chancellor Schussel. The Commission will continue to work with the Austrian Presidency and all parties to resolve the problem peacefully and efficiently.
This issue raises wider themes. Our European society is based on respect for the individual person’s life and freedom, equality of rights between men and women, freedom of speech, and a clear distinction between politics and religion. Our point of departure is that as human beings we are free, independent, equal and responsible. We must safeguard these principles.
Freedom of speech is part of Europe’s values and traditions. Let me be clear. Freedom of speech is not negotiable. Like all freedoms, its preservation depends on responsible use by individuals. Governments or other public authorities do not prescribe or authorize the opinions expressed by individuals. Conversely, the opinions expressed by individuals engage these individuals, and only them. They do not engage a country, a people, a religion. And we should not allow others to pretend that they do.
Freedom of speech is the basis not only of the possibility to publish an opinion, but also to criticize it. Freedom of speech cuts both ways.
Freedom of speech has limits, as well. These must be respected. They are defined and enforced by the law and legal systems of the Member States of the European Union. It is self evidently unacceptable to go outside the law.
Freedom of religion is not negotiable either. Just as Europe respects freedom of speech so it must, and does, respect freedom of religion. Religious freedom is a fundamental right of individuals and communities, it entails respect for the integrity of all religious convictions and all ways in which they are exercised. Muslims must be able to practise their faith in the same way as the adherents of other religions and convictions practise theirs.
The European Union and its Member States have for a long time promoted dialogue between different communities both within the EU and with neighbouring Muslim countries and Muslim countries in other parts of the world.
It is through a vigorous but peaceful dialogue of opinions under the protection of the freedom of expression that mutual understanding can be deepened and mutual respect can be built. I am fostering and will continue to foster dialogue between cultures and with religions. This dialogue must be based on tolerance, not prejudice, and on freedom of expression and religion and the values connected with them. Violence is the enemy of dialogue. We must not allow the minority of extremists to win. Let the best of our values win against the worst of prejudices."
Political group speakers
For the EPP-ED group, Hans Gert POETTERING (DE) said defending press freedom was a guiding principle. The feelings of believers and symbols important to them should be respected. There was freedom of belief and freedom of difference. We needed self control, to remain calm and measured. To the media in Iran and other Islamic countries he said that one cannot fight insensitivity with insensitivity. "We need to respect freedom of expression and its limits, to respect the freedoms of others. We need peaceful and constructive dialogue. Using violence as a way to express opinions can never be accepted. We condemn those who stirred up reaction in the Islamic world, months after the publication of these cartoons. This was organised by regimes who reject freedom of expression and repress their populations." He said violence against buildings and people should be condemned firmly. He put forward a specific suggestion for further reflection: the setting up of a committee of experts to review material in school books in Europe and in the Islamic world to see how values are transmitted. He pointed out that there were hundreds of cartoons in the Islamic world mocking European values and beliefs. He said the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly could be a forum for dialogue. He recalled a conversation with a senior cleric in Saudi Arabia, who had asked about how Muslims were treated in Europe. He had replied that we wanted them to be better integrated into our societies, but should continue freely to exercise their faith. The same freedoms are not available to convert to Christianity in Saudi Arabia. "Tolerance goes in two directions. Anyone who attacks one EU country attacks us all. We express our solidarity with Denmark. We must have tolerance and understanding, based on mutual recognition of the truth."
Former Danish Prime Minister Poul Nyrup RASMUSSEN spoke for the Socialist group. He said he had been shocked to see people attacked, flags burned and embassies trashed - and innocent people losing their jobs. "This is sad because our history is based on tolerance, solidarity and development. We have fought for justice, and for peaceful co-existence in Palestine. Violence must stop. I want to thank President Barroso for his signal of solidarity to my country. Any attack on one Member State is attack on the whole EU. EU should not be deemed to be Union of intolerance. Through our long and bloody history, we have learned values of peaceful co-existence the hard way. I want to make clear that we can accept no compromise on religious expression or freedom of expression. But this does not exist in a vacuum. We should respect others and freedom of religions." He said publication of the cartoons had been irresponsible and shown ignorance of the Islamic religion. It did not represent position of Danes in general - there was no need to criticise what is deemed sacred by others. "I find it hard to understand that the Prime Minister did not wish to meet representatives of the Islamic world harder to understand," though he acknowledged the Danish government had expressed its respect for religions. This episode, he said, cannot be used to create new myths about each other or to stimulate xenophobic and populist movements in Europe or in Islamic world. "It is not a matter of them and us. For too long extremists have played the tune, it is time for time for moderate and responsible voices to set an agenda for another way and not to add fuel to fire. We should unite all forces for a new dialogue with Islamic world, for mutual respect beyond all borders to all religions. It is not them against us, we are one," he said. He said this event should be the last act of provocation. Instead there should be a permanent, political, open and constructive dialogue.
Speaking for the ALDE group, Karin RIIS-JØRGENSEN (DK) said her core message was to safeguard and defend freedom of speech not only in Europe, but also in Kabul and Tehran. Violent protest, attacks, and flag burning had replaced dialogue. Seeing a European company boycotting Danish goods was not, she said, a sign of solidarity. "No-one was more shocked than me and my fellow Danes, she said. These global tensions have merely increased support for the far right. This has all been abused by extremists both in Europe and outside. We must not let extremists triumph at the expense of the majority." When the Danish flag and others were burned, she said, we should show solidarity and reject demands that governments apologise on behalf of the independent media. The Danish constitution, she said, gave all people the right to publish subject to responsibility before the Courts. The idea of a UN resolution of banning attacks on religions belief would be to criminalise thought on a global scale. "People have the right to be offended by cartoons, but complaints must be handled in appropriate legal channels. Offence is not a reason for violence. Freedom of the press must remain paramount; it is the basis of our freedoms. Believers of all religions should accept these values - they are free to practice religions but should also accept the right to be a non-believer," she said. Greater care, she argued, must be taken to ensure relations between communities remain as harmonious as possible. This could be resolved not by thought police but by dialogue. She rejected the idea of a code of conduct for the press: "If communities cannot discuss issues on their cultural fault lines, how will they grow together? Freedom of expression is a right but not a duty; it is a right we need to defend. If we start undermining freedom of expression, our right critically to analyse any religion, then freedom has been violated."
Daniel Marc COHN-BENDIT (DE) for the Greens said it was important to avoid telling the press what its limits are: "politicians should not and cannot do this". Instead he expressed his belief in the capacity of the common sense of civil society to do this. He noted that the debate surrounding the publication of the cartoons is a "debate for everyone, for society" and expressed his support for President Barroso's belief in the right to publish the cartoons. He considered it fundamental that "we cannot draw up a code of conduct for the press". Mr. Cohn-Bendit noted that as religion is in the public domain, criticism of it will always be "part and parcel of democracy" and that although the cartoons may not be in good taste, "freedom is not a question of taste, and it is something we have fought for". He expressed his solidarity with all those who have been victims of the recent violence. He concluded by noting that if we had laws that showed greater respect for immigrants in Europe, then greater respect might be reciprocated: "give them freedom; they will use it with responsibility".
Francis WURTZ GUE/NGL , (FR) called freedom of expression the "touchstone of democracy" and the "touchstone of living in a secular society". He considered freedom of expression along with tolerance as "two achievements not to be underestimated in Europe". He commented that the world of today is a small and interdependent one and that the "freedom of each is exercised in the action of all". Mr. Wurtz warned that if Europeans do not "break the vicious cycle", they will be "helping both extreme sides in achieving their aims". He asserted the need for Europe to "build bridges between the civilisations" and the need to heal the "open wound" of the Middle East "before it turns septic".
Jens-Peter BONDE (IND/DEM, DK) declared that on "freedom of expression, we will never give in" and that along with freedom of religion it needed to be respected. He supported the Danish Prime Minister in his refusal to take responsibility for the content of the Danish press. Mr. Bonde talked of the importance for every local editor to show global responsibly, that any rights concerning freedom of expression must be decided locally and the need for "dialogue and generosity instead of animosity". He asserted that Islam is not above Danish law and that it cannot appeal to the judiciary at a European Level to be considered so. Mr. Bonde closed his speech with the notion that "we must all live together on this globe; we have no other globe available, yet"
Brian CROWLEY (UEN, IE) opened with the notion that "there are no absolute rights…rights can be restricted", but that we also have to ensure that the press has the freedom to "offend" and to "poke fun", for he said humour and offence act as the safety-valve of democracy in ensuring that it works properly. He condemned the violence that occurred as a consequence of the cartoons' publication and believed that attention should be drawn to the numerous peaceful protests that occurred, protests that are "equally as important to raise in democracy as the right to expression". He therefore lamented the wide media coverage of the minorities' violence. He considered there to be a need for European solidarity, as a "boycott on Danish goods, is a boycott on all goods", and a need to "respect the dignity of difference".
Frank VANHECKE (NI, BE) began his speech by commenting on how shameful he saw the "lack of solidarity with Denmark that many European governments have shown during this affair". He lamented the verbal contortions of many who wanted to avoid offending Muslims and noted that the violent protests were not only targeted at the Danish but at the entire free west. He considered it time for Muslims who live in Europe and who enjoy freedom of expression to "put things into perspective" by understanding that democracy is "sometimes a question of clashing point of views". He called for the European Union to show its resistance "even at the risk of unflattering labels" and for Europeans to throw off their "muzzles". Concluding, Mr. Vanhecke commented that Turkey could never be a member of the Union, because the principles of Islam are incompatible with the principles of Europe.
Council response
Austrian Minister Winkler responded for the Council, expressing thanks for the strong message that people on all sides were signing up to a dialogue with other civilisations. He repeated that any attack against a Member States or boycott is an attack or boycott on Union as a whole: "We stand in solidarity with Denmark." He agreed on the importance of school textbooks not conveying stereotypes and that extremists must not be allowed to triumph. He said responsibility of press was for the press to exercise. The Council would continue to work on lines of better understanding of civilisations and religious communities. "We reject violence and boycotts," he concluded. Text adopted
MEPs optimistic about outlook for Bosnia and Herzegovina
The European Parliament welcomed the start of negotiations on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with Bosnia-Herzegovina, but stressed that the pace of negotiations will depend on the ability of the Bosnian, Serb and Croat communities to reach agreement on necessary constitutional and institutional reforms. In a resolution adopted by a large majority, MEPs said that the EU should support the country’s political forces and citizens more actively in their search for a consensus.
MEPs referred in particular to the development of a proper legal framework and efficient public administration and reforms of public broadcasting, police, defence and intelligence. They also stressed that full cooperation with The Hague Tribunal is a precondition for closer relations with the EU and asked the authorities to renew efforts for the sustainable return of refugees.
Among other things, MEPs supported the initiative to set up a Truth and Reconciliation Commission, and stressed that the parliamentary elections in October 2006 will be crucial. They pointed out that the policing financed by the EU has proved to be quite efficient and reiterated its calls for strengthened cooperation with the Balkans countries on border control. Text adopted
MEPs call on Member States to open up their labour markets
The European Parliament gave wide approval to an own-initiative report on the effects of globalisation on the Internal Market, drafted by Edit Herczog (PES, HU) on the heels of a public hearing held last October.
Noting that the EU, over the past few years, has been facing challenges to retain its leading position in areas such as economic growth, labour market performance, research and innovation, MEPs argue that the key to solving these problems lies in the completion of the internal market, "the EU's strongest asset to maximise the advantages of globalisation". In calling for bold steps to complete the internal market the report "applauds those Member States which have opened up their labour markets for citizens from the new Member States" and "urges those Member States which still maintain restrictions in this regard to eliminate existing obstacles to the free movement of labour". As a Commission official observed during a debate at committee level, -- and as MEPs went on to contend in their report -- the EU must ensure that the internal market "remains an attractive place to invest". At the same time, as the Parliament states, a flexible and globally-oriented internal market should go hand in hand with efforts "to deliver growth, jobs, social justice and respect for ecological balance while maintaining [Europe's] values and [its] social model."
As Konrad Szymański (UEN, PL) stated that the vote on the controversial services directive would be the "first test of our true intentions" giving the EP "a chance to show whether it wants a genuine internal market".
If Globalisation is the question .
"Protectionism is not the answer," argued Commissioner for the Internal Market and Services Charlie McCreevy, speaking before the plenary. As international integration accelerates, he remarked, "the concept of open markets and a globalising economy has come under attack." "I am not denying that many industries go through difficult and sometimes painful transitions" he added, noting "legitimate" concerns about globalisation, "but it does no good to try to shift the balance elsewhere – foreign takeovers, cheap imports, and migrant workers".
Lisbon not enough
Noting the EU's struggle to attain the goals set forth by the Lisbon Agenda, MEPs assert that the Lisbon Strategy, as a general economic plan, "may not be enough to handle globalisation". It is for this reason that the Parliament -- citing the Globalisation Adjustment Fund as an example -- calls for "other action lines" to cushion the negative effects, and to take advantage of the positive effects, of globalisation.
Securing the EU's competitive advantage
As Mrs. Herczog had remarked during last year's public hearing, the EU, if it wishes to compete in the know-how sector, must be able not only to generate, but also to safeguard, knowledge and innovation. Patents, copyright laws and anti-piracy policies are fundamental in this context. To that end, the present report underlines the importance of "clear labelling rules and observance of denominations of origin as means of guaranteeing the protection of European goods and values". Intellectual and industrial property rights must be secured, the Parliament insists -- through the setting up of patenting schemes or the implementation of effective controls on counterfeiting. Text adopted
Protection of workers from optical radiation - deal approved
Parliament approved an EU directive designed to protect workers from exposure to optical radiation. MEPs voted by 570 votes in favour, 16 against with 49 abstentions. The Council has accepted Parliament's key demand that the legislation should cover only artificial sources of optical radiation and not natural sources such as the sun. The often heard name "sunshine directive" is thus now completely inappropriate.
The directive lays down minimum standards for the prevention and early diagnosis of damage to the eyes and skin from optical radiation, and for the prevention of long-term health dangers. It sets exposure limit values and requires employers to carry out risk assessments. It also includes provisions on workers' rights to information, training, consultation and health checks.
Optical radiation within the meaning of the directive is any electromagnetic radiation in the wavelength range between 100 nm and 1 nm. The spectrum of optical radiation is divided into ultraviolet radiation, visible radiation and infrared radiation. The directive does not cover ionising radiation like x-rays or gamma rays, nor electromagnetic fields such as microwaves and radio frequencies.
Agreement was reached on most aspects of the directive at an early stage but there was one major sticking point at second reading: unlike the Council, MEPs believe national authorities - rather than the EU - should lay down the rules on whether and how employers should assess dangers to the eyes and the skin of natural radiation from the sun, and how they must respond to such risks. The Council wanted to require employers not only to assess the risks but also to set up an action plan if a risk is identified.
The deal approved by the two delegations excludes any reference to natural optical radiation from the directive and thus limits its scope to artificial optical radiation. If the full Parliament endorses the agreement, Member States will have four years to implement the directive at national level.
As to the sources of artificial radiation concerned, such as lasers and infrared lamps, the directive details the measures the employer must take to protect employees. These include adapting working methods to reduce the risks from optical radiation; limiting the duration and level of any exposure; the design and layout of workplaces and workstations; using appropriate personal protective equipment. Parliament agreed in second reading with these points. But MEPs successfully pushed the Council to accept that the Commission should produce a practical guide to help employers, especially smaller firms, to understand the technical aspects of the directive.
Background
This directive is the last of a series of four designed to protect workers from the dangers of various "physical agents". Previous directives have dealt with vibrations, noise and electromagnetic fields. Text adopted
Tighter control on welfare of chickens kept for meat production
In adopting a report on the welfare of chickens, MEPs adopted tighter rules on animal welfare for birds kept for meat production than the Commission had proposed. They came out strongly against cruel practices like beak trimming and called on the Commission to standardise penalties for chicken farmers who do not comply with EU rules.
The consultation report approved the general rule established by the Commission to limit stocking densities to 30 kg/m2 per unit. However, MEPs call for several changes to the proposed directive, in line with their assertion that "economic and social considerations should not take precedence over animal welfare and health."
The Commission would allow the possibility of a derogation to the rules, up to a maximum of 38 kg/m2, if a number of additional animal welfare criteria are met. While the Parliament agreed to this possibility, it is proposing a cut-off date of 1 January 2013, from which point on, the stocking density may not exceed 34 kg/m2. In addition, some of the Commission's welfare criteria regarding ventilation and temperature limits would be extended to all holdings, regardless of whether they were operating under the derogation.
Thus, under the amended proposal, all establishments would have to conform to a number of rules: non-flickering light of at least 50 lux intensity on a 24-hour rhythm, relative humidity of maximum 70% (when the outside temperature is below 10 degrees), temperature of maximum 3 degrees more than the outside temperature (when this exceeds 30 degrees), sufficient ventilation, regular feeding times, permanent access to water, minimal noise, dry litter, and twice daily inspections.
MEPs wish to do away with the possibility of surgical interventions. Under the rules laid down in Mr. Berman's report, practices of beak trimming and the castration of male chickens would no longer be allowed under any circumstances. The Parliament also added a reference to genetic selection, suggesting that this "must not restrict, diminish, or threaten animals' welfare potential."
The enforcement of all these rules is to be carried out by national authorities "in the form of unannounced spot checks" at least once a year, and the cost of the inspections is to be born by the competent authority itself. If deficiencies are detected, the authorities can mandate a reduction in the stocking density--severe deficiencies can lead to repeated reductions. Nevertheless, the House insists that the penalties be "proportionate, progressive, dissuasive" and gradual.
MEPs also call for a uniform classification scheme for symptoms of illness in chickens, harmonized penalties for infringements, as well as a common system of labelling chicken meat for consumers. The latter should indicate not only the origin and production standards of the products, but also the animal's age and the stocking density at which the chickens are kept.
Worried about the possibility of lower standards of animal welfare around the world, MEPs also adopted an amendment calling on the Commission to "control, and where necessary, prohibit imports of chickens from third countries which come from holdings which do not observe similar rules on the welfare of chickens for meat production as those to be adopted by the EU." Text adopted
MEPs back Community licence for air traffic controllers to improve safety and combat staff shortages
MEPs adopted a second reading report on establishing a Community Air Traffic Controller Licence. Rules on training and licensing of air traffic controllers are to be harmonised. The aims of the proposed directive are to ensure high safety standards and make it easier for air traffic controllers to work outside their home country by simplifying the mutual recognition of national licences.
Given the shortage of air traffic controllers in Europe - around 1,800 more are needed - mobility of controllers was one of the Parliament's main concerns. MEPs back moves to ease restrictions on the free movement of air traffic controllers: from now on, under the principle of "unconditional mutual recognition", all EU Member States must recognise each others' licences and qualifications, language certificates and medical certificates for air traffic controllers.
Rapporteur Christine de VEYRAC (EPP-ED, FR) also underlined the importance of the directive for the Single European Sky, created in 2004, as it facilitates both the establishment of cross-border functional airspace blocks and the provision of cross-border air-traffic control services. At present airspace blocks often end at national borders. One of the objectives of the Single Sky is a safer, more efficient flow of traffic by creating airspace blocks that do not end at national borders but straddle them where this makes operational sense. The Air Traffic Controller Licence is an important precondition for the creation of airspace blocks.
Regarding language requirements, MEPs and Council have agreed on an operational language proficiency (level 4) for English, and for a local language where Member States consider it necessary for safety reasons. Moreover, in line with the Parliament's wishes, Member States are also allowed to require advanced proficiency in the local language (level 5) for important safety reasons: MEPs argued that staff responsible for air traffic control are also in contact with a number of local services (particularly the local emergency services), with whom they must be able to communicate easily.
MEPs approved the Council's Common Position as it stood, since it takes account of the amendments proposed by Parliament at first reading and of the Commission's amended proposal. Text adopted
Strategic guidelines for rural development 2007-2013
Parliament adopted a report suggesting a stronger focus on young farmers, the modernisation of agriculture, and the protection of the rural cultural heritage as key strategic guidelines for rural development. MEPs underlined the importance of "the provision of essential funding to the new Member States in order to reduce the gap between them and the EU 15."
The consultation report by Mairead McGUINNESS (EPP-ED, IE) on strategic guidelines for rural development was adopted by a large majority (455 votes in favour 16 against with 10 abstentions) in Parliament.
Palriament welcomed the Commission proposals but sought to add more references to helping young farmers and the necessity of modernising the agricultural sector. Parliament also called for the "safeguarding of the rural cultural heritage" to counteract rural depopulation. Additional suggestions included the promotion of local and regional products, the "incorporation of women into the labour market," and "support for investment and training in the field of non-food production," as well as green tourism.
The House also highlighted "village renewal and development," for instance by investing in "childcare and old people's centres, subsidised housing and rented accommodation, cultural centres, transport" and other infrastructure projects. Text adopted
MEPs support the retention of the Shetland fisheries box for a further three years
In an own-initiative report on the current restrictions within the Common Fisheries Policy, MEPs welcomed the Commission's decision to "maintain the Shetland Box for a further three years" and to "retain the Plaice Box and associated access restrictions pending further study".
The Shetland Box
Established in 1983, and in the hope of curbing the over-fishing of "species of special importance in the region…which are biologically sensitive", the Shetland Box is managed by a licensing system which restricts vessels of over 26 meters fishing for demersal fish in the area. The five main commercially exploited fish in the box are haddock, monkfish, cod, whiting and saithe, with a disproportionate abundance of mature haddock and whiting. The licensing system restricts the number of vessels allowed to fish within the box at one time to 128. This number comprises 62 British, 52 French, 12 German and 2 Belgian, the allocation of which was "based on the track records of fishing activity in this area".
The Plaice Box
In 1989, the Commission established an area closed to beam trawlers of more than 300 horsepower (hp) or 221kW that became known as the plaice box. The restrictions were implemented in order to reduce the levels of discards of flat fish in the North Sea fisheries. At first, the closure applied only in the second and third quarters of the year, but in 1994 it was extended to the fourth and since 1995, the box has been closed the whole year round.
The report comes after the Commission fulfilled its commitment under Article 19, which requires it to assess the "the justification for restrictions on access to waters and resources outside of the 12 mile zone". It welcomes the Commission's cooperation with the industry, whilst noting the support for the maintenance of the Shetland box given by the Scientific, Technical and Economic Committee for Fisheries (STECF) and by the North Sea Regional Advisory Council (NSRAC). It further notes how the Commission's Expert Working Group highlighted the "socio-economic importance of the boxes" and that one of the intentions of the Shetland Box is to "provide protection for fisheries-dependent communities in the north of Scotland".
The report observes that the UK government, along with the German government, believes that any changes regarding the Shetland box are "neither necessary nor desirable" and that "any decision should be taken in the context of future flatfish management and the advice of the National Sea Regional Advisory Council (NSRAC)".
Parliament calls on the Commission to make a quantitative evaluation of the likely implications of any changes to the Shetland box and recommends that in the case of these evaluations taking longer than the anticipated three years, it recommends that the current legislation should remain in force. Text adopted
Parliament supports move to focus state aid on competitiveness
Parliament is supporting Commission plans to reform the state aid rules, with the aim of having less, but better state aid in the future. MEPs adopted a report by Gunnar Hökmark (EPP-ED, SE) which approves the EU executive's aim of making state aid an instrument for growth and jobs as part of the Lisbon strategy.
The own-initiative report is Parliament's contribution to the Commission's consultation on its proposals. MEPs agree that state aid policy needs comprehensive reform, saying that the market economy is the most efficient way of allocating limited resources, so state aid should be a last resort. However, they note that when it does not distort competition, state aid is a permissible means to promote development. Welcoming the plans for an economic approach to state aid, they call for this to be strictly defined, notably including a detailed definition of the concept of market failure.
The report says Member States should require companies to publish details of the subsidies they receive "to enable shareholders to better evaluate the real performance of the company." MEPs stress that aid for innovation can give industry an incentive to invest more in research and development, but warn it should not distort competition, by for example, favouring one undertaking over others.
On state support for services of general economic interest, Parliament says that this only counts as 'state aid' when there is overcompensation. It calls for greater clarity from the Commission on the implementation of the Altmark ruling taking account of the specificities of different sectors and suggests assessment of state aid to public service companies should be based on the effect on the market rather than the size of the company involved.
When it comes to regional aid, the report supports a focus on investments on infrastructure and horizontal aid. While noting that environmental state aid can be crucial in achieving sustainable development, MEPs call for Member States to reduce and ultimately eliminate state aid which promotes polluting production or consumption.
Among other points, the report also argues that the system should be made less bureaucratic and that sanctions for non-notification should apply to the Member States concerned as well as to the recipients of aid. Text adopted
Making human rights clauses more effective
MEPs adopted a non-binding report on the human rights and democracy clause in EU agreements. It points out that the clause had now been introduced into more than 50 of the EU's international agreements.
Ten years after it was first drafted, it is now time to evaluate how it has been implemented and how it could be improved.
The report notes that many sectoral agreements, such as those on textiles, agriculture and fisheries, as well as agreements with developed countries, still lack the clause. MEPs warn that Parliament is "no longer prepared to give its assent to new international agreements that do not contain a human rights and democracy clause". It points out that, on many occasions, the EU had not been able to respond adequately to serious and persistent violations of human rights and democratic principles. The House concludes that the EU must draw up new procedures and new criteria for applying the human rights and democracy clause, which must apply without discrimination between States or between their levels of development.
The report also calls for the establishment of human rights subcommittees under EU-third country agreements, to be responsible for reviewing compliance with the clause, monitoring its application and implementation, and proposing actions to address democracy and human rights problems.
MEPs say that one of the factors which has compromised the application of the clause was its vague language, which did not spell out detailed procedures for 'positive' and 'negative' interventions in EU/third country cooperation - unlike the democracy clauses in the Cotonou Agreements with the ACP States which had been very effective. MEPs also call for the expansion of the positive dimension of the human rights clause, which entails the need to take effective measures to contribute to the enjoyment of human rights within and by the respective parties, to include an ongoing assessment and monitoring of the impact of the agreement itself on the enjoyment of human rights, as well as to adopt a human rights approach when implementing all aspects of the agreement.
Parliament says if one of the governments concerned in the human right clause, the European Parliament or the national parliaments concerned or, in the case of ACP countries, the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly, calls for the human rights and democracy clause to be invoked, through the suspension of a bilateral agreement or the implementation of dialogue or other appropriate measures, the Association Council should automatically include that debate on its agenda.
MEPs note that the European Parliament has formally expressed its view to that effect in several cases, but that the Association Council has simply ignored those requests.
In order to ensure a more coherent, effective and transparent approach to European human rights policy, a revision of the current wording is indispensable, says the Parliament. The revised text should take into account the following principles: reciprocity, with regard both to the territory of the EU and that of the other countries involved; gender equality and women's rights; no discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation or disability; temporary suspension of a cooperation agreement as well as a "warning mechanism" in response to a breach of the clause; and consultations between all parties.
MEPs stress that, for elections to be considered democratic, free and fair, certain preconditions must be met, including, inter alia, respect for political and civic rights, respect for freedom of expression and information, equal access to the media and respect for political pluralism, so as to offer electors a real choice.
Lastly, MEPs wants Parliament to be involved to a much greater extent in drawing up the negotiating mandate for EU/third country agreements, and insists on the need for it to be a joint decision-maker with the Commission and the Council when it comes to initiating consultations, suspending an agreement or suspending any negative measures already imposed on a country. Text adopted
Confiscation of vehicles by Greek authorities - MEPs call for compliance with EU law
In adopting a non-binding report put forward by Michael Cashman (PES, UK), Parliament called on the Greek authorities "to fulfil the Hellenic Republic's obligations under the Treaty and to comply with the rules laid down in Community legislation".
This comes in response to a large number of petitions concerning the confiscation of automobiles suspected by the Greek authorities to be illegally imported. In the event that the Greek authorities fail to respond to the demands of the report, it calls on the Commission to "proceed without delay with it legal action against the Hellenic Republic".
On the 28 March 1983, the Council Directive 83/182/EEC was implemented. This Directive concerned tax exemptions within the Community for certain means of transport temporarily imported into one Member State from another. The application of this directive in Greece has been problematic, involving complexities relating to the determination of "normal residence", the penalties implemented in cases of infringement of the rules, and the extent to which the "good faith" of the perpetrator is taken into account. Consequently, there have been "a number of irregularities which have occurred in Greece when the customs authorities, suspecting that the petitioner's foreign registered vehicles were being illegally imported and used in Greece, confiscated the vehicles".
The report opens by expressing its "great concern" that the Greek authorities failed to implement the exemption laid down in Directive 83/182/EEC and points out that the Greek seizure, confiscation, and selling of vehicles is "incompatible with the principles of the EU's Charter of Fundamental Rights". Although the report acknowledges that it is up to national legislation to decide the appropriate penalty when dealing with "infringements relating to temporary importation of certain means of transport", the report advises that the good faith of the offender must be taken into account. It also notes that Member States must exercise their power in "accordance with Community law and its general principles, and consequently with the principle of proportionality". Text adopted
Human rights : Azerbaijan, Guantanamo and Sri Lanka
As usual, Parliament's session ended with three short debates on human rights issues around the world. On this occasion they covered Azerbaijan, Guantanamo Bay and Sri Lanka. Resolutions were adopted on the first two, while the groups agreed to withdraw their proposed resolutions on Sri Lanka.
Azerbaijan: MEPs condemn destruction of cultural heritage
In its resolution on Azerbaijan, adopted by 85 votes in favour to 5 against with no abstentions, Parliament addresses allegations by Armenia that campaigns to destroy the Armenian cemetery at Djulfa in the region of Nakhichevan were carried out by Azerbaijani forces in November 1998 and December 2002 and that the most recent destruction took place in December 2005, as evidenced by the recent video footage from the Armenian authorities. There were numerous reactions to these actions from the international community, but Azerbaijan has not provided answers to inquiries from Abdelfattah Amor, the former special rapporteur of the United Nations, concerning the events in November 1998 and December 2002.
Parliament strongly condemns the destruction of the Djulfa cemetery as well as the destruction of all sites of historical importance that has taken place on Armenian or Azerbaijani territory, and condemns any such action that seeks to destroy the cultural heritage of a people. It calls on the Council and the Commission to make clear to Armenia and Azerbaijan that all efforts must be made to stop the practice of ethnic cleansing which has led to such actions, and to find ways to facilitate the gradual return of refugees and displaced people.
MEPs demand that Azerbaijan and Armenia respect their international commitments - notably in the cultural realm - and especially those deriving from their accession to the Council of Europe and incorporation into the European Neighbourhood Policy. They stress that respect for minority rights including historical, religious and cultural heritage is conditional on the genuine and effective development of the European Neighbourhood Policy, which must also lead to the establishment of good neighbourly relations between all the countries concerned. They demand that Azerbaijan allow missions dedicated to surveying and protecting the archaeological heritage on its territory, especially Armenian heritage, such as experts working with ICOMOS, and also allow a European Parliament delegation to visit the archaeological site at Djulfa.
Parliament calls on Armenia and Azerbaijan to abide by their international commitments, in particular in the area of culture and of safeguarding cultural heritage, entered into within international bodies such as UNESCO and the Council of Europe, and calls on them to do their utmost to protect archaeological, historical and cultural heritage on their territories in order to prevent the destruction of other endangered sites. It invites the Commission and the Council to incorporate a clause on protecting those territories’ invaluable archaeological or historical sites into the action plans currently being discussed in a European Neighbourhood Policy context.
Parliament also invites the Commission and the Council to make the implementation of the European Neighbourhood Policy action plans conditional on respect by Azerbaijan's and Armenia's for universally accepted principles, in particular their obligations as members of the Council of Europe, regarding human and minority rights, and calls on the Commission and the Council to incorporate into these action plans specific provisions for the protection of the cultural heritage of minorities.
Call to close Guantanamo Bay detention facility
In their resolution on Guantanamo Bay, adopted by 80 votes in favour to 1 against with 1 abstention, MEPs call on the US Administration to close the detention facility there and insist that every prisoner should be treated in accordance with international humanitarian law and tried without delay in a fair and public hearing by a competent, independent, impartial tribunal. They condemn all forms of torture and ill-treatment and reiterate the need to comply with international law.
Parliament stresses that contemporary terrorism, particularly global terrorism directed against democracies and their populations, poses a threat to the basic and fundamental human rights our societies enjoy. It reiterates that the fight against terrorism, which is one of the priorities of the Union and a key aspect of its external action, can only be successfully pursued if human rights and civil liberties are fully respected.
Sri Lanka
MEPs discussed prospects for talks between the government of Sri Lanka and the LTTE. At this delicate stage of efforts to bring peace to the island, Parliament's groups decided it would not be appropriate to take a formal position, and so the six draft resolutions that formed the basis of the debate were withdrawn before the vote. Text adopted
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta.do?language=EN
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta.do?language=EN
EN
3
LINK
/activities/expert/ta.do?language=EN
EN
4
LINK
/activities/expert/ta.do?language=EN
EN
5
LINK
/activities/expert/ta.do?language=EN
EN
6
LINK
/activities/expert/ta.do?language=EN
EN
7
LINK
/activities/expert/ta.do?language=EN
EN
8
LINK
/activities/expert/ta.do?language=EN
EN
9
LINK
/activities/expert/ta.do?language=EN
EN
10
LINK
/activities/expert/ta.do?language=EN
EN
11
LINK
/activities/expert/ta.do?language=EN
EN
12
LINK
/activities/expert/ta.do?language=EN
EN
13
LINK
/activities/expert/ta.do?language=EN
EN
14
LINK
/activities/expert/ta.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
