Workers to get better protection from artificial optical radiation
Employment policy
2006-02-21 - 10:01
New rules for optical radiation
Employers will have to protect workers from exposure to artificial forms of optical radiation but will not have to worry about natural sunlight under legislation approved by the European Parliament.
The rules, which will come into force across the EU over the next four years, were the subject of some conflict, with MEPs favouring national rules on risk assessment and response to the impact on the eyes and the skin from natural radiation from the sun. Ministers wanted EU rules on risks from sunlight but gave in to the Parliament, which felt that guidelines on protection from climates as diverse as Finland and Greece would be better dealt with nationally. During discussion of the legislation concerns, were raised that the inclusion of protection from exposure to the sun would place too heavy a burden on a number of smaller companies, especially building firms and small catering concerns, which may have a lot of outside workers.
The legislation sets minimum standards for the prevention, early diagnosis and avoidance of long-term health danger to the eyes and skin from optical radiation in the form of ultraviolet radiation, visible radiation and infrared radiation from lasers and infrared lamps. It also sets exposure limits and includes provisions on employee rights to information, training, consultation and health checks as well as requiring employers to carry out risk assessments.
Employers will have to adapt working methods to reduce risk from optical radiation: limiting the duration and level of exposure, looking at the layout of the workplace and providing appropriate protective equipment. MEPs also managed to get an agreement for the EU Commission to produce a practical guide for employers, which should prove particularly helpful to smaller companies, on the technical aspects of the new rules.
The rules don't cover ionising radiation like x-rays and gamma rays or electromagnetic fields including microwaves and radio frequencies.
The new laws on optical radiation are the last of a series of four designed to protect workers from the dangers of "physical agents." Previous legislation has dealt with vibratation, noise and electromagnetic fields. Workers are also protected by 1989 rules which require Member States to take all necessary measures to guarantee "the safety and health of workers in every aspect related to work".
20060221STO05517 Employment and Social Affairs Committee
EN
1
PHOTO
20050819PHT00962.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/committees/presentation.do?committee=1238&language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
