Parliament debates the Services Directive ahead of important vote
Free movement of services
2006-02-15 - 10:51
Almost two years after the Commission published its draft directive on the internal market in services, after months of controversy, and after no fewer than ten parliamentary committees had dealt with different aspects of the proposal, Tuesday 14 February was the day when the issue finally had its first reading debate in plenary. President Borrell said that a demonstration of around 30 000 people was taking place in Strasbourg at the same time as the debate.
Rapporteur Evelyne GEBHARDT
" Today, we are dealing with the most important piece of EU legislation apart from the Constitution ," said the rapporteur Evelyne GEBHARDT (PES, DE). " Services in Europe must be as free and open as goods and capital ." It was, she said, good that the Commission had made proposals in this area, but these had been so unsuccessful as to give the impression that the interests of the ' old ' EU15 states were being played off against the ' new ' EU10. In fact, she said, all Member States have the same rights and obligations - the EU should serve the welfare of all 450m citizens. " People must be central ," she said, " workers and their families should be the centre point, not major companies and their profits." The Commission's draft had needed serious revision by Parliament. Despite the ideological differences, she urged the plenary to take decisive steps for the Directive without too much red tape, which respects the special features of each Member State, with no downward spiral of wages and working standards and environmental protection. " We needed to get away from the devastating form of the Country of Origin principle. I proposed a simple answer that it should be legal to provide services applying the rules of the country of destination ," she said. It should apply only to proper marketable commercial applications, but nor should it trample or underfoot people setting up businesses, she said. The original proposal had been turned on its head and could now be adopted. " We can adopt legislation for liberalised services which also works towards a social Europe. I am confident we will reach solutions that command large majority, obliging Council and Commission to follow the path set down by Parliament ."
Council Presidency
Speaking for the Council Presidency, Austrian Federal Minister for Economics and Labour, Martin BARTENSTEIN said implementation of the Services Directive would help reach the Lisbon goals. The internal market had created 2.5 million jobs, but the remaining loopholes needed to be closed. " Legal and bureaucratic barriers split the market, leading to higher prices, less competition in interests of consumers, and a failure to create jobs ," he said. The original proposal had led to intensive debate and much criticism, some valid, but many worries were unnecessary. " We can support the basic principles of removing unfair barriers. Parliament's vote will be the major basis for review of the proposal which the Commission needs to carry out ." The Directive, he said, will help service operators and service users, and would not call into question the European Social Model. Europe's citizens, he continued, were entitled to an internal market without social or wage dumping. It needed to be neutral on labour law and there needed to be controls. Quality, coverage and availability of services must not be reduced. " The Presidency will work closely for a balanced directive, which takes account of peoples' concerns, but which lays the basis for well functioning market in services ," he said.
Before turning to the leaders of the political groups, EP President Josep BORRELL pointed out that an enormous demonstration was taking place outside Parliament, with some 30,000 people peacefully taking part. " This is a strong encouragement for us to work responsibly ," he said.
European Commission President
President José Manuel BARROSO stated that the Services Directive was crucial to European growth and employment prospects. He congratulated the European Parliament for its work and its readiness to vote. Mr Barroso said " a lot of work has still to be done for Europe to fully enjoy the fundamental freedoms enshrined in the Treaties ".
The Directive would be a test to see if the EU-25 was able to find solutions to difficult issues which are particularly sensitive to public opinion. " Europe needs a strong consensus in the European Parliament on the Services Directive ."
While the fears expressed about the Directive in some cases were legitimate, some were based on misunderstandings and some had nothing do with the proposed directive.
It was important for the EU not only to translate the four fundamental freedoms enshrined in the Treaties but also to respond to the legitimate concerns. The Commission's revised proposal would take on board Parliament's amendments that were based on a broad majority. A strong Services Directive would show that the EU of 25 Member States was capable of reaching pragmatic solutions. " The Union needs a real market for services and needs to support SMEs. Europe needs a balanced directive based on the four freedoms enshrined in the Treaties "
Commissioner for Internal Market and Services
Commissioner for the Internal Market and Services, Charlie McCREEVY , stated that the proposed Services Directive had long been in the headlines. In many areas, there was broad agreement on the proposed Directive. First, administrative simplification would make it easier for businesses by establishing single points of contact and reducing cost. Second, he said, it would be good for consumers because the Directive would lead to greater consumer confidence as information on businesses could easily be more easily shared. Thirdly, greater administrative co-operation would also mean that businesses could be more efficiently supervised.
Commissioner McCreevy also that the Commission would take on board amendments adopted by the European Parliament by a large majority. He welcomed the vote in the Internal Market Committee and particularly the parts on the services of general interest. However, he stated that services of general economic interest should be included within the scope of the Directive.
On the posting of workers directive, the Commissioner stated that if Parliament voted to delete reference to this directive, the Commission would publish guidelines on how the directive should be implemented. On healthcare services, he said that the Commission had to take into account the jurisprudence of the European Court of Justice and, therefore, the Commission would come up with, if necessary, a separate proposal on patient mobility.
The Services Directive represented a forward step to an internal market on services. The Directive should be compatible with the four freedoms enshrined in the Treaties and the jurisprudence of the courts. Any measures taken by Member States had to be based on non-discrimination, necessity and proportionality.
The Commission, he said, would come forward with a revised proposal following the vote in the European Parliament with a view to common position from Council " hopefully before April ".
Political group leaders
Hans-Gert POETTERING , leader of the EPP-ED group, said what the proposal had changed. Freedom of movement of services was one of the four freedoms that were the basis of Union, but it had lagged behind the others. The core of the Lisbon strategy was to make European services more competitive and improve choice for consumers. " This is a political decision for clear implementation of treaty. It is a test of the seriousness of our commitment to Lisbon ." The proposal had been subject to criticism, both justified and unfair. Some had tried to use the debate to strengthen barriers to services. " Our group has practically rewritten the proposal - it shows we are willing to compromise, to reach a broad agreement, but not at any cost ." This should now, he said, seek more cooperation between states, help combat the illegal trafficking in labour, benefit consumers, improve international competitiveness, and speed up the integration of new Member States into Europe's social market economy. " We want the Council's spring summit to come to a political agreement on the basis of our vote. Any delay mean less employment and growth. We must take people's concerns seriously, but also show leadership to show the European project has a future, and the EU a common project to take forward ."
For the leader of the Socialist group, Martin SCHULZ (PES, DE), this Directive was the most controversial and hotly disputed of recent time, because it asked the question 'What social model should Europe have ?' The answer was about to come. " For us, as social democrats, it is clear that economic and technical progress was linked to higher wages, social security and consumer protection. Bolkestein aimed for growth created by lowering wages and standards. But Bolkestein no longer exists - that is the first good message to take from this debate. Europe cannot be divided into groups and the attempt to divide us has been removed. " The thinking had been to lower wages and standards, competing downward, playing off old Member States against new. That attempt, he said, had failed. " In our group, and in the EPP, the old and the new have been working together to solve the problem. This is another good message ." Many, he said, had attempted to use the directive in their own interests to shape the internal market on the basis of a purely liberal model. But there was now a broad majority in favour of a new Services Directive based on a guarantee of free market access but under the conditions of country where the services were provided, maintaining the standard acquired up to now. " If anyone wants to change or destroy the European Social Model, it is clear they will have to reckon with the European Socialists ," he said.
Graham WATSON (UK), leader of the ALDE group, said Frits Bolkestein was still alive and kicking. There was, he said, a choice to reform and create wealth and opportunity, or to use protectionism in the short term interest of some, but with a long term loss for all. " We risk having a mindless mass of regulation - we support the Country of Origin principle because we think about the needs of small businesses. Doing away with it reduces the growth potential by half ." He said a compromise between mutually exclusive positions was not a consensus; it was a 'Berlin blockage .' There was, he said, no risk of social dumping as the posting of workers directive was still in force. The directive should transform the founding principles of Union into reality, not making second class citizens of the new Member States. The new compromise, he said, left Member States able to justify barriers on social policy and consumer protection grounds. " We would not be contemplating such an emasculation unless Barroso and his Commission had defended their draft, rather than tilting at windmills... the Commission cowers in the shadow of public opinion and Member State hesitation ." He said greater growth, more jobs and stronger companies were within grasp. He called on MEPs to vote to create dynamic market for services.
Heide RÛHLE (Greens, EFA) started her speech by noting how very few proposals have polarised the citizens of Europe as much as this one. She spoke of the need for a European directive on services but that the Parliament was not in the position to deliver this time and instead merely "watered-down" the Commission's directive at the cost of clarity. She further noted that services of general interest as well as services of economic interest should be dealt with separately and not in the directive. She lamented the lack of clarity when it came to the definition of social services and the non-transparent "patchwork left". Ms. Rühle also disputed the country-of-origin principle asserting that when a service is provided locally, the local legislation should be complied with. She spoke of the problematic local-level restrictions that she considers the directive to cause and urged this element to be questioned. She concluded by saying that the directive could not be supported.
Francis WURTZ (GUE/NGL, FR) noted and welcomed the "exceptional political and social mobilisation around Europe" that the discussion of the directive has caused. He stressed that his group have not "turned their noses up at the various improvements made" but denied that the changes in the directive have been for the overall good. Mr Wurtz expressed concern at the "open door left to the court nibbling away" at European social rights created by the changes in the directive. He talked of the potential it creates to offer services through bogus independents and the problems of contradictory working hours per week. In the "context of these ambiguities", Mr. Wurtz considered that "the right thing to do at this stage is to reject the directive ", and if not now, he assured that he would strive to reject it further down the line. He finished by declaring that he was "in favour of equality, in favour of solidarity, in favour of the rights of everyone" , and therefore that he would "say no to Bolkestein".
Nigel FARAGE (IND/DEM, UK) spoke against the directive by commenting that despite the Lisbon Agenda's objectives, " we have 20 million people unemployed " throughout Europe, that growth rates are "desperately low " in the euro-zone, that we are "stumbling around in an economic desert" and that the Bolkestein directive is merely a "mirage". He talked of his fear that the Directive's application will vary from country to country, and the potential it provides for the European Court of Justice to preside over the judicial powers of Member States. He concluded by criticising the directive's plan to remove power from the Member States and give it to the "failing institutions" of Europe.
Speaking for the UEN group, Adam BIELAN (PL) asserted that one of the fundamental goals of the EU - to create a free-flowing market - has not yet been achieved, but that the Directive has the potential to do this. He supported the proposal by noting that the vast empirical evidence shows that the implementation of the directive would create 600,000 new jobs, that it would cause a reduction in prices, many benefits for customers and "higher unemployment, higher productivity, higher wages ". Mr. Bielan urged the Parliament not to consent to the reprimand of the directive, but instead to support it and show what he believes Europeans are: "courageous, responsible and wise ".
Marine Le PEN (NI, FR) called the amended Directive "modified, amended but still contested". She asserted that agreement on the directive had only been reached by some individuals of the two major groups rather than the groups as a whole. She commented on the loss of the authorisation system only to be replaced by the "one-point-of-contact approach" , she noted how the directive had gone away from the country-of-origin principle but not from social dumping or the threat of weighing up comparative advantage. She declared the directive to be "complex, ambiguous, unclear, contradictory and dangerous", and in view of protecting culture and education, she said she was against it.
British and Irish speakers
Christopher HEATON-HARRIS (EPP-ED, UK), who authored an opinion on the Services Directive for the Budgetary Control Committee, said: " there is quite a lot of St Valentine's spirit around in Par liament". There were times when concessions were needed, but this was not such an occasion. Those protesting wanted to protect the market in the short-term, but it would not help them in the long-term. If Europe did not liberalise services, the current 20 million unemployed would increase and Europe's economy would stagnate. He agreed with the UK government's position that the proposed directive had been watered down too much already. The aim of the Directive was to create jobs and not protect the status quo.
Anne Van LANCKER (PES, BE), draftsperson for the Employment and Social Affairs Committee, praised Parliament's transparent way of working. Parliament had a great responsibility: to show there could be an internal market in services, bearing in mind the European Social Model and without social dumping. " We should not undermine social provisions - this directive is often seen as blank cheque for social dumping and wage cuts. We have seen examples in Sweden and with Irish Ferries which are unjustified. We need measures for better access to information for employers, less red tape, and also actually to apply posting of workers directive which is too often side-stepped ." She said all services of general economic interest should be excluded and the country of origin principle abandoned. The present compromise was a good one, she said.
Malcolm HARBOUR (EPP-ED, UK), the shadow rapporteur for the EPP-ED group, said many of the fears had been overplayed. Mr Harbour said that he wanted to concentrate on the opportunities that the Directive offered and paid tribute to the rapporteur Mrs Gebhardt. He stated that three-quarters of the amendments to be voted on Thursday had been drawn up by the EPP-ED group. The idea of chapter in the proposed Directive on the freedom to provide services came from the EPP-ED group at the time of the vote in the Internal Market Committee. SMEs had continually been frustrated by administrative burden and this directive would eliminate 81 separate barriers to the freedom of establishment. Businesses should not be subject to disproportionate and unnecessary duplicate rules or restrictions as the case-law of the European Court of Justice had underlined. Mr Harbour stressed the importance of the Commission and Commissioner McCreevy in making the proposal more business friendly. He also stated that the Council could get a common position on the Services Directive during the Spring European Council.
It was clear that the Directive needed a rewrite stated Jean LAMBERT (Greens/ EFA, UK) but it was "a pity that it was Parliament who is doing it". She said that, along with many others, she had found the Commission's behaviour "highly problematic" during the course of the discussion on the directive. She spoke of the Commission's lack of clarity and the fact that it did not give answers to specific questions asked. Furthermore, she lamented the absence of an impact assessment. Although she conceded that there were " few " issues of disagreement, she pointed out that the issues that did arise were "extremely important" ones. She talked of the country of origin "theory" and questioned where it fitted in with the pursuit of higher standards. She declared her support for the removal of health from the directive, saying that "it should never have been in there in the first place" and asserted the need to distinguish between " patient mobility" and " service mobility " .
On the balance between the protection of indigenous employment and liberalisation, James ALLISTER (NI, UK) said he favoured the former. The country of origin principle was a " bridge too far " and he stated that competition had to be " not only free but also fair ". He also could not agree with the scope of the Directive saying that it should not apply to core public services. Each Member State, he said, had a duty to provide these services to its citizens and it could not be " substituted by the cheapest cowboy pro vider". He said he could not support the Directive.
Response to the debate
Responding to the debate at the end of the afternoon session, Minister BARTENSTEIN said "There is now a better directive in front of us, which is able to garner a broad majority at first reading. I largely agree with the compromise proposal ." He said that Parliament could be proud of its work on this dossier, as it could of its work on REACH. Given the stance of six Member States, it was important to have a large majority, he said, to send a clear opinion from Parliament. " The compromise gives high added value in terms of freedom of services in the internal market, and a gives a clear 'no' to social and wage dumping ." He said this directive, having been a symbol of the gap between EU institutions and citizens was also now a symbol of whether the EU was able to go forward for growth and employment. " We in the Presidency will work hard over next weeks, we will listen to the Parliament, we will listen to the social partners and, at the end of March, we will take the debate to the European Council. We will take on board position of Parliament and will take it seriously ," he said.
British and Irish speakers continued .
Eoin RYAN (UEN, IE) stated that politics was too often based on the politics of fear and the fear of change and this had also been the case in Ireland. There were barriers available that would protect Europe from the forces of globalisation and it was about Europe avoiding a race to the bottom. He quoted an economist who had said that there was a risk with all the amendments in Parliament that the services directive " would suffer a death by Parliament ".
Bairbre de BRUN (GUE/NGL, UK) urged the House to reject the Services Directive. The Directive, she said, commercialises almost all services within the EU and will deprive millions of quality public services. It will, she continued, disproportionately affect women, both as the majority of workers in the service sector and as users of those services. Ms de Brún was in agreement with points made earlier about decisions ending up with the Court of Justice. The struggle, she said, will be at its most intense at national level.
Arlene McCARTHY (PES, UK) started by making reference to the late MEP, Philip Whitehead who, she said, would have been proud of the work done by the rapporteur Mrs Gebhardt and all Members who have worked so hard to improve and amend the Commission proposal.
The Bolkestein proposal, Mrs McCarthy stated, was flawed because it failed to recognise that if you want the public to support the opening up of the market, you have to convince them of the benefits and reassure them that it will not undermine working or consumer rights.
"So let us make it simple. We need to end the ludicrous discriminatory practices that are stopping our businesses from getting a foothold in the European market. Why should a business have to apply to join a local chamber of commerce, only to be told there is a five-year waiting list? Why should a business have to set up four offices and pay a EUR 500 000 deposit? The black economy is thriving in Europe in the services sector because these complex and costly barriers are encouraging businesses to engage in undeclared and illegal work. Let us make them legal with these rules. Let us get rid of protectionism, but protect consumers and working rights . "
Consumers, she believed, can see the benefit of choice and competition if they can be sure that if something goes wrong they can have a speedy remedy in a local court and they do not have to chase down a bad provider to Lisbon, Paris, Warsaw or London to have their rights recognised. This is what we are trying to achieve in these compromises, she stated.
Those working in the service sector need the guarantee that their employment rights are protected. This is not about old or new Europe. Citizens are looking to us to make the right choice, to get rid of crippling protectionism in the single market in services and protect working and consumer rights.
Concluding, Mrs McCarthy asked the Commission to look at ensuring that these single points of delivery, these one-stop-shops that are so vital to delivering, monitoring and supervising the kind of services needed – that it should look at setting up an EU trust mark or an EU quality assurance scheme to give the consumer the trust and the confidence to use these services which respect consumers' and working rights.
Avril DOYLE (EPP-ED, IE) stated that in relation to services, there has been over 50 years of Member State protectionism and restrictive practices, from complicated bureaucratic hurdles and time delays to financial penalties to obscure qualification requirements. This, in turn, has encouraged a rampant black economy. Mrs Doyle stated that in fact countries that have embraced the enlarged EU market have grown from strength to strength. Since 1993, she said, the free movement of goods, capital and persons has yielded enormous economic and social gains. Nearly 70% of the working population in Europe is involved in the services sector, which represents 55% of the EU's GDP, but at present services account for only 20% of trade between Member States. The incomplete market has created nearly EUR 1,000 billion of prosperity and 2.5 million additional jobs in Europe. The Services Directive could, she said, deliver 600,000 jobs more.
However, she continued, there are a limited number of services, especially the health services, that should have sector-specific measures. She welcomed Commissioner McCreevy's undertaking to propose a separate directive on patient mobility on the whole issue of cross-border health service provision. However, she supported the remaining provisions of what is already an emaciated directive. It is, she said, particularly important that the temporary workers' agencies are not excluded from the scope, given the extent to which staffing and recruitment agencies are used in a modern, flexible labour market. She wholeheartedly supported the provisions of Article 16.
Diana WALLIS (ALDE, UK) stated that a matter of such importance deserves thorough and long standing preparation, particularly preparation of Europe's public, " the citizens we seek to represent and who in large numbers we seem to have managed to antagonise over this proposal ."
Reflecting back to 1992, the years of preparation leading to the final and general excitement to welcome the free market in goods and contrasting this with the present situation - one far-reaching proposal for a directive literally dumped on the table at the end of the last mandate. She hoped that a lesson would be learned from this for the future about communicating Europe.
Proinsias DE ROSSA (PES, IE) congratulated the rapporteur, Mrs Gebhardt, and Mrs Van Lancker, and their shadows in the other groups for the excellent work they have done in seeking to strengthen the services directive.
It is obvious, he stated, that a race to the bottom in any area will not win the allegiance, or indeed build the confidence of European citizens in the European project.
Mr De Rossa urged the House to support the broad progressive majority in this Parliament to deliver a 'de-Bolkesteined' directive by supporting the key compromise amendments which have been painstakingly negotiated. This House, he said, will be abdicating its responsibility by refusing to adopt the amended directive now on offer and leaving our services market, our labour rights, our consumer rights and our environmental rights in this area to the uncertainty of case-by-case decisions of the European Court of Justice. " It is not elected to make law - we are " he stated
Simon COVENEY (EPP-ED, IE), stated that this directive is attempting to achieve a massive amount in one brave step. With all the work put into this directive in recent months, in this regard, he recognised the work of Malcolm HARBOUR (EPP-ED, UK) in particular, who has put an enormous amount of effort into bringing the compromise wording this far on behalf of the EPP-ED Group.
"In the intensity of debate, however, on specific amendments, in particular relating to Article 16 on the freedom to provide services, let us not lose sight of the overall objective of what we are trying to achieve. This is the first stage of a process that aims to create a directive that will promote a more open and better functioning internal market for services. If adopted in the right form, this directive can facilitate growth, job creation and increased economic activity in the services sector ."
The reality, Mr Coveney stated, is that the EU economy needs a kick-start and this directive can contribute to this. Sixty-eight per cent of EU employment and over 60% of wealth creation comes from the services sector and, therefore, services are the key driver for the sluggish EU economy. In short, this new compromise directive may not give all political groups all of what they want, but it will remove many barriers to cross-border trade and services and reduce the red tape that businesses encounter when they try to expand into other EU countries. A balance between the protection of employment law and collective agreements within the EU Member States and opening up a more efficient market for services has been achieved through compromise.
Concluding, Mr Coveney hoped Parliament will give a strong mandate to the Commission to carry this directive forward with renewed momentum following Thursday's vote, and he looked forward to seeing a further improved version of this directive in the not too distant future coming back before Parliament.
John PURVIS (EPP-ED, UK) recalled that Parliament, from its very first directly elected plenary in 1979, has championed the cause of a truly free and open single market as envisaged in the original Treaties. It is now, he said, the opportunity to emulate the courage and foresight of our predecessors and make sure that a real single market in services is implemented. " Trade unionists, French 'no' voters, French plumbers: truly there is nothing to be afraid of. Just as a single market in goods has provided new, more and better jobs, so will the services directive, if we vote through a strong and liberal version. It can provide the opportunities which we all seek, especially in SMEs, as the essential element of a successful, competitive and prosperous European economy ."
Noting that the Opinion of the Committee on Industry, Research and Energy, which took a liberal line, was supported by 34 votes to 6 and was supported by Conservatives, Liberals and even most of the Socialists. Mr Purvis hoped that Parliament as a whole will repeat such a courageous and far-sighted position. A free and open market in services will work and get more and more Europeans back into work.
Commissioner McCreevy - response to the debate
Commissioner for Internal Market and Services, Charlie McCREEVY , thanked all participants for their contributions representing various perspectives.
"We have heard all the arguments for and against this proposal. What is clear to me is that despite the divergences there is a strong body of opinion in support of a services directive; a common wish to arrive at a broad understanding of how we should go forward. I welcome that. It demonstrates the vital role that the European Parliament can play in reconciling the many different opinions expressed in this house.
On the basis of today's debate, I feel confident that Parliament can lead the way forward in building the consensus that this proposal needs if it is to be adopted. We owe a debt of gratitude to the rapporteur, the shadow rapporteurs and group leaders for their constructive approach.
I said that the Commission will take full account of those amendments that find a broad consensus here. I believe we are close to that consensus, particularly in regard to the scope of the proposal and the freedom to provide services as set out in Article 16.
I was heartened to hear so many speakers say that they wanted a services directive with real value added. That is why we should limit to the minimum any further sectoral exemptions from the scope, and we need to pay particular attention to the wording of Article 16. There can be no going back on treaty provisions or court jurisdiction.
In reply to Mr Watson's criticism of our efforts to help build bridges on Article 16, it is a pity he did not check the source of the draft text that he found fault with. It did not come from my Cabinet, but then I am used to being accused of many things, good and bad, for which I have no responsibility.
Turning to the substance of today's debate and the posting of workers, I have much sympathy for those who are concerned about what they see as unnecessary administrative burdens placed on workers who are posted to another Member State. There is Community law and court jurisprudence which must be respected. If you vote by a large majority to delete Articles 24 and 25, then the Commission will come forward quickly with guidance on that key initiative.
It is important that the message which comes with this debate and the vote on Thursday is one of Europe moving forward; moving forward in proposing a framework for a better services directive; a better services directive which will provide the incentives and confidence necessary for businesses, entrepreneurs and consumers, take full advantage of our internal market by investing in new opportunities, developing and buying new services which will create more jobs and growth."
What's next?
European Parliament first reading vote on Thursday 16 February at 10am. After the plenary vote, it will be up to the Council of Ministers, as joint legislator with Parliament, to decide its position on the directive and the amendments adopted by MEPs. If all Parliament's amendments are acceptable to the Council, the legislation will be adopted in its modified form. If the Council rejects any of Parliament's amendments or adds any of its own, the text will return to Parliament for a second reading.
20060210IPR05172 Internal market: freedom of establishment for service providers and free movement of services, also known as the Bolkestein directive or the Services Directive Background note on services directive
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=240902
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060209BKG05098 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
