Control of EU funds: MEPs want Member States to account for all monies
Budgetary control
2006-02-02 - 11:53
EU Chair in office and Austrian Secretary of State Hans Winkler remained cautious in his response to an oral question on "national management declarations". Beyond this rather technical term hides Parliament's firm intention to place Member States on track for an improved system of controls for EU funds.
" I know you are expecting more ", Winkler said, " but so far I can only say that Council has accepted to look at the ideas contained in the Commission's "roadmap to an integrated control framework ".
Commissioner Siim KALLAS has recently launched an ambitious plan to ensure regularity and reliability of payments made from the EU budget.
Authors of this Oral Question on the 2004 discharge rapporteur Jan MULDER (ALDE, NL), his 2003 counter-part Terry WYNN (PES, UK), Budgetary control chair Szabolcs FAZAKAS (PES, HU), as well as Javier Pomez RUIZ (EPP-ED, ES), all voiced their concern at the Member States' lack of action to tackle this problem, which has badly undermined taxpayers' confidence in the EU.
Parliament likely to re-examine this issue in the course of the 2004 EU budget discharge, up for adoption by the Plenary on 27 April in Brussels. Meanwhile, MEPs adopted a resolution which welcomes the Commission's efforts, on the one hand, but singled out Member States on the other as regards the need to see " better controls rather than more controls" and "assurance coming from national authorities "
Without a major improvement of controls, " the Commission will not be in the position to obtain adequate information on the legality and regularity of transactions ", the resolution argues. The relevant political authorities should also " take full responsibility " for the funds placed at their disposal.
Back in November 2005, MEPs stated that they were tired hearing the same explanation for the 11th year running when the Court of Auditors failed to report a positive Declaration of Assurance (DAS), because of the " scope for doubt in the reliability of underlying operations ".
Parliament has tied this issue with the ongoing talks on the next Financial Perspective and remain hopeful that a breakthrough will be found in due course for improved control systems of EU funds.
20060201IPR04900 European Parliament resolution on National Management Declarations
-//EP//TEXT MOTION B6-2006-0074 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
