Practical, people-based approach promised by new internal market committee Chair
Institutions
2006-02-07 - 09:50
Arlene McCarthy promises a straight-talking approach in new her role.
"Ask the questions the people are asking" and "speak to people in language they can understand" is how Arlene McCarthy MEP summed up her new role as Chair of the Parliament's internal market and consumer protection committee (IMCO). Adopting a distinctly practical approach, Mrs McCarthy said that when the committee is scrutinising potential new EU legislation it must always ask "how will this affect peoples lives?" and "what will it mean in practice?" for the public and the business community.
This pragmatic approach will certainly be tested with the ongoing debate over the "Services" directive - the European Commission's proposal to allow people and businesses in the service sector greater freedom to work across the European Union. The whole issue has already generated huge debate and controversy across the Union. In France for example, the spectre of the "Polish plumber" taking jobs from local tradesmen was a significant factor in last May's referendum over the proposed European Constitution. The directive is one of the "biggest, most controversial pieces of legislation the Parliament has ever dealt with" said Mrs McCarthy in an exclusive interview with the Parliament's website. The latest version of the directive is due to be voted upon by a full plenary session of the Parliament in Strasbourg on 16 February.
"Better regulation" of the internal market
With public authorities across Europe increasingly using private companies to provide services or infrastructure projects to ensure greater efficiency and expertise, the committee will be looking at this area to see if existing EU legislation is adequate. In particular, does it ensure that "fundamental principles of equal treatment, transparency and mutual recognition are safeguarded and value for money obtained" in such "Public Private Partnerships". The committee will also continue its scrutiny of a proposed Community action programme in the field of consumer protection for the period 2007-2013.
With internal market rules and regulations accounting for almost a third of the "acquis communautaire" (the name given to the entire body of European law), it is clear Mrs McCarthy and her colleagues will have their work cut out. However, she spoke of the need for "better regulation" in the EU. One area the committee intends to examine is in ensuring that existing rules are being applied correctly to ensure proper functioning of the internal market and adequate consumer protection - a move that could potentially lead to conflict with some EU members, where responsibilty for implementation ultimately lies.
Arlene McCarthy became Chair of the committee following the death of her predecessor Phillip Whitehead on New Year's eve. In her acceptance speech Mrs McCarthy praised Phillip Whitehead's "special blend of wit, wisdom and experience" and said she has "mixed feelings" taking over the position following the death of someone she considered her "political mentor". This year will be her 12th year in the Parliament, first having been elected as a Labour MEP in 1994 for the Peak District and then from 1999 for the North West region of Britain.
20060207STO05038 IMCO Committee Press article on the Services Directive
EN
1
PHOTO
20060207PHT05042.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/committees/presentation.do?committee=1241&language=EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20051118IPR02599 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
