Confiscation of vehicles by Greek authorities - MEPs call for compliance with EU law
Petitions
2006-02-14 - 12:54
In adopting a non-binding report put forward by Michael Cashman (PES, UK), Parliament called on the Greek authorities "to fulfil the Hellenic Republic's obligations under the Treaty and to comply with the rules laid down in Community legislation".
This comes in response to a large number of petitions concerning the confiscation of automobiles suspected by the Greek authorities to be illegally imported. In the event that the Greek authorities fail to respond to the demands of the report, it calls on the Commission to " proceed without delay with it legal action against the Hellenic Republic ".
On the 28 March 1983, the Council Directive 83/182/EEC was implemented. This Directive concerned tax exemptions within the Community for certain means of transport temporarily imported into one Member State from another. The application of this directive in Greece has been problematic, involving complexities relating to the determination of " normal residence ", the penalties implemented in cases of infringement of the rules, and the extent to which the " good faith " of the perpetrator is taken into account. Consequently, there have been "a number of irregularities which have occurred in Greece when the customs authorities, suspecting that the petitioner's foreign registered vehicles were being illegally imported and used in Greece, confiscated the vehicles ".
The report opens by expressing its " great concern " that the Greek authorities failed to implement the exemption laid down in Directive 83/182/EEC and points out that the Greek seizure, confiscation, and selling of vehicles is " incompatible with the principles of the EU's Charter of Fundamental Rights ". Although the report acknowledges that it is up to national legislation to decide the appropriate penalty when dealing with " infringements relating to temporary importation of certain means of transport ", the report advises that the good faith of the offender must be taken into account. It also notes that Member States must exercise their power in " accordance with Community law and its general principles, and consequently with the principle of proportionality ".
20060209IPR05133
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
