The Week Ahead 13 - 19 February 2006
Institutions
2006-02-10 - 11:05
The weekly summary of the main events at the European Parliament over the next seven days is now available
Strasbourg plenary session
Internal market. The much discussed directive aimed at removing barriers to the service industries in the EU comes up for its first reading by Parliament. All this week the political groups have been negotiating to reach an overall compromise before the plenary vote (debate Tuesday, vote Thursday) .
Cartoon controversy. In response to the incidents in several Muslim countries following the publication of caricatures of Muhammad, MEPs will hold a debate on freedom of expression and respect for religious faith (Wednesday).
Iran. The House will vote on a resolution on the dispute between Iran and the international community over the former's nuclear programme (Wednesday).
Belarus. MEPs will give their views on the situation in Belarus ahead of the presidential elections taking place on 19 March (Wednesday) .
Austria. President Heinz Fischer of Austria will address a formal sitting of the House to mark his country's six-month presidency of the EU (Wednesday) .
Human rights. MEPs will discuss the inclusion and application of human rights and democracy clauses in EU agreements with third countries (debate and vote Tuesday) .
Agriculture. MEPs will give their verdict on legislation designed to improve conditions for battery chickens (debate Monday, vote Tuesday).
Transport. A second-reading vote takes place on legislation to introduce a Community licence for air traffic controllers (vote Wednesday) .
Safety at work. Parliament is due to approve the deal agreed by the Parliament/Council conciliation committee on the exposure of workers to optical radiation (debate Monday, vote Tuesday) .
CIA. Commissioner Franco Frattini will appear before the temporary committee investigating the alleged use of European countries by the CIA for the transport and illegal detention of prisoners (Monday) .
20060210IPR05148 For full details see 'The Agenda'
EN
1
LINK
/news/expert/event_top_page/default/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
