What price the health of Europe's citizens?
Public health
2006-02-01 - 15:20
Members of the Environment and Health Committee, meeting on Tuesday, voted to allocate €1,500 million over seven years to the new Community action programme on health. Although healthcare services are run entirely by the individual Member States, the European Union has a complementary role in health issues and Parliament wants it to play this role to the full.
The European Parliament has already expressed opposition to the figures proposed by the December European Council for the 2007-2013 financial perspective, which MEPs regard as too low. And the Environment and Health Committee has no intention of scaling down the EU's ambitions in areas closely affecting the welfare of its people. Health is one of these areas. According to Antonios Trakatellis (EPP-ED, EL), rapporteur for the Community action programme, "the objectives must always be matched by the resources available to achieve them. In my view, there is no guaranteed match between these two in the proposed programme. I therefore propose that the funding be increased, in the certainty that the Council and the Commission will realise that this proposal is perfectly reasonable." The rapporteur received overwhelming backing from the committee and his report was adopted by 54 votes to 1.
The European Commission originally suggested a single action programme for health and consumer protection, with an overall budget of €1,203 million of which 969 million were earmarked for health. The Commission hoped to achieve more efficiency by combining the two areas but Parliament, while in favour of pooling administrative resources, decided that the two areas, which come under different legal bases (Articles 152 and 153 of the EC Treaty) in which the EU has different powers, should be split into two separate programmes. Parliament's Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection will adopt what is now a separate programme on 20 February, probably without modifying the initial budget of €233 million.
The Environment Committee sees health as an extremely important area and one where the public has much to gain from an ambitious European policy, even if the organisation of healthcare and the funding thereof is in the hands of the individual Member States. The new EU programme is designed to protect the public against threats to health, make national healthcare systems more effective and encourage healthy lifestyles.
MEPs also believe that a higher standard of health protection should be a goal of all EU policies. They wish to reduce inequality between and within Member States by guaranteeing access to healthcare for all according to comparable standards and without discrimination, and they wish to facilitate patient mobility. To achieve this, transparency between national healthcare systems must be improved. MEPs want to see greater crossborder cooperation, in particular for the treatment of rare diseases, plus exchanges of information on the services and treatments available and on reimbursements. The programme also includes special measures on risk prevention, information for practitioners and the public and the exchange of best practice.
2006-01-31 Chair of the Environment Committee Karl-Heinz Florenz EPP-ED DE
Procedure: Co-decision, 1st reading
Plenary vote: March, Strasbourg
Vote en plénière: mars à Strasbourg
20060130IPR04818
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
