European patent system is too costly and may be discouraging innovation
Information society
2006-02-01 - 11:43
At a public hearing on intellectual property rights held on Tuesday by the Legal Affairs Committee, experts agreed that the current European patenting system is too costly for firms and could be hampering competition instead of boosting innovation. At the same time several speakers expressed doubt about using criminal law to enforce intellectual property rights.
The hearing was organised to facilitate debate in the Legal Affairs Committee on the fight against counterfeiting and on the long-running question of creating a Community patent system. At present, patents can be issued by the European Patent Office - a non-EU body - or national patent offices.
In practical terms, many small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) cannot afford the cost of obtaining and defending a patent and therefore have no access to the innovation market, leaving bigger firms with a monopoly. Experts from the academic, industrial and professional worlds at Tuesday's hearing agreed on the general principle that patents are effective instruments to protect intellectual property (IP) rights but criticised the existing European patent system for lacking legal certainty.
Giuseppe Gargani (EPP-ED, IT), chair of the Legal Affairs Committee, said: "Firms are interested in having standard legislation in Europe on patents ... to compete with other countries like the US" . He added: "I think high fees are the main problem. " A patent delivered by the European Patent Office or national offices can cost up to €100,000, twice as much as in Japan and three times as much as in the US.
Klaus-Dieter Langfinger, from UNICE, the European employers' association, stressed the correlation between protection of IP rights and economic growth. Quoting a study by the World Economic Forum, he said that the 20 countries with the highest IP protection standards are among the 27 richest states in the world. He added that many SMEs also benefit from patent protection. Nevertheless, he criticised the European patenting system as less efficient than its Japanese and US counterparts. The reason is that "the EU does not provide enough legal certainty and affordable costs. The aim of making the EU economy more competitive should lead to the removal of those barriers ". Luis Berenguer, former MEP and President of the Tribunal for Competition of Spain, said that patents could become " a rather protectionist instrument serving the interests of big companies ", if the current system is not improved. The main problem, he said, is the cost, both in terms of money and time, of challenging a patent.
Should criminal law be used to enforce intellectual property rights?
A discussion panel was devoted to the question whether EU legislation is needed to harmonise national criminal law on the enforcement of IP rights. Thomas Vinje, IP expert at the London law firm Clifford Chance, said: "Patent infringement should be excluded from the scope of any criminal enforcement directive ". He also said that criminal penalties should only apply to the fight against counterfeiting and piracy. Reto Hilty, Director of the Max Planck Institute for Intellectual Property in Munich, agreed with Mr Vinje that new EU initiatives in this field were unnecessary. He explained that " international agreements, such as TRIPS, already contain provisions against trademark and copyright pirating which are binding on the Member States and the EU ".
Jim Murray, of the European Consumers' Organisation (BEUC), warned that current practices of fighting counterfeiting can pose a threat to consumers' rights. For instance, the music industry is imposing levies on its products to compensate the effects of piracy without informing buyers of their right to make a copy for personal use. He therefore called for a distinction between pirating and small-scale copying with no commercial intent. Mr Murray also questioned the effectiveness of using criminal law measures to enforce IP rights. He said "There is a tendency to criminalise people, which has the effect of reducing respect for the law, especially among young people ." In conclusion, he said " We ask the EP to adopt a balanced approach on IP enforcement and to tell consumers what they can do and not only what they cannot do ."
The European Commission has just withdrawn, for technical reasons, a proposal on criminal sanctions for the enforcement of IP and will probably present a new text on the same issue soon.
2006-01-31
Procedure: Public Hearing
In the Chair: Giuseppe GARGANI (EPP-ED, IT)
20060130IPR04828
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
