Appreciation for Parliament's efforts from UN High Commissioner
Development and cooperation
2006-02-21 - 17:52
António Guterres, UN High Commissioner for Refugees, told MEPs on Tuesday that he was glad Parliament's powers on the right of asylum had been increased. The EP now legislates jointly with the Council in this area. Mr Guterres was speaking at a meeting held by the EP Development Committee in conjunction with the Foreign Affairs and Civil Liberties committees.
"I appreciate what the European Parliament is doing" , said Mr Guterres, "particularly on the directive on asylum applications. Unfortunately the EP has until now only had a consultative role. I am delighted that there is now co-decision on asylum issues." This boost to Parliament's role matches the two major challenges facing the HCR: safeguarding the right of asylum and stemming the tide of intolerance. "Europe must remain a diverse continent where fear of the other and of difference, fed by populist rhetoric, must disappear" , continued the former Portuguese prime minister.
He described as "indispensable" the privileged relations the HCR has with the European Union, which is a "firm supporter of multilateralism and of the United Nations' activities" . The EU's financial and political support is "crucial for the populations whose cause we defend" . Wars and human rights violations have created 10million refugees in the world and 25 million people displaced within their own countries.
"The heart-rending fate of the refugees is a question that is linked not only to the EU's development policy but also to human rights and the ability to resolve conflicts. Hence the political importance of this meeting, which brings us together with our colleagues from the Foreign Affairs and Civil Liberties committees" , said Luisa Morgantini (GUE/NGL, IT), chair of the EP Development Committee.
Regarding the link between refugees and the EU's own security, Elmar Brok (EPP-ED, DE), chair of the Foreign Affairs Committee, said "we must be more active, less defensive and have high standards without questioning the right of asylum".
According to Jean-Marie Cavada (ALDE, FR), chair of the Civil Liberties Committee, "the twentieth century has been a century of refugees. It saw the birth of the HCR in 1951 to take charge of the 1.2 million people thrown out onto the road at the end of World War II. We must ensure that refugees are governed by rules but also that Europe remains a place that welcomes them" .
Hélène Flautre (Greens/EFA, FR), chair of the Subcommittee on Human Rights, stated "not every state in the world accepts the HCR - for example Libya" , a country with which the EU is currently negotiating a readmission agreement, "and Morocco, where the HCR is suspected of wanting to externalise the European Union's asylum policies".
During the debate MEPs discussed the humanitarian crisis in Darfur, Sudan, the list of unsafe third countries, international subsidiary protection and the possible amendment of the 1951 Convention to take account of environmental threats and create a category of "environmental refugees" .
2006-02-21
Meeting of António Guterres, UN High Commissioner for Refugees, with the Development, Foreign Affairs and Civil Liberties committees of the European Parliament
20060220IPR05416
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
