International Women's Day kicks-off campaign against forced prostitution
Women's rights/Equal opportunities
2006-03-09 - 15:44
Unite to fight forced prostitution
The EU must show the red card to forced prostitution and fight trafficking in human beings for sexual purposes, said participants in a seminar organised by the European Parliament's Committee on Women's Rights on the occasion of the International Women's Day on 8 March.
In the light of alarming reports of a sharp increase in forced prostitution during big events, such as the upcoming football world cup in Germany, the Committee wanted to exchange views and discuss strategies and ways forward to combat forced prostitution. As Anna Záborská, chairwoman of the Committee said, "this is not the end of the debate, the debate will continue until the end of forced prostitution".
A modern form of slavery
European Vice-President of the Commission Margot Wallström voiced deep concern and outrage about this "modern form of slavery" where women may be sold "for a price lower than that of the ticket to the football arena". Fellow Vice-President Franco Frattini outlined some proposals to tackle the problem, including stronger external border control and the introduction of a short-term visa during the world cup for citizens from countries seen as the origin of trafficking. He couldn't give a concrete list, but mentioned "countries of Latin America, Sub-Saharan countries, Asia and the East of Europe". He also proposed a study on how different legislation on prostitution influences the scope of trafficking, and said it is necessary to look at demand as well as supply.
Speaking for the governing body of European football, UEFA, Vice-President Per Ravn Omdal, said "UEFA supports the EU's efforts to fight all forms of human trafficking and exploitation". But he and FIFA President Joseph Blatter note that the football associations can't control what goes on outside the stadium.
Work for NGOs
Dagmar Plum from Solidarity with Women in Distress said her NGO will finance a victim hotline in Germany for three months around the World Cup with interpretation into Spanish, Portuguese and East European languages. "Every woman matters. This is a very lucrative business that we need to stop. Did you know that a human trafficker can earn up to 67,000 dollars per year with one single woman?" said Brunhilde Raiser (National Council of German Women's Organizations). "We need a Euro-wide approach to protect victims, prosecute responsible criminals and establish a residence regime for the victims." Raiser supports German legalisation of prostitution as a useful weapon to fight human trafficking.
Voluntary prostitution?
"There is no difference to be made between voluntary and forced prostitution. The Swedish legislation (criminalising buyers) works," said Maria Carlshamre (ALDE, SE). "Problems with prostitution are arising in Germany, Austria and the Netherlands", which are EU countries where prostitution is legal".
German Green Hiltrud Breyer, who launched the idea of this campaign urged "fair play" during the world cup regarding forced prostitution and called on the Commission to come forward with a directive on violence against women. "This is not against football as such," concluded Christa Prets (PSE, AT) - author of the EP report on human trafficking adopted in January. "It is unbelievable that some road traffic offences are tougher than punishment on trafficking in human beings".
When Parliament meets in its 13-16 March Strasbourg plenary, MEPs will use an oral question to the European Commission as the opportunity to debate possible measures to combat forced prostitution at big sporting events.
20060309STO06004 Committee on Women's Rights and Gender Equality - International Women's Day Statement by the EP President Borrell on the occasion of International Women’s Day Briefing Strasbourg 13-16 March
EN
1
PHOTO
20060309PHT06000.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/comparl/femm/womensday/2006/default_en.htm
EN
3
LINK
/president/Presidents_old/president_borrell/press_releases/en/files/cp0130.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060216BRI05330 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
