MEPs concerned about EU funding for company relocations
Regional policy
2006-03-14 - 14:58
Concerns over company relocation
In adopting a report on relocation in the context of regional development, MEPs call on the Commission to penalise companies which, having received European Union aid, relocate their activity within seven years after the granting of the aid. Parliament demands that practices that are not conducive to the achievement of economic cohesion and the strategic goal of full employment, such as unjustified relocation likely to cause job losses, should not be financially supported by the EU.
The own initiative report was adopted by a large majority. Speaking during the debate on Monday in Strasbourg rapporteur Alain HUTCHINSON (PES, BE) said: "We call on the Commission to take all the necessary measures in order to avoid that EU regional policy could be constituted as an encouragement to relocation. We support the Commission proposal which aims at penalising companies who have benefited from EU aid and relocated their activities within 7 years."
Parliament says that practices not conducive to the achievement of economic cohesion and full employment, such as unjustified relocation likely to cause job losses, should not be financially supported by the EU.
In the context of regional state-aid, MEPs call on the Commission to take measures with a view to repayment of aid granted to companies which relocate their plants within or, in particular, outside the EU. The House backs the idea of penalising companies which, having received European Union aid, relocate their activity within seven years.
Parliament also wants the Dublin based European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions with the remit of studying, assessing and monitoring the issue of relocation, in order to objectivise its social and economic impact and effect on cohesion policy, spatial planning and regional development, and of submitting the findings obtained and putting forward specific proposals to Parliament in the form of regular reports.
Lastly, the House calls on the Commission and the Member States to monitor the effective and targeted use of European funds, which, says the report, should be focussed on vocational training and the retraining of workers in regions affected by restructuring or relocation and, in particular, of those workers who have been directly affected by a job loss as a result of the relocation of their former employer.
A recent study(*) on industrial relocation calculated that between 1995 and 2001 some 95,000 industrial jobs were lost in France and relocated abroad, an average of 13,500 a year, a little over half of them lost to the developing countries. Countries where wages are low represent slightly under half of relocation destinations, China being the main destination, far ahead of Eastern Europe, North Africa, South America and other Asian countries.
[*] Patrick AUBERT and Patrick SILLARD, « Délocalisations et réductions d’effectifs dans l’industrie française », (April 2005), INSEE.
20060313IPR06152 Relocation in the context of regional development The European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions based in Dublin
EN
1
PHOTO
20060314PHT06160.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5217822
EN
3
LINK
http://www.eurofound.europa.eu/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
