Enlargement: EU must keep its promises but take account of absorption capacity
Enlargement
2006-03-16 - 13:40
The European Union should keep its promises to candidate countries and possible candidate countries but also take the EU's absorption capacity fully into account, said MEPs when they approved a resolution by 397 votes in favour, 95 against with 37 abstentions.
If necessary, the Commission should propose a close multilateral relationship to all European countries which currently have no recognised "membership perspective". Countries which do have such a perspective should be free to join this multilateral framework as an intermediate step towards full membership.
Parliament asks the Commission to submit a report by the end of this year setting out the principles defining the EU's absorption capacity. In order to do so " the nature of the EU, including its geographical borders ", should be defined. It also asks the Commission to draw up a communication strategy "so as to meet the legitimate concerns of the European public regarding European enlargement and integration" . MEPs add that the stalemate in the ratification of a constitutional treaty is preventing the EU from increasing its absorption capacity and that no new Member States should be allowed in before the necessary budgetary resources are available.
MEPs support the Commission's emphasis on "fair and rigorous conditionality" , whereby it will lay down clear requirements for each phase of the negotiations with accession countries and suspend negotiations when relevant conditions are not met. They remind candidates and potential candidate countries that they should not only adopt laws to comply with the accession conditions, but should also rigorously implement and enforce them.
With regard to Turkey, MEPs say that the pace of change slowed in 2005 but they express the hope that the opening of negotiations will stimulate further reforms. They welcome the decision not to prosecute Turkish author Orhan Pamuk, but denounce the further prosecution of others for the non-violent expression of their opinion, even on the basis of the newly adopted penal code. Turkey is urged once more to remove all restrictions on Cypriot ships and airplanes, but MEPs also urge the Council to move ahead on the financial aid and trade package for northern Cyprus. MEPs voice concern at the increase in violence in south-eastern Turkey after the resumption of terrorist attacks.
The decision to open accession negotiations with Croatia is welcomed, as is the decision to grant the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia the status of candidate country. Croatia is urged to allow all EU nationals, without discrimination, to have access to the housing property market. With regard to other countries in the Western Balkans, MEPs point out that these countries were given a European "perspective" at the Thessaloniki summit of 2003. They welcome the fact that Albania is close to finalising negotiations for a Stabilisation and Association Agreement, as well as the Council decision to start such negotiations with Bosnia-Herzegovina. MEPs regret the stalemate in the negotiations on constitutional reform in Bosnia-Herzegovina. The international intervention in the government of Bosnia-Herzegovina should be further reduced.
MEPs recognise the "significant progress" made by the Belgrade authorities in their cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, but support the UN Chief Procecutor's call for Ratko Mladic and Radovan Karadczic to be handed over without delay. On the upcoming referendum in Montenegro on a possible separation from Serbia, MEPs are confident that the government and the opposition will find an agreement on the terms and procedures for this referendum.
They also welcome the start of negotiations on the final status of Kosovo but are concerned that the UN Special Envoy has described inter-ethnic relations, especially with regard to Serbs and Roma, as "grim". They conclude that the only solution to the status question may be a multi-ethnic Kosovo.
20060309IPR06054 2005 enlargement strategy paper
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5287112
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
