Commission to seek suspension of EU talks with Serbia
External relations
2006-02-23 - 13:04
Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn announced before the Foreign Affairs Committee today that he will recommend suspension of negotiations with Serbia-Montenegro to the Foreign Affairs Council meeting next Monday. Citing a lack of cooperation by Serbia with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, Mr Rehn said a "disruption of our negotiations cannot be avoided".
The Commissioner reminded MEPs that full cooperation with ICTY without delay was a priority condition in April last year for starting negotiations on a Stability and Association Agreement with Serbia-Montenegro, including the arrest and transfer of Ratko Mladic and Radovan Karadzic, with the latter being the responsibility rather of Bosnia-Herzegovina. Following the initial transfer of 12 people by Serbia, "cooperation has in fact deteriorated" , said Mr Rehn. Although the political will in Serbia to transfer people suspected of war crimes had improved, this "must now be translated into concrete action" , he added. "We must be sure that the Serbian army and security forces are under full civilian control. Today Serbia is at a cross-roads. It faces a choice between a European future and a nationalist past." Asked by Jelko Kacin (ALDE, SL) if the EU's message on the handing over of Mladic had been understood in Belgrade, Mr Rehn said that he had made this clear during his visit to Belgrade last week "with full Finnish bluntness" and that Commission president Barroso, who had been there as well, had been very no-nonsense as well. "There was no room for misunderstanding." Pressed by Doris Pack (EPP-ED), Mr Rehn agreed that Montenegro should not suffer from Serbia's lack of cooperation: "Montenegro is cooperating and thus does not have this problem."
MEPs warmly welcomed the commissioner's stated intention to facilitate the issuing of visas to people from the Western Balkans and to offer more scholarships and grants to the young. It was indeed extraordinary, he said, that Ratko Mladic and Ante Gotovina could travel freely through Europa while students from their countries could not.
Mr Rehn restated the Commission's support for a regional free trade agreement in the Western Balkans. Elmar Brok (EPP-ED, DE), Hannes Swoboda (PES, AT) and Libor Roucek (PES, CZ) pointed out that in several countries, especially in Croatia, there were fears of a recreation of Yugoslavia through such an agreement. They therefore proposed the extension of the Central European Free Trade Agreement - which unites Poland, the Czech Republic, Slovakia, Hungary, Slovenia, Romania and Bulgaria - to include the countries of the Western Balkans.
In reply to a question by Mr Roucek, the Commissioner said he could not say anything on the possible accession of Bulgaria and Romania next year until 3 April, but he urged both countries to achieve "more concrete results in the fight against corruption and organised crime" .
István Szent-Ivanyi (ALDE, HU) called for more money for pre-accession aid, to which Mr Rehn replied that this was a subject "for internal discussion now" , but that he of course welcomed Parliament's call.
When André Brie (EUL/NGL, DE) asked about the alleged kidnapping of the German citizen El Masri by the CIA from the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, the Commissioner replied that FYROM had been asked for clarification, but that the answers received so far had been insufficient and that additional information had been requested.
2006-02-21 Committee on Foreign Affairs chair Elmar Brok EPP-ED DE 20060223IPR05638
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
