Parliament's guidelines for its 2007 budget
Budget
2006-03-15 - 16:43
MEPs adopted a resolution on the priorities for Parliament's own budget for 2007 which presents guidelines for the budget setting process for Parliament - and the other EU institutions with the exception of the Commission. The report was adopted 621 votes in favour, 29 against and 12 abstentions.
The report stresses the importance of information policy noting that over the years European institutions have failed to convince European citizens that they truly represent their interests and aspirations. It says insufficient knowledge coupled with a poor perception makes understanding of EU policies difficult and takes the view that the existing information services have to be improved and that an effective strategy, accessible to all European citizens, should be implemented as a matter of priority for all institutions.
MEPs invite all European institutions to study the feasibility of setting up a Centre of European Houses in Brussels, using existing resources without incurring any significant additional expenditure. This would be a place for citizens to participate freely in various areas, including cultural and technical events, training seminars and exhibitions on specific topics.
The report affirms Parliament's commitment to deliver on promises to the EU citizens in an efficient, tangible and accountable manner and in so doing strengthen the image and credibility of the European Institutions. It commits Parliament to fulfil its responsibilities as the only democratically elected representation of the people of the EU. One practical suggestion is to re-examine the structure of debates during the plenary sessions.
Among other points, the report calls for the Council to make progress on the issue of a statute for MEPs' assistants and insists on the need to re-address the " unnecessary and exorbitant costs " of Parliament having to work in three locations.
20060309IPR06047 2007 budget: other sections
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5306442
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
