School students mark European Day for the Victims of Terrorism at the European Parliament
Justice and home affairs
2006-03-13 - 15:22
On Friday, the European Parliament marked the second European Day for the Victims of Terrorism with a memorial ceremony. Parliament's Secretary General Julian Priestley welcomed around 600 students from schools in London and Brussels to the parliamentary chamber, where they observed a minute of silence. Six students, each representing their school, took the floor, along with MEPs, to have their say on combating terrorism.
Cultural tolerance is the key
"Our thoughts are with those who have suffered in Madrid and London, the tragic days when commuters in two vibrant European cities suffered at the hands of evil individuals," said Mohammad Juned Khan, a student from South Camden Community School, in an area of London affected by the attacks of 7 July 2005. "It is important to me personally to stress that in no shape or form can these terrorist associate themselves with Islam. I speak on behalf of my school where three quarters of the pupils are Muslim. As it is stated in the Quran, 'If anyone kills a person it would be as if he killed all mankind. And if anyone saves a life, it would be as if he saved the life of all mankind.' "
Ben Montgomery (European School in Uccle, Brussels) spoke on behalf of "students in a multicultural, cosmopolitan school" when he said: "We must start now as the future generation by understanding one another at our own level and not harbour feelings of hate towards other cultures". "What sort of future will we young people have?" asked Artus Galiay (European School in Woluwe, Brussels). "There is only one ethical position: to reject violence, and reject fear."
Ricardo García Ríos (European School in Ixelles, Brussels), a Spanish student whose family was affected by the bomb attacks in Madrid said: "With our willingness to be the actors of the future - and here I am speaking to my fellow students here in this chamber - I propose that we create an association to work for the complete rejection of violence." Finally, two more students, from Victor Horta School and Athénée Royal de Koekelberg, both in Brussels, set out the different parts of the world affected by terrorist attacks since 9/11. They said the roots of terrorism can be found in the social disparities within countries which make integration difficult and often reinforce the feeling of belonging to a certain religion or cultural movement.
Fighting terror with law
The event concluded with comments from several MEPs who are involved in the fight against terrorism. Stavros Lambrinidis (PES, EL), Vice-Chair of the Committee on Civil Liberties, who chaired the meeting, said "Terrorists would like us to forget the names of victims and to treat them as they do not matter. But this Parliament will make sure that these people and these names will not be forgotten."
Carlos Iturgáiz Angulo (EPP, ES) said: " The defeat of terror is the best homage which the democratic European society can offer to the victims...We cannot negotiate with terrorists. Terror is something we cannot argue with. It must be defeated by justice."
Bárbara Dührkop Dührkop (PES, ES), whose husband was killed by ETA, spoke to the young audience as a victim of terrorism and encouraged them to continue stating their commitment to fight terror: "You represent and support a noble cause, and this is not without a risk. You give hope to our society." She concluded by stressing that "victims of terror do not belong to anyone's cause," and that their demands should not be used for political means.
Baroness Sarah Ludford (ALDE, UK), said: "Governments who seek to protect their citizens through repressive and illiberal anti-terror laws are missing the point... We must not let our civil liberties and human rights become the next victims of terrorism. That's why I and other MEPs have campaigned so strongly against outrages like Guantanamo Bay."
2006-03-10 In the chair Stavros LAMBRINIDIS PES EL
Memorial ceremony for the European Day for Victims of Terrorism
20060310IPR06066 Statement by EP President Josep Borrell on the Second European Day for Terror Victims - see 'Press Releases' on the President's site
EN
1
LINK
/president/defaulten.htm?home
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
