Restructuring can be made socially acceptable if all concerned act together
Social policy
2006-03-15 - 16:43
Parliament adopted a report on "restructuring and employment" with 463 votes in favour, 142 against with 58 abstentions. The report stresses the importance preventing social hardship as following restructuring. The Parliamentarians set out how the EU can achieve better financial and human support in these cases.
MEPs point out that " social decline and loss of economic substance " is not necessarily a consequence of restructuring provided that the collaboration of affected firms, trade unions and public action works effectively. Nevertheless they underline that these conditions are not often present. They consider that business restructuring should only take place if warranted by the circumstances, namely in order to save jobs or improve competitiveness and the economic development of firms. Since the EU opened up the market, it has to assume the responsibility for the support of restructuring measures by proposing measures and financial resources to anticipate better and accompany restructuring and mitigate its social consequences. SMEs, in particular, have to be supported in this context mainly via structural funds. Furthermore, MEPs propose that the financial programs under discussion for 2007-2013 should be geared more closely to anticipating and managing restructuring.
The report stresses the enormous disadvantages that dismissed employees suffer: " Priority aid should be given to them in all cases ". Members of Parliament speak of the " hidden effects " such as medical and psychological problems affecting workers' health when restructuring takes place. Furthermore, measures such as more regional employment pacts, as well as aid for training and re-training for workers who are made redundant should be taken.
Calling " for better monitoring and better traceability of the use of Community funds " the report underlines that funds are sometimes diverted to related, speculative or administrative purposes. To prevent "subsidy tourism", Parliament claims that firms subsidised from EU funds should not receive any further Community aid for a period of 7 years if they relocate. In addition, they could be required to reimburse aid.
According to MEPs, criteria for EU aid should not only be the size of an undertaking or its geographical location but also whether a firm includes provisions for adjustment processes as part of its business planning in particular whether it is committed to initial and further training.
Members call on the Commission to work towards a Community framework for the protection of workers rights in the event of restructuring and to submit a proposal for a directive if the social partners do not find a solution.
The Commission should also propose a European one-stop Internet shop for citizens, local authorities, social partners and businesses affected to enable them to find information on the problems related to restructuring.
20060313IPR06154 Restructuring and employment
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5281652
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
