April Plenary session: State of Europe's economy high on agenda
Institutions
2006-04-03 - 19:10
Economic guidelines, services and spring summit come under MEPs' scrutiny
The state of Europe's economy will feature prominently this week. On Tuesday MEPs will debate economic guidelines for the EU and the Commission will unveil their revisions to the Services Directive. Wednesday sees Austrian Chancellor Wolfgang Schüssel debate the EU's Spring economic Summit, while EP President Borrell and leaders of the political groups will make statements on the results of negotiations on the EU's financial perspective. Elections in Ukraine and Belarus also feature.
MEPs gather for their April Strasbourg plenary session to deal with issues from the opening of labour markets to the new Member States, and to the future of the Middle East after the Israeli elections. The major debates of Monday evening focus on trans-European energy networks and on measures to increase the openness and transparency of the EU institutions in general and the Council of Ministers in particular. Michael CASHMAN 's (PES, UK) report on public access to EU documents will be part of this latter debate. MEPs will also debate progress on the WTO talks and the state of EU competition policy. The report by Alain LIPIETZ (Greens/EFA, FR) on competition policy (2004) will be the second point on the agenda. The third item on the agenda will be a debate and Commission statement with resolution on the situation regarding refugee camps in Malta.
On Tuesday, the sitting will open with a debate on employment and the economy, as Parliament holds its annual debate on the EU’s guidelines for its Member States in these areas. There will also be a debate on the transitional arrangements restricting access for workers from eight of the countries who joined the EU in 2004 to the labour markets of many of the ‘ old ’ EU 15. Parliament will also debate two reports by Avril DOYLE (EPP-ED, IE) at the final, third reading stage of legislation on fluorinated greenhouse gases and emissions from air-conditioning systems in motor vehicles. The afternoon session will focus on the ‘ better lawmaking ’ agenda, including a report from Arlene McCARTHY (PES, UK) on internal market legislation. At 5pm, the Commission will make statements on its modified proposal on the directive on free movement of services and the posting of workers directive (96/71/EC).
The report by Diana WALLIS (ALDE, UK) on the request to defend the parliamentary immunity of Witold Tomczak will be taken without debate and the vote will take place on Tuesday. On Wednesday ,President Borrell and the political group leaders will make brief statements on the results of the latest trialogue on the financial perspective . Depending on the outcome of the trialogue, which will take place on Tuesday 4 April, the Parliament may also adopt a resolution on this subject.
The key debate of the week will take place on Wednesday morning as Chancellor SCHÜSSEL from Austria, current President-in-Office of the Council, presents the outcome of the Spring Economic Summit to MEPs .
On Wednesday at midday, the President of Malta Edward Fenech-Adami will address MEPs in a formal sitting. He will then join President Borrell for a joint press conference.
The afternoon session focuses on foreign policy matters, with successive debates on the Middle East after the Israeli elections, Belarus and Ukraine , plus a discussion on World Health Day . The EU's High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy, Javier Solana , will participate in the discussion on the Middle East.
Two more reports from Michael CASHMAN (PES, UK), this time on identity checks at the external borders of the Schengen area, will be voted on Thursday.
Thursday’s sitting beings with debates on development issues, as Parliament considers the work of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly and the issue of corruption in developing countries. MEPs will also vote on a report from Proinsias DE ROSSA (PES, IE) relating to the European Schools in Brussels.
As usual., the session will end with three short debates on human rights issues around the world. The human right debates and resolutions will be on the following subjects:
Darfur
Assyrian community in Iraq and the situation of prisons in Iraq
Egypt: - the case of Ayman Nour.
20060331STO06908 Briefing for Strasbourg plenary 3-6 April 2006 Draft Agenda for Strasbourg plenary 3-6 April 2006
EN
1
PHOTO
20060331PHT06891.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/omk/sipade3?PROG=AGENDA&L=EN&QUERY=ALL-SIT&NAV=S&REF=2006-04
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060313BRI06148 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
