EP defends citizens' interests in long term budget
Budget
2006-03-27 - 18:21
EP stands up for students
As the talks on the budget framework for 2007-2013 continue, with Parliament defending the funding of policies which are pivotal for the citizens, we asked four MEPs to explain the European Parliament's position. The Chairman and three Vice-Chairmen of the Budgets committee are the Parliament's negotiators in on-going budget discussions with national governments and the Commission and they are staunchly defending the Parliament's demands for the level and direction of spending.
The question that remains in the spotlight for the public and the media is the level of the budget framework over the next seven years. After EU leaders finally reached an agreement in December with a much reduced proposal of €862 billion (compared with the €975 billion proposed by the Parliament), MEPs wanted to find out what sort of impact this reduction implied for the EU. "We have asked the Commission to give us a so-called impact assessment on what the cuts agreed in Brussels could mean for various programmes," said the Chairman of the Budgets committee, Janusz Lewandovski, a Polish Christian Democrat. The worst hit areas would be research, Trans-European networks, health and consumer protection and education. German Christian Democrat Reimer Böge warned that, "If today we have 170,000 Erasmus students every year, in future it will be only 140,000." To redress the balance and put cash back into these important programmes, the Parliament is asking ministers to raise the budget by €12 billion.
One might imagine that budget negotiations are all about money, but while the financial side is very important the negotiators are focusing on "how to improve the role of Parliament in the decision-making process and how to certify that the money is better used than at the moment," explained Budgets committee vice-chairman Jan Mulder, a member of the Dutch Freedom and Democracy party. The Parliament is also looking for improvements in the system for disbursement. "Some people have to fill in 40 pages of forms to get a few thousand euros," noted fellow Vice-Chairman Ralf Walter, a German Social Democrat. This is counter-productive and means that many potential beneficiaries don't follow through with requests for funding and the money reverts back to EU countries. Mr. Walter said that Parliament aims to make things better for the citizen by "making sure that the procedures are as easy and involve as little bureaucracy as possible".
The talks have already been going on for some time. While the Commission presented its proposal more than two years ago and Parliament adopted its position in June 2005, the heads of the 25 countries were not able to find an agreement until December. All three institutions are now holding regular meetings to try and agree a compromise. "After nine months, even in biological terms...we should be close to an agreement," Mr Lewandowski said. But the talks look set to be very tough. As Mr. Böge said of the Parliament's position ahead of the meeting on April 4: "Those who lose their nerves first, will lose."
20060324STO06741 Link to the Budgets committee's webpage Financial perspective: agreement on the figures postponed
EN
1
PHOTO
20060324PHT06742.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/committees/presentation.do?committee=1235&language=EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060320IPR06486 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
