No doubt that CIA renditions have taken place in Europe, journalists tell MEPs
Judicial cooperation
2006-03-22 - 11:39
The committee investigating alleged CIA involvement in the illegal detention of prisoners in Europe heard on Tuesday from three journalists who have researched allegations of CIA abduction. Stephen Grey, a freelance journalist working with The New York Times, and Guido Olimpio and Paolo Biondani of Il Corriere della Sera agreed there was considerable evidence that 'extraordinary renditions' had taken place in Europe.
Mr Grey, who is based in London, began by saying there was " no doubt " that CIA planes have carried out 'renditions' on European soil. This involves the detention of terrorism suspects in one country and their transfer to a prison in another country for interrogation. It is carried out without any legal assistance for the detainee.
"Are you 100% convinced of the details you wrote in your articles?" asked Jas Gawronski (EPP-ED, IT). "I'm not here to criticise what the Americans are doing or whether it is correct to send a detainee to a jail in Egypt, but I have no doubt that these things happen. And I know that these activities occur, because the people involved in their organisation told me about it", said Mr Grey. "There is no question in my mind that this occurs." He cited sources in Washington, including pilots working for the CIA.
No evidence of detention centres
Asked by Bogusław Rogalski (NA, PL) about the existence of detention centres in Europe, Mr Grey said: "There is traffic of planes from Afghanistan to countries like Poland and Romania but I have no evidence of detention centres there … I could add that Poland and Romania are not the most frequent Eastern European countries of destination for such flights, Hungary and the Czech Republic are more common destinations … We know that detention centres collaborating with the CIA exist in some Middle-East countries, like Syria and also in Morocco, Egypt and Uzbekistan." Washington sources were the basis for this too, he said, but there was no written evidence.
Stavros Lambrinidis (PES, EL) asked if there was evidence of European authorities knowing about these activities. Mr Grey referred to specific cases: "British officials were fully aware of extraordinary renditions being carried in UK even if they didn't support it … They didn't encourage it, but they did have knowledge of it." Regarding the case of the Italian Muslim cleric, detained in a Milan street in February 2003 and transferred to a secret jail in Egypt, he said: "I am absolutely categorical when I say that the Italian government knew about the abduction of Abu Omar. It would be out of normal practice for the CIA to carry out such operation without informing the Member State."
The Italian case
Guido Olimpio and Paolo Biondani provided more details on this last case, one of the best known and best documented examples of extraordinary rendition in Europe: Abu Omar was flown to Egypt, via the military airbases at Aviano in Italy and Ramstein in Germany, after which he was tortured before being released. Italian prosecutors have issued arrest warrants for 22 CIA agents in this case.
Answering questions from the committee, Mr. Olimpio said he was sure the CIA had had contacts with the Italian intelligence services. "Italy didn't want to be involved so the CIA ended up operating alone", he said. Mr Biondani told the MEPs: "A US source from CIA circles in Italy said that for this part of the operation it is standard procedure for the CIA to inform national authorities before detaining anyone". Later, "someone from CIA headquarters in the US confirmed my sources were right: it would have been the first time such an operation had been carried out without knowledge of the national authorities."
Wolfgang Kreissl-Dörfler (PES, DE) asked about the role of Italian intelligence services. Mr. Biondani said there was no conclusive evidence of their involvement: "However, it is a logical speculative line of argument to assume they had been informed."
2006-03-21 Temporary Committee on the alleged use of European countries by the CIA for the transport and illegal detention of prisoners Chair Carlos COELHO EPP-ED PT 20060320IPR06487
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
