Money, energy, elections all figure in a busy week at the European Parliament
Institutions
2006-03-20 - 11:59
Brussels Plenary Wednesday and Thursday
The European Parliament has a varied week ahead with a Plenary Session in Brussels, negotiations with the Commission and EU ministers on the EU's long-term budget, President Josep Borrell's speech to the spring summit and the plenary session of the Euro-Mediterranean assembly.
Finance figures quite heavily this week with discussions with the Council and the Commission about the financial framework over the next seven years. The Parliament has already made it abundantly clear that it opposes the agreement reached by heads of government in December, particularly regarding the level of proposed spending and suggested cuts to a range of programmes covering issues from youth and culture to small and medium-sized businesses and security policies. Also this week, the budget control committee will consider the management of the Union's 2004 accounts.
Plenary session on Wednesday and Thursday
After a busy week in Strasbourg last week, MEPs are set to continue their work in this week's Brussels Plenary, with discussions on the security of the EU's energy supplies, tackling problems related to the aging population and a debate on the EU's annual strategic policy review. You can watch the sessions on EP live by clicking below.
Thursday is a particularly packed day. Following the plenary, Mr Borrell will open an exhibition at the Parliament organised as part of the celebrations around the 20th anniversary of the accession of Spain and Portugal to the EU. He will be joined at the opening ceremony by Spanish and Portuguese Prime Ministers, José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero and José Sócrates, and by Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso. This event will also be screened on EP Live from 1600-1645.
After that, the EP President will attend the European Summit, which takes place in Brussels on Thursday and Friday, where he will deliver a speech to heads of government.
Foreign policy on the agenda
The European Parliament's role in the world isn't neglected either this week. The head of the World Trade Organisation, Pascal Lamy, will be at the Parliament Thursday, while a delegation of election observers will head off to the Ukraine for legislative elections on Sunday.
Meanwhile, Mr Borrell will chair the Euromed plenary assembly on 26-27 March, bringing to a close the EP's presidency of the body, which brings together EU countries and 10 Mediterranean countries (Algeria, the Palestinian Authority, Egypt, Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, Morocco, Syria, Tunisia and Turkey). On the agenda are an anti-terrorist “code of conduct" and the issue of freedom of expression and the respect of religious beliefs.
20060317STO06475 Webstreaming Euromed website EP Agenda
EN
1
PHOTO
20060206PHT05006.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/eplive/public/freetext_page_webstreaming/default/default_en.htm
EN
3
LINK
/president/euromed/en/default.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060317IPR06457 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
