Opening of the session : Reaction to ETA ceasefire / possible debate on Belarus
Institutions
2006-03-22 - 16:57
President Josep BORRELL opened this Parliamentary session with an announcement of which, he said, was good news for Spain and for the whole of Europe.
" A communiqué has been issued by the ETA announcing a permanent ceasefire. We can now glimpse a future in Spain without terrorist violence. Obviously, this is a time to remain calm and be cautious, and also remember the many victims of terrorism. It is a time for hope and for all democratic forces to work together. It is a good news for the whole of Europe, as it shows one can fight terrorism from the castle of democracy ."
Socialist group leader Martin SCHULZ (DE) ceded the floor to Bárbara Dührkop Dührkop ( PES, ES), whose husband was killed by the ETA. She said: "ETA's announcement of a permanent ceasefire is a terrifically hopeful piece of news for everybody in Spain and indeed in Europe. We are making a call for unity, for all democrats in Europe to stand together to build a definitive peace. I am quite emotional in saying this, but it is indeed a time to think of the victims of ETA."
For the EPP-ED group, Hans-Gert POETTERING (DE) also said it was time to think of the victims of ETA and their families. While welcoming the news, he insisted there should be no quid pro quo: "ETA should not expect anything in exchange. We look forward to peace across the Basque country and across the whole Spanish nation."
Graham WATSON (UK) spoke for the ALDE group, saying it was a pleasure to celebrate something that can only be regarded as a victory. "In a democracy change comes through the ballot not the bullet. The actions of ETA, like the IRA, the Red Brigades and others have been terrorist actions and unjustifiable." He looked forward to a peaceful future in Spain.
Daniel Cohn BENDIT (DE) spoke for the Greens/EFA group. He said the statement showed two things: "Democracies are right to resist terrorism and that since we are right to do so we also have to know how to negotiate and how to talk." He congratulated all the political forces of Spain for standing firm against violence, but also for being willing to negotiate.
Brian CROWLEY (IE) of the UEN group also welcomed the statement, although, he said it came too late for the many victims of ETA. He said ceasefires and negotiations do not mean subjugation, but parity of esteem. In Spain as in Ireland, he said, "Lives were sacrificed needlessly because people refused to talk to each other on an equal footing. The EU is the best possible peace process", he said, saying it spread respect for dialogue and tolerance.
Jens-Peter BONDE (DK) for the IND/DEM group said he was very happy with this news. He said his own area of Denmark, near the German border, was another example where old enemies were now friends. "I hope peace will also be found in Spain and the Basque country."
A number of other speakers took the floor, including James ALLISTER (NA, UK), James NICHOLSON (EPP-ED, UK) and Proinsias DE ROSSA (PES, IE) who spoke of the lessons to be learned from the Northern Irish peace process. The question of how the Spanish government should react was also raised, notably by Alejo VIDAL QUADRAS (EPP-ED, ES) and Enrique BARÓN CRESPO (PSE, ES)
Probable additional debate on Belarus
Following requests from several MEPs it is likely that a debate on the situation in Belarus following the controversial elections will take place tomorrow (Thursday 23 March) although no formal decision was taken.
20060322IPR06608
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
