MEPs rein in Commission plans to merge health and consumer protection
Consumers
2006-03-23 - 11:43
"To promote the interests of consumers," reads the EC's founding Treaty, the Community is to take "measures which support, supplement and monitor the policy pursued by the Member States." Meeting on 23 March, the European Parliament signed up to €233 million worth of such measures -- by lending its support to the 2007-2013 programme of Community action in the field of consumer protection.
The programme's objectives, to be achieved with a range of Community-financed actions and instruments, are fourfold: to aim for a better understanding of consumers and markets; to ensure better consumer protection regulation and greater participation of civil society stakeholders; to guarantee better enforcement, monitoring and redress; and lastly, to help produce better educated, responsible consumers. Split, MEPs tell Commission The Commission had originally suggested a single action programme for health and consumer protection in hopes of achieving more synergies between the two areas. " Bringing the two areas together" , it argued, would " lead to greater policy coherence, economies of scale and increased visibility". MEPs, however, did not agree with this approach. In the words of rapporteur Marianne Thyssen (EPP-ED, BE), "neither the practical nor the policy arguments in favour of integrating the aforementioned action programmes [were] convincing. The synergies aimed at will in practice be much smaller than hoped for." It was with this in mind that the Parliament's Conference of Presidents -- citing additional budgetary considerations and noting that health and consumer protection are covered by different legal bases (Articles 152 and 153 of the EC Treaty) -- had decided to separate the integrated programme into two parts back in June 2005. The Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection (IMCO) thus dealt only with consumer protection, while the Environment and Public Health Committee (ENVI) was left to address the health component. The ENVI report had already been voted on during last week's session in Strasbourg plenary. Given that MEPs decided to split the joint programme, it was only logical that they would do the same with its budget. 233 million euros, out of a total budget of €1,203 million, was consequently earmarked for consumer protection. However, with a view to the pending negotiations between Parliament and the Council on the 2007-2013 financial framework, MEPs, following the IMCO committee's recommendations, decided not to introduce any other amendments relating to the cost of the consumer action programme. Amending the Commission’s original figures, IMCO Chair Arlene McCarthy (PES, UK) had explained prior to the committee vote, would be “premature and would undermine our negotiating position.” Reimer Böge (EPP-ED, DE), the EP's rapporteur on the Financial Perspective, addressing IMCO members, was of the same opinion. Introducing new figures, he had claimed, “would undermine the credibility of the EP in the negotiations” .
The EP did vote, however, to decrease some maximum ceilings for Community financing for "actions in pursuit of the aims and objectives" of the programme -- from 60 to 50 percent. It also approved an amendment defining the eligibility criteria for bodies and legal persons seeking to qualify for such financing, all while expanding the list of actions eligible for Community support. Lastly, in keeping with their earlier appeals -- a 2005 own-initiative report by Henrik Dam Kristensen (PES, DK) being one example -- MEPs supported amendments to strengthen assistance to consumer organisations in the new Member States.
It is now up to the Council of Ministers, as joint legislator with Parliament, to decide its position on the amendments adopted by MEPs. If all of Parliament's amendments are acceptable to the Council, the legislation will be adopted in its modified form. If the Council rejects any of Parliament's amendments or adds any of its own, the text will return to Parliament for a second reading.
Speaking before the plenary, Mrs. Thyssen dedicated her report to Philip Whitehead, the former chair of the Internal Market Committee, who passed away on 31 December 2005. "We all stand in his debt", she said.
20060322IPR06616
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
