Ukraine elections "free and fair"
External relations
2006-03-30 - 17:17
"These elections clearly show how far Ukraine has come, in scarcely a year and half, to meeting the democratic standards that the people of Ukraine stood up for during the Orange Revolution", said Marek Siwiec (PES, PL), head of the European Parliament observer mission which monitored the parliamentary elections in Kiev.
The EP delegation (see list of members below) monitored the way the elections were conducted in twenty-five polling stations in Kiev and held talks with voters to assess their understanding of procedures and their trust in the electoral process. No major anomalies were observed in the polling stations visited. The election was judged to have been well conducted.
Overall, according to the head of the EP delegation, the elections were "free and fair" although progress needs to be made on the practical organisation of the polls (queues and compilation of electoral rolls) and on respect for the rules on funding of election campaigns.
MEPs noted that their mission was favourably received in Ukraine and that there was much interest in what they were doing. The EP delegation was part of a joint election monitoring mission of the OSCE, NATO, the Council of Europe and the European Parliament. In total, 900 observers monitored the election.
As to the outcome of the elections, Marek Siwiec said "the European Union can find valid interlocutors in all the Ukrainian political parties which will sit in the Assembly. This capital must be used in cooperation between the Ukrainian and European parliaments" .
The EP delegation consisted of Marek Siwiec (chair, EPP-ED, PL) Charles Tannock (EPP-ED, UK), Thijs Berman (PES, NL), Šarūnas Birutis (ALDE, LT), Rebecca Harms (Greens/EFA, DE), Zbigniew Krzysztof Kuzmiuk (UEN, PL) and Patrick Louis (IND/DEM, FR).
The findings of the EP delegation will be presented at a press conference at 12 noon on Tuesday 28 March in Brussels.
20060321IPR06543
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
