Call for progress in WTO talks
External/international trade
2006-04-04 - 15:55
Parliament adopted a non-binding report on the Doha round of world trade talks ahead of the World Trade Organisation meeting of 30 April in Geneva. The report on the outcome of the WTO’s Hong Kong ministerial conference in December was adopted by 493 votes in favour to 103 against, with 25 abstentions.
While deploring the slow progress in the negotiations so far and the predetermined low level of ambition for the outcome of the Ministerial Conference in Hong Kong, MEPs note that this low level of ambition threatens the ability to deliver meaningful results for the Doha Round. MEPs call on the Commission to prepare an alternative action plan in case the Doha negotiations fail. The House hopes, however, that the Ministerial Declaration will pave the way for a successful conclusion of the Round in all key areas.
Parliament says industrialised countries and advanced developing countries should engage constructively in real negotiations to reach a successful conclusion.
On agriculture, says the committee, the commitments made by the Commission during the negotiations at the WTO must not go beyond the bounds of the current Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) arrangements or the negotiating mandate. It recalls the scope of the Luxembourg agreement on CAP reform and insists on the need to define ‘green box’ measures including decoupled support. MEPs in the committee also deplore the absence of progress on the establishment of a register for wines and spirits as well as on the extension of geographical indications to other products.
The report asks the Commission to consider the possibility of introducing a ‘development box’ for the Least Developed Countries (LDCs) into the agricultural negotiations so that they can tackle food safety and rural employment – major issues when it comes to eradicating poverty.
Negotiations on non agricultural market access should, says the committee, lead to ambitious and balanced results, guaranteeing new real market access opportunities. Given the lack of progress in the services area, the report calls for the intensification of negotiations at both bilateral and multilateral levels, with due regard for the interests of weak and vulnerable economies, while insisting that the EU continue emphasising the liberalisation of services and the opening of markets, especially in finance, tourist and distribution sectors, which are important for the European economy.
MEPs call for strengthened discipline with regard to anti-dumping and other rules issues in order to prevent abusive recourse to trade defence instruments while preserving the legitimate use and effectiveness of these instruments.
Among other points, the report also calls for institutional reform to improve the functioning of the WTO. It reiterates the importance of a parliamentary dimension for the WTO to enhance its democratic legitimacy and transparency, with Members of Parliament constituting an important link with citizens.
The House calls on the EU and the LDCs to jointly strive to achieve 100 % duty and quota-free market access for LDCs in developed and advanced developing countries. MEPs call on the Commission to give due consideration to non-trade concerns (animal welfare and the environment) in the field of agriculture in the forthcoming negotiations. MEPs stress the heavy distortion of competition suffered by European farmers as long as imported products are not subject to the same standards as home products.
MEPs participation
MEPs also stress the importance of the European Parliament being represented at all WTO meetings where major steps in the negotiations are taken and where ministers are involved and not only on the occasion of official Ministerial Conferences. The House requests, therefore, that a small delegation of members of the European Parliament be meaningfully involved in the meetings to be convened in Geneva with a view to meeting the 30 April and 31 July deadlines set in the Hong Kong Declaration. Finally, MEPs invite the Council to extend an invitation to such a delegation of members of the European Parliament to participate, as observers, in at least one of the meetings of the 133 Committee to be organised in Geneva at the end of April.
20060330IPR06842 Assessment of the Doha Round following the WTO Ministerial Conference in Hong Kong
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5296422
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
