MEPs react to latest violence in Middle East
Institutions
2006-03-21 - 19:30
Parliament President Josep Borrell told MEPs that Palestinian President Mahmoud Abbas was unable to address Parliament as planned. However, the leaders of the political groups made statements on the latest violence in the Middle East.
President Borrell said: “ Soon after his arrival in Strasbourg yesterday, he had to return to Ramallah after the terrible and deplorable events in Jericho had created a violent and dangerous situation. I met him last night and told him that Parliament understood that he needed to return to his country and take control of the situation. That he had to go home without speaking to the House has elements of a Greek tragedy about it, since he represents the majority of Palestinians who still support a negotiated solution to the conflict. He is a man who has tried to achieve peace through negotiations since the 1970s. His visit would have been an opportunity for us to support this. That opportunity was lost because of an unnecessary and illegal military operation and the unacceptable violence that operation provoked. We have to ask how this can contribute to the security of Israel. We Europeans will now have to pay for a new prison, as we have had to pay for so many other things which have been destroyed. The violence following that attack is deeply worrying. Three western hostages have been taken, including two French citizens. There are unconfirmed rumours of more.
When I spoke to Mahmoud Abbas last night he told me about the efforts he had made all day to stop military operations and prevent a spiral of violence before it went out of control. The EU staff monitoring the border between Gaza and Egypt also have also had security problems. The Palestinian President undertook to return to Strasbourg – probably at April session. If that is so, we will be able to hear how he will tackle the situation .”
Political group leaders
For the EPP-ED group, Hans-Gert POETTERING (DE) said: “ We are all very concerned about events in the Middle East. My group greatly laments that the Palestinian President was unable to speak to us today. The group leaders have already decided to invite him back. He is a moderate person aiming for balance and peace. We are deeply concerned with the present situation. What should we do? First, we should warn against precipitous conclusions – we must not do anything to fuel the violence. The storming of the prison should be investigated. We need to get answers as to why this has happened, and they must be convincing answers. But it is good to remind people of the basic principles. We want an Israeli state with safe borders and a Palestinian state with safe borders. The dignity of Israelis and Palestinians is of the same value. On both sides majority wants to move towards a settlement. We call for the release of all hostages whether European or not. We hope the EU will take a fair and non-partisan approach to peace in the Middle East. And we hope the time will soon come for Mahmoud Abbas to give his speech to the European Parliament .”
For the Socialist group, Martin SCHULZ (DE) said he agreed with all that had been said by Mr Poettering and by the President. “ We all lament the recent events, and regret that President Abbas cannot speak to us. The fact that he was due to be here was already an encouraging sign, that the elected President of the Palestinians, representative of their freedom and sovereignty was here, giving us the opportunity to help ensure that this Head of State was viewed as an equal partner by all others in the region. That should be our ultimate goal. Every peaceful contribution we can make is good. We hope he will soon be able to come to Parliament again. As for the Jericho events, we must always ask questions of who does what to whom... what purpose does this serve? We can only speculate. Is it of value to anyone to storm this prison? The answers we have seen in the Israeli media are not appropriate. It is not for a state to storm a prison. If people were to be released, there must be ways of stopping this without storming a prison. There had been international observers present – why was this not stuck to? I hope that there were no domestic Israeli issues behind this – that would help no-one .”
Graham WATSON (UK) spoke for the ALDE group: “ We also regret the fact that President Abbas had to return home in such circumstances. When the tectonic plates of the three great monotheistic religions rub against each other, causing sparks in the Middle East, we should proceed with extreme caution. We should not risk a serious threat to continued peace in our world. As European diplomacy with Iran is undermined by George Bush's deal with India ignoring the non-proliferation treaty, our work in the Middle East should not be undermined by unilateral Israeli actions. There are questions to be asked about whether there was a conspiracy with the British and American troops who left shortly before the Israelis came in. Nothing can justify attack or the hostage taking which followed it. We hope that we are able to move quickly to restore calm and confidence – and we hope to see Mr Abbas back in this Chamber in more serene circumstances to hear how he can work with all sides to create peace in that region .”
For the Greens/EFA group, Daniel COHN-BENDIT (DE) said that the fact that Mr Abbas had to return home was not tragic or dramatic, but was politically hard to accept. “ Unilateral policy on either side leads to disaster. Mutual contempt leads to breakdown in negotiations. The EU must insist that there should be no more unilateralism: Israel cannot decide alone what a Palestinian state should look like, the Palestinian government of Hamas alone cannot decide who can use violence against Israel. If each believes that they can turn their back on the other side, then the international community cannot turn its back. Israel cannot decide alone even if there is a security problem in the West Bank. Of course it is clear there are domestic political choices at work. The Olmert government has scored on the left by withdrawing some settlements, now it wants points on the right. The future of the region has been sacrificed to the next elections. What the Israelis did was wrong – though this prison was no longer a prison, since prisoners were holding press conferences with 500 journalists. If you want to let or get people out there are legal ways which the Palestinians should have followed, but Israel does not have right to react by destroying the prison. We must be against the unilateral exercise of power on either side .”
Francis WURTZ (FR), leader of the GUE/NGL group, said it was a serious decision for Mr Abbas to hasten back. “ The situation with this new and deliberately humiliating exercise and with the unacceptable but inevitable reaction of kidnappings, is very serious. An EU country, the UK, had an agreement with the US, Israel and Palestine. This was flagrantly violated by Israel despite no prisoner having got away. If Israel thought there was a problem, Abbas had already proposed the transfer of prisoners to the Mukata under international supervision. The EU has turned a systematic blind eye to the Sharon government and its successors. We have a Prime Minister-designate who runs the mad risk of inflaming a situation which is already explosive, simply in order to show the most extreme part of his electorate what he can do for them. He knows the US always gives Israel Carte Blanche. The European authorities have got Israel used to their acceptance. Are we to accept without reaction that peace can be torpedoed and those keenest on peace, like Abbas, undermined?”
Non-attached MEP Irena BELOHORSKÁ (SK) said this was further proof of intolerance between two countries we respect but which do not respect each other. “ This attack on a prison and on political prisoners – who all have rights to proper process – reminds us of arbitrary rule. On both sides, there are more reactions, it is a never ending story. I was looking forward to Mr Abbas's presentation today, to hearing his visions of Palestine and for the negotiating table. I wanted to hear what they plan to give for peace. Parliament should play a role as a mediator, to give a helping hand to both parties who want peace .”
Other speakers
Elmar BROK (EPP-ED, DE), Chairman of the Foreign Affairs Committee said: “ This is one of those moments when it entirely uncertain what will happen; it could be a starting point for a spiral of worsening developments. President Abbas, who was directly elected by his citizens, was in a mediating position between those in favour of recognising Israel and Hamas, who do not recognise Israel but who nevertheless won an election. It would be dreadful if that role is lost. We do not know what will happen next. This will heighten emotions on the Palestinian side. The withdrawal of UK and US observers means that a platform for stability has been lost. The attacks in Gaza seem to show Abbas's supporters abandoning their renunciation of violence now they have lost the elections. This is what happens in a situation where Abbas has lost credibility .”
The Chief EU Observer for the recent Palestinian legislative elections was the MEP Veronique DE KEYSER (PES, BE). She said she and Edward McMillan-Scott (EPP-ED, UK), the leader of the Parliamentary election observers, had met Mr Abbas the previous night. “ We are shocked and angry at latest events. This is neither fate nor chance. An attack on a prison just when the President was coming to Europe accompanied by the local Jericho strongman is not a matter of chance. Parading half naked prisoners with their eyes covered and their arms tied owes nothing to chance. Now anything can cause violence. The cartoon business is not yet behind us – this is very serious. An attempt is being made to undermine the person who could lead Hamas towards the peace process. That is the person being attacked today. I don't know who will benefit from this crime, but I don't want us in the EU to be dupes. It is true that negotiations were going on about the prison and that one of the prisoners was implicated in the murder of an Israeli minister, but we should not begin a new cycle of violence. We must stay calm and denounce what happened yesterday .”
Mr McMILLAN-SCOTT ( EPP-ED, UK) said: “ Mahmoud Abbas was elected freely and fairly last year. The legislative elections were controversial but also free and fair. Abbas's presence in this assembly, which represents the values of democracy, pluralism and freedom which we hope to have accepted in the Middle East, would have been important. It is paradoxical, ironic and tragic that two countries who speak so much about the need for democracy in the Middle East – the US and the UK – have abandoned their international responsibility. Instead of dealing with a problem, they walked away. When the Euro Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly meets in Brussels next week, I hope we will have a statement from the Commission and Council about what happened and who gave the orders .”
EU Council
For the Council, Hans WINKLER, State Secretary in the Austrian Foreign Ministry, said the cancellation on Mr Abbas's visit raised serious concerns regarding the ongoing and escalating violence in the Middle East. He pointed out that Foreign Minister Ursula PLASSNIK had already condemned the radical Palestinian attacks, and had called for the United Nations to take action. The priority, he said, was to restore peace and protect human life. “ We all bear responsibility for that and will work to ensure the immediate release of hostages. The Council will have to consider carefully what steps to take. All institutions, Parliament, Council and Commission should react in a responsible manner to ensure the peace process is not destroyed. The Presidency calls on Israel and the Palestinian Authority to hold back and prevent further violence. They should avoid unilateral measures. Not correct path. The attacks on EU and Member State institutions, and the taking of hostages are to be condemned, they only upset efforts for peace. ”
European Commission
Commission President Jose Manuel BARROSO added his voice to the general expression of regret that Mr Abbas was unable to address Parliament. “Commissioner FERRERO WALDNER met him yesterday and offered our support in the search for a peaceful solution in the Middle East. We condemn unambiguously all forms of violence which have occurred in that region, from wherever they come. We appeal to a sense of responsibility of all parties for restraint. We are concerned at the very worrying situation for the region and for the Europeans taken hostage, and EU buildings attacked. No-one has helped the Palestinian people more than the EU and wish to continue as a donor to the Palestinian people. We appeal to all sides for restraint and for all sides to live together in peace.”
EP President
President Borrell closed the debate by calling for a high level Commission and Council presence at the Euro Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly due to meet in Brussels in ten days time: “ We hope to hear measured and useful proposals to encourage dialogue and assist the Middle East situation ,” he said.
20060315IPR06251
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
