Development impact of Economic Partnership Agreements
Development and cooperation
2006-03-23 - 13:10
"If long-term sustainable development is to be the overall outcome of Economic Partnership Agreements (EPAs)" then the Commission must "act in accordance with the Cotonou objective of poverty eradication". This is the view expressed in a non-binding report on the development impact of Economic Partnership Agreements.
Between 1975 and 2000, the trade relationship between EU countries and those of Africa, the Caribbean and the Pacific (ACP) was determined by the rules set out in the Lomé Conventions. This agreement granted ACP countries unilateral preferential (non-reciprocal) access to the European market. However, in September 2002, the ACP countries began to negotiate Economic Partnership Agreements (EPAs) that would make their trade-relationships with the EU compatible with the guidelines of the WTO. These guidelines stipulate that a trade relationship should be reciprocal: "countries at different levels of development can enter into a reciprocal free trade agreement providing that the liberalisation of substantially all trade occurs within a reasonable length of time”. Thus, under the proposed EPAs, the new trade relationship between the EU and ACP countries is reciprocal and aimed at the progressive liberalisation of trade.
The report opens by expressing the understanding that there is a necessity to make compatible the rules governing ACP-EU trade relations with those of the WTO. Nevertheless, it urges the Commission to ensure that the goals of liberalisation do not take precedence over the goals of development. In correlation with this, it advises caution when considering the liberalisation of public sectors in the ACP countries. Moreover, "too rapid a reciprocal trade liberalisation between the EU and the ACP could have a negative impact on vulnerable ACP economies and States". With a view to promoting economic integration, trade and investment, the House encourages the development of EPAs that concentrate on the principle of asymmetry in favour of ACP regions.
Parliament laments the lack of progress that there has been in the pursuit of "development-friendly" policies so far, and calls on the Commission to "pursue ambitious new initiatives to stabilise the price of commodities which are essential to developing countries" and to "support mechanisms for producers to be involved and participate in price determination where feasible". It also asserts the need for effective trade-related assistance and for an improvement in the infrastructure of ACP countries. The report calls for greater transparency in the negotiations, a real public debate on the issues, and a deeper involvement of other sectors. On the part of the ACP countries, it asks their governments to work within a framework of democracy, responsibility and good governance.
The main objective of the Cotonou Agreement was to reduce and eventually eradicate poverty along with the nurturing of sustainable development. The concept of "reciprocity" represents "a major shift in the EU's approach to development and trade policies with ACP partners". MEPs believe however, that the EU and ACP countries combined represent a substantial number, "large enough to demand eventual reforms of the WTO rules".
The House stresses that the outcome of the EPA negotiations should provide sufficient time for adjustment for ACP producers’ domestic and regional markets and allow ACP countries the necessary policy space to pursue their own development strategies. Parliament also stresses the importance of public services for development and democracy and consequently asks the Commission to always prioritise affordable access for all when considering promoting liberalisation or other options in areas such as water distribution and sanitation , health, education, transport and energy. Finally, the House urges the Commission to focus its attention on and prioritise improving production and processing capacities, and national and regional trade within the ACP.
20060322IPR06612 The development impact of Economic Partnership Agreements
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5270872
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
