'Stop the Traffik' campaign launched in European Parliament
Justice and home affairs
Ireland
2006-03-22 - 14:50
Daniel Bedingfield launching the Stop the Traffik Campaign
Simon Coveney MEP launched a global campaign called 'Stop the Traffik' at a lunch-time concert in the European Parliament in Brussels on Tuesday 21 March 2006.
Speaking at the event, which featured music by Daniel Bedingfield, Simon Coveney said: " In the same way that the 'Make Poverty History' campaign successfully raised the issue of debt relief, fair trade and development aid, I hope that 'Stop the Traffik' will raise awareness about the trafficking in human beings and in particular forced child prostitution." Avril Doyle MEP said: "With well over a million of the world's most vulnerable, mainly women and children, being sold into prostitution every year and with at least 100,000 of these within the EU, we can no longer ignore this ugly, degrading practice. Human trafficking is a crime against humanity. "
'Stop the Traffik' is a global coalition working together to help stop the sale of people, to prosecute traffickers and to protect the victims of human trafficking. 'Stop the Traffik' aims to raise awareness of the problem of human trafficking and to call for change through the education of people in both source and receiving countries as well as by equipping individuals to be advocates for change. The initiative will also encourage and help finance grass roots anti-trafficking projects around the world.
It is estimated that up to one million people are trafficked across borders throughout the world each year. Of that number, it is estimated that up to 100,000 women are trafficked into Europe every year to work in the sex industry. Reports suggest that an additional 40,000 women and girls could be trafficked into Germany this year alone and forced to work as prostitutes during the World Cup.
Simon Coveney said: "People should know that if they pay for sex the person they hire may have been trafficked or forced into prostitution. We must concentrate on reducing the demand for prostitutes and in doing so decrease the numbers of primarily young girls being trafficked into the sex industry." Human trafficking is a modern day form of slavery. It's the third largest source of income for international organised crime, after trafficking in drugs and arms," he said
The campaign will include education and information packs for schools, collages and youth groups which can be downloaded from the website www.stopthetraffik.org
The 'Stop the Traffik' campaign culminates in 'Freedom Day' on 25 March 2007, a day to celebrate liberty and commit to bringing freedom to everyone across the world.
20060321IPR06583 Stop the Traffik campaign
EN
1
PHOTO
20060309PHT06037.jpg
EN
2
A
http://www.stopthetraffik.org/
EN
3
LINK
http://www.stopthetraffik.org
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
