93 Airlines on EU-blacklist for unsafe airlines
Transport
2006-03-27 - 15:31
A ban in one EU country means a ban across the bloc
Since 22 March, 93 airlines that fail to meet safety requirements have been banned across the EU, largely due to the efforts of the European Parliament. Also, passengers will be informed of the identity of the carrier and compensated should the company be included on the list after the reservation has been made.
After a number of plane crashes in the summer of 2005, in which more than 500 people died, the European Commission raised the issue of air carrier identification and the listing of companies banned from flying to or over EU territory. Considered the original proposal too weak, the European Parliament wrought substantial changes by introducing one common EU-blacklist based on common criteria instead of 25 separate national lists and by enhancing the rights of passengers.
French UMP MEP Christine de Veyrac, Parliament's rapporteur on the proposal, welcomed the blacklist as "big progress for safety". From now on, she said, "all Europeans benefit from the same level of safety whatever Community airport they travel from. By drawing up the list, the EU is meeting its citizens' expectations. "
Who's on the list?
Some 83 out 93 airlines banned in the EU are African. The list includes all carriers from the Democratic Republic of Congo (51), Equatorial Guinea (12), Liberia (4), Sierra Leone (14) and Swaziland (7). Also, airlines like Air Koryo from North Korea, Phuket Airlines from Thailand or BGB Air from Kazakhstan are denied landing and taking off rights in Europe.
Unsafe airlines banned throughout the EU
The blacklist published Wednesday was compiled on the basis of contributions from the 25 EU member states. It includes airlines that show serious safety deficiencies and therefore pose a serious risk. From now on, companies banned in one Member State are banned across the EU. So far, airlines denied landing in one Member State simply landed in another one, as was the case with Turkish airline Onur Air, which was banned in the Netherlands, Germany and France and therefore took off from or landed in Belgium.
The blacklist will increase aviation safety in the EU, because it will oblige all carriers operating in Europe to comply fully with safety standards. It will be updated as often as necessary, but at least every three months.
Informing and compensating passengers
Parliament also strengthened passenger rights to information. They must be informed of the identity of the carrier, whatever the means used to make the reservation (internet, travel agency...). Where the identity of the carrier is not known at the time of reservation, the passenger must be informed as soon as the identity is established. Wherever the carrier is changed after reservation, passengers must be informed at check-in, or at the time of boarding at the latest.
Finally, Parliament decided that passengers will have the right to reimbursement or re-routing if the air carrier is included on the blacklist after the reservation has been made and the flight has therefore been cancelled.
Where to find the list
The list is published on the Internet. Also, air carriage contractors and airports have to bring the list to the attention of passengers, both via their websites and, where relevant, on their premises.
20060323STO06719 Blacklist
EN
1
PHOTO
20060323PHT06730.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.ec.europa.eu/transport/air/safety/doc/flywell/2006_03_22_flywell_list_en.pdf
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
