The week ahead 27 March - 2 April 2006
Institutions
2006-03-23 - 17:21
Group week - Brussels
Euromed. The plenary session of the Euro Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly (EMPA) meets in Brussels on Monday, completing the work begun in the EMPA committees the previous day. There will be debates on the code of conduct for fighting terrorism, freedom of speech and respect for religious beliefs. This session marks the end of the European Parliament's presidency of the Assembly. The 240-member EMPA is made up of Members of the European Parliament, EU national parliaments and parliaments of the EU's 10 partner countries around the Mediterranean. Josep Borrell and Fouad Mebazaa. The EP President and the Speaker of the Tunisian Parliament will hold a joint press conference at the end of the EMPA session at 6pm on Monday. Preparing for the plenary. Parliament's political groups will use the coming week chiefly to prepare for the Strasbourg plenary session of 3-6 April 2006. The key debate of the week will be on the outcome of the EU Spring Summit and the Lisbon Strategy. Other major items on the agenda include a report calling for the lifting of the labour market restrictions imposed by many of the EU 15 on the citizens of 8 of the 'new' Member States, and a debate on the 'Better Lawmaking' initiative. Another report deals with the effectiveness of overseas aid and corruption in developing countries. The session will include a formal address by the President of Malta. Elections in Ukraine. After observing the legislative elections in Ukraine, the a delegation of MEPs will give its first assessment at press conferences in Kiev (Monday) and in Brussels (Tuesday). Pre-session press conference. Any changes to the plenary agenda decided by the Conference of Presidents will be announced at the press briefing in Brussels at 11am on Friday
20060323IPR06717 For full details, see The Agenda
EN
1
LINK
/news/expert/event_top_page/default/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
