MEPs back Commission's competition policy
Economic and monetary affairs
2006-04-04 - 14:50
Parliament supports the Commission's competition policy in an own initiative report in response to the Commission's 2004 annual competition report. Alongside its generally positive assessment, the report makes a number of specific recommendations.
MEPs urge the Commission to promote the correct application of the competition rules in all Member States and to intervene in good time where the competition rules are being applied unsatisfactorily or in a discriminatory manner. They call for clarity on the "sometimes obscure relationships" among national competition authorities and 'national champions' to remove any suspicion of complicity.
The report notes MEPs' concern at the continued failure to achieve full liberalisation in the EU gas and electric markets and welcomes the Commission's inquiry into the sector, as it does the inquiry into bank payment systems and the business insurance market, though in these two cases it urges adequate time for full and thorough responses to the Commission. It suggests that in the case of major networked services, competition must be guided by strong public service obligations.
MEPs call for the Commission to issue a "clear and precise interpretative communication on the fourth criterion set out in the Altmark judgement" on state aid for public services. They ask for a detailed analysis of the problems associated with collective bargaining sensitive economic sectors, such as agriculture, particularly the relationship between small producers and major processors and marketing firms.
Highlighting the importance of consumer information in ensuring a genuine competition culture, MEPs say there is a need to consider at Community level private compensation in cases of anti-competitive conduct.
The report also reaffirms the call for Parliament to gain a more active role in the development of competition policy by enhancement of its codecision powers in this field.
The rapporteur, Alain Lipietz (Greens/EFA, FR), did not agree with the changes made to his original text at committee stage and confirmed by the plenary, so he withdraw his name from the report before the final vote.
20060330IPR06840 Commission competition policy 2004
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5288232
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
