MEPs say European Development Fund is too low
Development and cooperation
2006-03-23 - 11:35
In adopting a joint resolution on the revision of the Cotonou Agreement and setting of the amount for the 10th European Development Fund (EDF), the House regrets that the overall amount for the 10th EDF decided by the European Council is below the original calculation of the Commission.
MEPs also regret that the plethora of political commitments made in 2005 in support of substantial increases in official development aid (ODA) have not been translated into a substantial increase in the contributions of Member States to the EDF. MEPs underline that the proposed amount for the10th EDF would amount to only 0.028% of Member States' GDP. The House deplores the fact that, on the one hand, Member States have made commitments to increase development aid but, on the other hand, if the level of the 10th EDF remains at that fixed by the European Council, the overall levels of ODA managed by the Commission will fall from 19% to just 14% by 2015, making this a de facto re-nationalisation of development policy. MEPs call on the Member States to consider significantly raising their contributions to the 10th EDF.
The House urges the Council to provide new money for 'aid for trade' programmes and insist that such programmes should not shift resources already earmarked for other development initiatives, such as the Millennium Development Goals. MEPs call on the Council to take into account the accession of East Timor to the Partnership Agreement and the fact that aid directed to this new country should clearly be additional in the light of the formula described in Annex 1a to the revised Cotonou Agreement.
Parliament calls on the Council and Commission to clarify the future financing of the African Union, including what level of financing should come from the MEDA programme. MEPs recall that all EDF expenditure must satisfy the ODA eligibility criteria, as defined by the OECD's Development Assistance Committee. Finally, the Parliament calls on the Commission to take the lead in ensuring coordination between the Member States in order to enhance the effectiveness of both EU and bilateral development funding.
2006-03-23 20060322IPR06611
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
