Services Directive: The End of the Deadlock
Free movement of services
2006-04-19 - 14:20
The ball is now in the Council's court
After two years of heated debate, the European Parliament has finally achieved the revision of the highly contested draft directive on the free movement of services presented by the European Commission. The text, dubbed the “Bolkestein directive” by the media, was thoroughly amended during a difficult and complex parliamentary session. The new version of the draft is now deemed acceptable by both the majority of MEPs and Member States as well as the Commission.
The draft directive on the free provision of services in the internal market is vital for the economic future of the European Union. Indeed, it will finalize an objective that has been recorded in the Treaty for fifty years. But it also has a highly political significance. Along with the draft European Constitution, it has been the most controversial text to appear in the last few years. Indeed, the initial version of the text presented by the former Commissioner in charge of the internal market Fritz Bolkestein, became for many people a symbol of the confrontation between Social and Liberal Europe. The French government therefore called for the project, which was deemed too liberal, to be thoroughly reviewed, while last February the governments of six Member States (the Czech Republic, Hungary, the Netherlands, Poland, Spain and the UK) addressed a letter to the Commission requesting, on the contrary, that it should not yield to a vision of the directive that is too protectionist.
The political divides within the European Parliament had also run very deep, but the vote on the amended draft on 16 January was a real and unexpected turning point. The solutions put forward by the MEPs were backed by both the Commission and the Council. On 24 March, the Commissioner now in charge of the dossier, Charlie McCreevy, agreed to follow the Parliament’s line in the amended version of the text, and two days later, the Austrian Presidency of the Council also said it was in favour of the version adopted by the MEPs.
The Parliament imposes its view
Two objectives need to be achieved simultaneously: on the one hand, that of facilitating the free movement of services to revive the market and stimulate the creation of employment, and on the other hand, preventing unfair competition between Member States caused by the differences between their social systems and wages and ensuring the sovereignty of the States in the domains of the labour law and the protection of certain vital interests.
To achieve this, the Parliament, due in particular to the largely favourable vote of the PPE-DE (Christian Democrats and Conservatives), PSE (Socialists) and ALDE (Liberal Democrats) groups, adopted three major changes. Firstly, it replaced the rule according to which service providers would be subject to the law of the country in which they are established, when temporarily providing a service in another Member State, by that of the “free provision of services”. This eliminated the automatism of the original proposal, giving greater room for manoeuvre to the destination country. This Parliamentary amendment was taken up by the Commission in the revised version of the text, presented on 4 April in Strasbourg.
Secondly, the MEPs reduced the number of areas to which the directive applies, notably excluding health and social services, which are no longer covered by the directive. Services of general interest also remain excluded, as do financial services, transport and port services, audiovisual services, services provided by temporary work agencies, gambling and security services.
Thirdly, it is now clearly indicated that the directive will be applied without prejudice to labour law and social law. Any reference to the temporary assignment of workers in a Member State other than that in which the company providing the services is established has been removed.
The next step
The amended text will now be submitted to the EU Council of Ministers. It will then be up to the Member States to decide the fate of the proposal. If, in line with expectations, the Council endorses the current text without any major changes, the Parliament could come to a decision in the autumn after a second reading, and an agreement between the two institutions could therefore be seen towards the end of the year. If on the other hand, the Council retreats from the position recommended by the Parliament, conciliation between the two institutions will clearly be very difficult.
20060418STO07420 latest EP press release on the services directive Background on the services directive
EN
1
PHOTO
20060418PHT07422.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060330IPR06875 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060209BKG05098 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
