The Week Ahead 1 - 7 May 2006
Institutions
2006-05-02 - 11:58
Committee meetings - Brussels
Football. UEFA president Lars-Christer Olsson and Bayern Munich president Karl-Heinz Rummenigge will be among guests at a hearing titled "Professional football - market or society?" organised jointly by four EP committees. EU legislation on football transfers, football as a social phenomenon, media issues, competition and corruption will be among the topics discussed (Wednesday). CIA. The temporary committee on alleged illegal activities by the CIA in Europe will hear from Javier Solana, CFSP high representative and secretary-general of the Council, and Alvaro Gil-Robles, former human rights commissioner at the Council of Europe. The delegation of MEPs visiting Skopje at the end of April will report back to the committee (Tuesday). NATO. NATO secretary-general Jaap De Hoop Scheffer appears before the Foreign Affairs Committee for the first time (Tuesday). Roaming. A mini-hearing on roaming and its economic implications is being held by the Industry Committee and the Internal Market Committee. Representatives of telecoms companies and consumer organisations will take part (Thursday) . Aviation. The Transport Committee votes at first reading on a draft regulation on common rules for civil aviation security (Tuesday). Paediatric medicines. The Environment and Public Health Committee votes at second reading on a regulation on medicines specifically for use by children (Thursday). Nuclear waste. Among other reports to be adopted this week is one at the Industry Committee on inspections of nuclear waste and spent nuclear fuel (Thursday) . Environment. Parliament and Council delegations will try to reach agreement in a conciliation meeting on two directives: the first on batteries and accumulators, the second on the application of the Arhus Convention in the EU institutions (Tuesday, Justus Lipsius, Council) . Torture. The Human Rights sub-committee will hold a hearing of experts on the EU's guidelines against torture. (Thursday). Open Day in Brussels. Parliament throws its doors open to the public in Brussels for its annual Open Day. This year's theme is "worker mobility" (Saturday).
20060427IPR07727 For full info, see Agenda
EN
1
LINK
/news/expert/event_top_page/default/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
