MEPs see Europe's economy getting back on track
European Council
2006-04-05 - 18:57
Parliament debated the outcome of the Spring European Council meeting held in Brussels on 23 and 24 March. Many MEPs welcomed important progress in the area of a common energy policy. On the services directive, there was a welcome for the backing of the European Parliament position.
Austrian Chancellor Wolfgang SCHÜSSEL , President-in-Office of the Council, began by quoting Robert Schuman, who said that Europe would be build by deeds, not by rhetoric. He spoke of the very specific goals for economic policy, including the creation of 10 million new jobs and a package of measure to ensure all young people would be offered an apprenticeship, a job or further education within six months of leaving school. The Council had also agreed to the Commission's proposal of a European globalisation fund. He stressed the importance of focussing on SMEs by cutting red tape and bureaucracy – by, for example, making it possible to set up a company within a week with only one government office to deal with all the process.
He pointed out that each Member State had now put forward individual plans to reach a goal of investing 3 per cent of GDP in research and development – success would mean an extra €100 billion from national budgets and the private sector. He noted that the Council had also supported the idea of a European Institute for Technology, as proposed by Mr Barroso. This would not be a duplication of existing institutions, but would aim to be “ a perfect network working with Member States' institutions ” to improve the link between universities and business. He welcomed moves to create better national ownership of the Lisbon reform plans.
Turning to energy policy, he thanked Angela Merkel and Tony Blair for their impetus for an EU initiative. “ Almost all EU countries face an energy crisis: there are risks of blackouts and the risk of climate change. There is rising energy demand in the world .” He welcomed the Commission's green paper with its focus on security of supply and increasing environmental quality. Noting the commitment to 20 per cent energy savings, he said the aim was to decouple economic growth from increasing energy use. There were goals of increasing renewables to 15 per cent and biofuels to 8 per cent. He also stressed the importance of improving capacity for inter-Member State energy trading.
“ There must be no protectionism in a relatively small market like Europe. The time has passed for everyone to have a national champion and to ignore European rules. We have agreed to open our electricity and gas markets... the Commission has instruments to enforce this and should use them ,” he said.
On the services directive, he said it had not been easy to reach a consensus, but the Council had agreed that Parliament's text was the basis to go forward, and he hoped there could be an accelerated procedure in second reading. He also wanted a solution to on the working time directive which respected national sensitivities and subsidiarity: “ A reasonable compromise is better than no deal at all – which also applies to the budget talks .” On the Financial Perspective, he stressed that despite its difficult birth there was now a compromise he could recommend to the other Member States.
He mentioned one foreign policy matter: “ The situation in Belarus is dramatic. I had the pleasure of meeting Mr Milinkievich – he is a calm sensible man who requires all our political and economic support... we should raise our voices together to call for the immediate release of all the detainees in Belarus, including the presidential candidate Aleksander Kozulin. We do not want to isolate Belarus and its population. We want to strengthen civil society there .” He said the regime in Belarus would face restrictive measures for as long as it used repression.
President José Manuel BARROSO said that it was somewhat fashionable in Europe now to be a little sceptical or cynical. However, the EU had countered this through the achievements of the Spring Summit. The summit had shown that, in an enlarged EU, progress was possible and that European responses were needed to achieve economic growth. The objectives set by the Commission had been achieved. Progress had been made in the field of energy as well as on the new European Institute of Technology.
The 25 national programmes on achieving the Lisbon goals had been received and the EU was now working on a logic of results and deeds. President Barroso stressed the importance of political ownership of the Lisbon strategy.
The summit, he said, had a practical side. On the services directive, the Member States eventually had agreed to take up the position agreed by the European Parliament in February and President Barroso expected a " rapid agreement ." The President welcomed the decision of Spain, Portugal, Finland and most recently the Netherlands following on from Sweden, Ireland and the UK to open their labour markets to the new Member States. On business, the European Council had agreed to cut red tape and support the Commission's reform on state-aid rules for SMEs. The summit also recognised the importance of the new European Institute of Technology. On energy, the Heads of State and Government had backed the Commission's Green paper and its goals of secure, competitive and sustainable energy. More would be done at the June European Council and there was also agreement that energy would form part of each forthcoming Spring Summit.
On Belarus, President Barroso outlined that the Commission was strongly supporting civil society and boosting a free and independent media in Belarus.
The President concluded " We are now moving in the right direction. We are putting words into action. We know what we should do, we agreed to do it and now we are doing it. We are doing it in partnership, with the European Parliament, the European Council, and Member States – but also with businesses, consumers and citizens across Europe. This is the only way to deliver more growth and new jobs. And the result will be the strongest proof that our reforms pay off and that we have moved up a gear."
Political group speakers
Responding for the EPP-ED group, Hans-Gert POETTERING (DE) welcomed the increased feeling of community and common responsibility which he perceived between the institutions. “ This is a good opportunity to strengthen the European psychology to create an EU for the people of Europe .” On Lisbon, he called for less red tape and bureaucracy, especially for small businesses: “ The services directive is important for that end. We need less legislation and more competition with freedom for companies to create jobs .” He noted that the Polish government was calling for European solidarity on energy policy – this, he said was welcome, but “ solidarity is not a one way street – we also expect solidarity on the future of the constitutional treaty .”
Socialist group leader Martin SCHULZ (DE) said that weighing up the Spring Council meeting there were some positive points to breathe life into European projects and this could be greeted with satisfaction. He said there was much in common with the proposals made by the PES on growth and employment. He agreed the EU needed a common energy strategy, though ultimately the Member States would decide. On the economic reform programme, he said: “Too often we see nice declarations then individual Member States forget what they have said and play to the national gallery.” He said it was thanks to Parliament that there would be a decent services directive.
For the ALDE group, Graham WATSON (UK) said things could have been worse, but the result of the Council was, as Mark Twain said of Wagner's music “ not as bad as it sounds .” He was pleased that even socialist Prime Ministers had accepted the market was needed to increase prosperity and that all had agreed on the important contribution helping the environment could have in creating growth and jobs. He welcomed the Commission's plans to challenge Member States not respecting the rules on liberalisation. “ We think future Spring summits should drop the economic focus and cover other vital issues such as, this year, Belarus and Guantanamo Bay... We want more European spirit.”
Pierre JONCKHEER (BE) spoke on behalf of the Greens saying that "citizens are awaiting results" and that "legislation of the EU will be predicated on these results". He made three suggestions for the European Union to take on board. He said that the EU budget was not big enough - that it did not provide enough money to "help achieve the Lisbon objectives" . He mentioned the need to consider the role of the EIB and the need for a debate on a common EU-tax to finance proper transport links across Europe. Mr. Jonckheer's last suggestion was that the Council needs to talk about the changes in the tax system of Member states, and that the EU needs to "ensure a growth of the tax base of Europe" in order to avoid "an ever-growing poorer population ".
Ilda FIGUEIREDO (GUE/NGL , PT) talked of the "gaping chasm" that is growing between the policies and the citizens of Europe, noting that the conclusions of the Spring Summit do not correspond with the reality of the situation within the EU. She asked "where are the responses and solutions to unemployment?", and asked what was being done about "the burgeoning and precarious work in poor conditions". Ms. Figueiredo spoke of "very vague and woolly commitments to employment", the need to have poverty mentioned as a violation of human rights and that "social inclusion should be at the forefront of the Council's concerns". She closed by asserting that "we need a change: we need economic policies that are social too ".
Brian CROWLEY (UEN, IE) said he "absolutely deplored the way this House has been used to fight national elections". He instead wished to draw attention to the achievements of the Parliament on employment and the expansion of research, development and education. He commended the Parliament's efforts to create new policies on energy systems, noting that the Parliament has the capacity to respond to Europe's needs so long as it "is willing to act as a political organ". He spoke of his desire for the EU to allow money to be utilised so that "we can ensure that we can deliver on future promises for future generations" .
Georgios KARATZAFERIS (IND/DEM, EL) spoke of a need to break any Communist attempts at jeopardising the goals of the Union, describing "globalisation as the other face of nationalism". He talked of the need to ensure better relations with the oil-countries through the maintenance of state autonomy and the "need to work with the state, the need to work with the peoples."
Non-attached Member Leopold Józef RUTOWICZ (PL) said that the EU needs to mobilise its institutions and any of its available funds, and that it's "procedures must be tailored to its needs" . He spoke of the importance of solving the Union's problems "amongst ourselves" and that a "change in urgency is required…not least in the Financial Perspectives ". Mr. Rutowicz also said that issues regarding agriculture " need to be solved " and that policies on energy "need to be attacked".
British speaker
Timothy KIRKHOPE (EPP-ED, UK), the leader of the British Conservatives in the European Parliament, welcomed the sanctions taken against the Belarus authorities. However, on the Lisbon agenda, he said there was an underlying malaise. On the services directive, he said that it was unhappy with the " Council compromise" and that the EU should go further. He said that Mr Blair was deluding himself on the services directive. Mr Kirkhope said that Europe needed to reform now and not later. The European Council had failed to say anything on protectionism but Mr Kirkhope welcomed President Barroso's legal action to ensure open energy markets and the fight against national protectionism.
Response to the debate
Responding to the debate, Chancellor SCHÜSSEL said the Austrian presidency would not be resting on its laurels. He defended the idea of setting ambitious economic targets, even if there was a risk they would be missed. Creating 10 million new jobs by 2010 was a realistic ambition, he said. He also argued that it was wrong to compare the Financial Perspective agreement with the draft proposed by the Prodi Commission, which he said had never been realistic. There were no cuts compared with the current Financial Perspective, but a series of substantial increases. “ I urge you to support us on this without bickering between the institutions. The question is whether we can get down to work in the interests of the European population .” Finally, he added that the presidency hoped to have a road map for progress on the constitutional issue in place by June.
In his response to the debate, President BARROSO said that there had been general support for the conclusions of the European Council. On energy, President Barroso said the work had not been completed and more would be done at the June European Council. He welcomed the specific targets on research set for each Member State and the general support for the European Institute of Technology. President Barroso stressed the importance of presidencies of the Council working together to ensure long-term consistency. The Commission President also welcomed the agreement on the EU budget for 2007-2013 as " good news ". Europe was solving issues one by one and was moving forward.
20060331IPR06894 Conclusions of the European Council 23-24 March 2006
EN
1
LINK
http://ue.eu.int/ueDocs/cms_Data/docs/pressData/en/ec/89013.pdf
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
