New European strategies to combat and deal with natural disasters
Regional policy
2006-04-21 - 01:02
The Regional Development Committee says the Commission should submit a proposal on a European strategy to combat natural disasters. It is calling for the setting up of a "European Civil Protection Force" and a European Monitoring Centre for drought and desertification. The committee wants compensation to be made available to natural disaster victims and their families - and also to farmers whose crops are destroyed.
In a report drafted by the committee Chairman Gerardo Galeote Quecedo (EPP-ED, ES) on natural disasters, MEPs point out that fires once again destroyed thousands of hectares of forest in 2005 and have cost the lives of more than 30 civilians and firemen, and the phenomenon – which has become an annual scourge for the regions and countries affected – is getting worse.
In response, the committee says that that Commission should draw up a European strategy to combat natural disasters. It should include a compulsory approach for risk prevention, and devise a technical protocol for joint action by the Union.
MEPs in the committee say a survey should be done of the locations which are most vulnerable to fires and to prolonged droughts - and also of the resources available at those locations. The committee calls for the creation of a "European Civil Protection Force".
Call for directives on fire prevention and management of drought and desertification
The committee says the Commission should propose a directive on prevention and management of fires in the EU to best use available Community and national resources for the problem. It says a similar proposal on the prevention and risk management of drought and desertification is equally necessary. The committee also calls for a European Drought and Desertification Monitoring Centre to be set up.
Compensation
MEPs urge the Commission to make available the resources needed to relieve suffering and satisfy the material needs of all the victims of natural disasters and their direct families, by means of the European Solidarity Fund and other Community instruments. They also call for an agriculture disaster fund to compensate any loss of income stemming from crops losses of farmers affected by natural disasters.
On Tuesday 25 April, the Environment Committee and Agriculture Committee are also due to adopt reports on natural disasters from their perspectives.
2006-04-20 Committee on Regional Development Chair Gerardo GALEOTE QUECEDO EPP-ED ES
Procedure: Own-initiative
Plenary debate: May I Strasbourg
Report on natural disasters (fires, drought and floods) - regional development aspects
20060418IPR07409 European Union Solidarity Fund
EN
1
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/regional_policy/funds/solidar/solid_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
