MEPs scrutinise global human rights issues
Human rights
2006-04-20 - 14:59
EU action defending and spreading human rights worldwide has improved in some areas, such as electoral observation and sanctions against governments that violate human rights, but much remains to be done. So says the Foreign Affairs Committee in a report adopted on Thursday, which also calls for Parliament to be more involved in future.
The report, by Richard Howitt (PES, UK), is a reaction to the EU Council's annual report on human rights in 2005. It singles out areas where the Council's activity deserves praise. These include the UK Presidency's efforts to combat the death penalty and promote freedom of expression, and the Austrian Presidency's promise to " continue the practice of demarches in respect of all of the EU's international partners regarding the ratification of international conventions banning the use of torture. "
MEPs in the committee welcome the inclusion of human rights issues in the European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP), and commend the " increasing effectiveness of EU electoral observation activities ." They praise the Council for imposing sanctions on Uzbekistan last year, and reiterate their condemnation of the violent repression in Ethiopia and human rights abuses in Tunisia. The committee is concerned at the " deteriorating security situation in Darfur ," " continuing reports of a long list of human rights abuses " in China, the " extrajudicial killings, disappearances and torture in custody in Chechnya, " and " Iran's poor human rights record." There is also anxiety about human rights abuses in Iraq, but a welcome for EU support for the new government there. The committee asks Council and Commission to " call upon the US government immediately to close the Guantanamo detention centre " and give the prisoners held there a fair trial.
The committee warns that "there is a general failure by the European Union to systematically and continuously address human rights concerns " and that " EU activities in the UN with respect to human rights are too introverted ." MEPs want to see a much more significant proportion of European Initiative for Democracy and Human Rights funding devoted to grass-roots projects. They want a " clear system of sanctions " to be applied to countries that violate the human rights clause in agreements with the Union.
In future annual reports, the committee wants to see a list of "Countries of Particular Concern" according to the EU's Human Rights Guidelines. It calls for the reports to " address explicitly discrimination issues " based on ethnicity, religion, gender, disability and sexual orientation. Finally, it says Parliament should be more directly involved in the drafting of the reports, to make the document " representative of the views of the Council, the Commission and the Parliament ."
2006-04-20 Committee on Foreign Affairs Chair Elmar BROK EPP-ED DE
Procedure: Own initiative
Debate in Plenary: May I, Strasbourg
Report on the Annual Report on Human Rights in the World 2005 and the EU's policy on the matter
20060411IPR07235 EU Council's Annual Report on Human Rights 2005:
EN
1
LINK
http://ue.eu.int/uedocs/cmsUpload/HR2005en.pdf
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
