Union for Europe of the Nations
Institutions
2006-04-21 - 09:47
UEN Group logo
As is clear from its name the Union for Europe of the Nations (UEN) Group believes in a Europe of nation states allowing governments and countries to co-ordinate and co-operate in building a more inclusive and stable Europe based on diversity. It strongly supports subsidiarity, which it believes is essential for the fair distribution of power between the EU, nations and local authorities and in the best interests of the citizen.
"Defending our cultural values, supporting those people who want to progress by defending freedom, democracy and human rights, promoting a social policy which proceeds hand in hand with the development of the economy and the welfare of the poorest are fundamental objectives for us," said Cristiana Muscardini, Co-President of the UEN Group. "The richness of diversity and the respect for difference is the concrete that binds us closer to each other," added Co-President Brian Crowley.
Its 3.7% of the 2004 European Parliament election vote won the UEN 27 seats, which have since been augmented by the addition of three Polish MEPs in December. Of the 30 MEPs, the Polish delegation is the biggest with 10 MEPs from two parties followed by Italy with nine representatives. The other four countries making up the UEN are Lithuania, Latvia, Ireland and Denmark.
In line with its share of seats in the Parliament, the UEN chairs the Petitions Committee and provides vice-presidents for the Agriculture Committee and the Economic and Monetary Committee. It is also well represented among the delegations with four vice-presidencies and the presidency of the delegation for relations with Canada.
The Presidency of the UEN Group is shared by Ireland's Brian Crowley - the longest serving Irish MEP and youngest group President in the Parliament at present - and Italy's Cristiana Muscardini - former member of the Convention for the UEN Group, and the Italian Member with the longest uninterrupted parliamentary mandate in the European Parliament.
The group, which was formed in 1999, strongly promotes a social market economy, education and research and protection of environment. They strongly oppose an exclusively materialistic concept of society. The issues of national identity, culture and language are at centre-stage of their priorities and they view the family as the bedrock of society and the best place from which to pass on the values which form the foundations of the EU.
20060420STO07476 Union for Europe of the Nations Group So, just what is an EP political group?
EN
1
PHOTO
20060420PHT07470.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.uengroup.org
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060215FCS05277 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
