The role and power of the European political parties
Institutions
2006-04-25 - 10:21
MEPs adopted a non-binding report by 498 votes in favour to 95 against with 7 abstention on the status of European political parties. The report discusses the current structural conditions for political parties in the European Union and makes suggestions as to how to promote the stability and financial autonomy of these parties.
The report opens with the concept that political parties play a vital role in the procedure of promoting democracy within the EU - they are fundamental to the endorsement of the values of "freedom, tolerance, solidarity and gender equality". It remarks that they are the key element in the linking of public opinion with the actions of the European institutions. Correspondingly, it advises that political parties must "take on a further role than that of umbrella organisations and become active proponents of European policy options" in order to minimise the "gulf" between the European public and its institutions.
Bearing in mind the important role that political parties play, the House makes some suggestions as to how to strengthen the stability and autonomy of political parties as tools of representation. It notes the importance for any organisation - whether profit making or not - to have financial stability so that it can make long-term decisions with economic certainty. In correlation with this notion, the report notes that such financial stability is lacking for European political parties in that the grants given to them are subject to change every year, discouraging any proper financial self-management. In so doing, the current structures make the parties "financially highly dependent on the European Parliament", diminishing their power of autonomy. As do the limitations applied to the transfer of funds between the five budget categories. The disparity between the treatment of parties and that of institutions is also noted.
In view of their critique, Parliament advises some changes, including the following: a change in the timing of the payment of funds so that they are "in tune with the way the recipients work"; funding plans prepared for several years should be agreed; the political parties must be put in the position to make financial decisions in view of long-term planning; the regulations should allow for higher amounts of money to be transferred between the different budget categories; and an increase in the financial support that parties receive should be realised.
Finally, Parliament notes with satisfaction that, in terms of appointing staff, the political parties at European level have taken account of the principle of equal opportunities for women and men to a large extent, and encourages them to ensure a better representation of women and men on lists and among elected members.
20060322IPR06613 Report on European political parties
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5289662
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
