EU-Arab relations: Complexity and Opportunity
External relations
2006-04-25 - 09:35
Impassioned: Dr Rachid El Houdaïgui of the University of Tangiers makes a point
Europe's often complicated relationship with the Arab world was examined recently at a public hearing in the Parliament. What emerged was a fragmented picture of different attitudes, policies and proposals on the best way for the European Union and the Arab world to build stronger ties. One of the most important points to emerge from the hearing was a plea for Europe to recognise the complexity of the Arab world.
Overcoming assumptions that the Arab world is all the same is the key to dialogue according to Tunisian academic Wassyla Tamzali. In a heart felt speech she said that those in the Arab world "don't need a dialogue of civilisations, but a dialogue between citizens". This sentiment of Arab diversity was echoed by Dr Rachid El Houdaïgui of the University of Tangier when he spoke of the "myth of the unified Arab world". He went on to note that the "only mobilising ideology in the Arab world is a religious one".
The hearing was hosted by the Parliament's Foreign Affairs Committee whose Chairman, German Christian Democrat MEP Elmar Brok, described the region as "one of the most sensitive and dynamic" in the world.
Politically the Arab world is diverse. It has Kingdoms with absolute Monarchies and Peoples' Republics with regular elections. However, in the latter there was no clear agreement on whether elections do in fact offer a real democratic choice or are a sham to impress the West. Conservative MEP Ari Vatanen - who represents France - pushed this point when he raised the issue of the Egyptian opposition Presidential candidate Ayman Nour who was released from custody prior to the 2005 election and then jailed immediately afterwards.
Florian Kohstall - an academic based in Cairo - holds the view that "elections in the Arab world...remain under the control of the ruling governments. While...they appear to be pluralistic, the leaders...retain their political control." Dr El Houdaïgui raised a few ironic smiles when he said "you can have as much choice as you want...providing the government doesn't change."
The Parliament has a particular interest in relations with the Arab world as for the last year it has held the chairmanship of the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly. This forum brings together Parliamentarians from the 25 EU members and 10 countries - most of them Arab - that border the Mediterranean. This is part of the "Barcelona Process" of political, economic and cultural cooperation launched in 1995.
Wide diversity is a feature of the Arab world. It comprises over 20 countries and is home to approximately 300 million people. Geographically it bridges two contents - Asia and Africa - and stretches from the Atlantic Ocean to the Persian Gulf. Economically some states have vast wealth due to petroleum reserves whilst others endure grinding poverty. Reconciling these contradictions with a young and rapidly growing population will be a formidable challenge in the 21st century.
20060425STO07580 Full report on EU-Arab Relations Hearing Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly EU-Arab cooperation
EN
1
PHOTO
20060424PHT07562.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/intcoop/empa/default.htm
EN
4
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/external_relations/euromed/
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060411IPR07236 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
