President of Malta: The European Union: A Voice of Reason in Europe and the World
Institutions
2006-04-05 - 15:20
President Borrell welcomed the President of the Republic of Malta, H.E. Dr. Edward Fenech-Adami by recollecting his "long-term commitment to European integration" during his time as Malta's Prime Minister.
President BORRELL commended the Maltese President's signing of the Accession Treaty some three years ago, describing it as representing "an important sign of consensus that now prevails in Malta about European integration." He noted that President Fenech-Adami's presence was a reminder of Europe's need to "strengthen dialogue with the countries of the Mediterranean basin" and the need to build "better relations with our neighbours of the South" . President Borrell warmly welcomed President Fenech-Adami's visit as a "timely" one.
Malta in the Union
President Edward Fenech-Adami opened his speech by saying that the Maltese are "proud to be part of the family of nations that is the European Union with its spiritual, cultural and humanistic heritage". He said that despite the path to membership being difficult, " the Maltese people took a clear and sovereign decision in favour of membership through a referendum and subsequent general election" . He praised the Union for its success in achieving the largest enlargement to date less than two years ago and spoke against the pessimism that often prevails within the Union. The President expressed his desire "to pay tribute to the European Union itself for its extraordinary catalyst effect in stimulating countries to embrace reform", considering it " wrong to blame Europe for unpopular reforms which, in reality, are decisions that every responsible government needs to take".
EU Constitutional Treaty
When discussing the EU Constitutional Treaty, he said that although "timing does not matter…in hindsight it may have been wiser to give this important project more time" and asserted that "the question remains, however, as to how to proceed from the current impasse". He expressed a need to respect the wishes of the people both in the countries who rejected the treaty and in those who approved it, suggesting various possible future scenarios to deal with the situation: "this is what this period of reflection is for. Let us not waste it ".
Reconnecting with the people through a voice of reason
The President spoke of a need to address "the incipient lack of trust…in the individual Community institutions" and to ask ourselves "what can we do to regain trust in the European Union and its institutions" He suggested this trust could be realised through a reconnection with the people, accordingly he welcomed "the work of the Commission in undertaking the daunting task of bridging the gap with citizens through its Plan D." Nevertheless, President Fenech-Adami advised that the most important way to strengthen trust within the Union is to show that "in adopting policies, in taking decisions, in interacting both internally as well as externally, the European Union is able to give a voice to reason". He supported the notion of the Union as a voice of reason by praising it in view of rational policies on small states, on the Services directive, on energy and maritime issues, on the Euro-Mediterranean Region, on the challenge of globalisation and on irregular immigration. He asserted that "being a voice of reason necessarily calls upon us to transcend the confines of our selfish national interests and to work together selflessly for our common good".
President Fenech-Adami closed his speech by mentioning Europe's "unequivocal attachment to the values of peace, tolerance, human rights and solidarity" and spoke of the fundamental notion that in order to strengthen the Union's connection with its citizens, it must be seen to be "responding effectively to the concerns of the people", he said: "it is Europe that citizens want from us and it is this Europe that they are ready to trust".
20060331IPR06897
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
