EU - Arab world relations: improving country-to-country dialogue
External relations
2006-04-21 - 15:18
"The Arab world is one of the most sensitive but also most dynamic regions of the world," said Elmar Brok (EPP-ED, DE), Chair of the Foreign Affairs Committee, as he opened a hearing on EU-Arab world relations. Participants argued political discussions between countries, not a dialogue of civilisations, were the best way forward.
The hearing on Thursday involved academics and experts from Europe and the southern Mediterranean. They addressed four central questions: the idea of a coherent Arab community of nations, the role of the pan-Arab Al Jazeera television network, the Barcelona process establishing cooperation between the EU and the Southern Mediterranean, and the thorny question of democracy promotion.
Is there an 'Arab world'?
Several participants questioned the validity of talking about EU-Arab world relations at all. Michel Rocard (PES, FR) asked whether it is useful to " treat the Arab world as a coherent unit" or whether bilateral ties should be cultivated instead. Dr Rachid El Houdaïgui, of the University of Tangiers, spoke of "the myth of a unified Arab world ," and argued that each Arab country's geopolitical fragility sprung precisely from its tense relations with its (often Arabic) neighbours. He said that these geopolitical uncertainties were tools which Arab governments " used to stifle internal political debate. "
The Pan-Arab Media: Al Jazeera
Donatella Della Ratta, a journalist specialised in Arab media, said Al Jazeera has played a large role in " creating a pan-Arab public sphere, " while Dr Houdaïgui called it " the political schooling of a large majority of the Arab world. " Ms Ratta said it has given a voice to some members of civil society that had previously been silent and therefore " showed the West that Arabic public opinion is fragmented and pluralistic ." She urged the EU to cooperate with Arabic media, and not to fall into the American trap of ignoring the existence of a newly developed media culture in the Arab world. Nevertheless, she also said " Al Jazeera is just a TV station ," and needed to be evaluated as such. Jana Hybášková (EPP-ED, CZ) disagreed, saying Al Jazeera was " very dangerous " for the spread of Western values in the Arab world. She expressed her concern at plans for Al Jazeera to start broadcasting in English to countries with large non-Arab Islamic populations such as Pakistan and Indonesia.
The Barcelona Process
Ali Benouari, from CERMAM (Centre d'étude et de recherche sur le monde arabe et méditerranéen in Geneva), argued that the Barcelona process was " not an end, but a means ." He stressed that negotiations should follow economic, political, and cultural lines. Wassyla Tamzali of the Fondation Mediterraneo in Naples said the " Barcelona process was a utopia in which we all strongly believed, " but that the EU had made a mistake in deviating from the political path of negotiations. " W e don't need a dialogue of civilisations, but a dialogue between citizens, " she said.
Democracy Promotion
Florian Kohstall, from CEDEJ (Centre d'études et de documentation économique, juridique et sociale in Cairo), touched on the most crucial question of the hearing: " how to democratise without destabilising " Arab countries. Ari Vatanen (EPP-ED, FR) warned that when " even initial steps to democracy fail" such as in Egypt, the future for democratising Arab states looked grim. Mr Houdaïgui argued that for mass movements, " the only mobilising ideology in the Arab world today is a religious one. " This worried several MEPs, among them Michael Gahler (EPP-ED, DE), who said " we are waiting for an Islamic Martin Luther to reinterpret Islam for the 21st century ." In Ms Tamzali's view, the only way to establish a political culture that is both democratic and stable is to fight fundamentalist parties. She said such forces will " only be moderated by the political context and political institutions" of democracy. She therefore asked MEPs to " pressure Arab governments to open a political space for democrats " in their societies, to let them " fight Islamists on their own terrain ."
2006-04-20 Committee on Foreign Affairs Chair Elmar BROK EPP-ED DE
Public Hearing on EU relations with the Arab World
20060411IPR07236 For documents related to the hearing, please see:
EN
1
LINK
/meetdocs/2004_2009/organes/afet/afet_20060420_1500_audition.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
