More interest rate rises on the way, ECB Vice-President tells MEPs
Economic and monetary affairs
2006-04-25 - 19:52
European Central Bank Vice-President Lucas Papademos said more increases in interest rates would be needed during the course of this year. He told the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee on Tuesday that the size and pace of the increases would be decided by the ECB based on its assessment of the economic and monetary situation in the euro area.
Mr Papademos was speaking to the committee to present his institution's annual report for 2005. He said recent data showed that the Bank had been right to raise rates at the end of that year, and that the risks on inflation remained on the upside.
Responding to a question from Committee chair Pervenche Berès (PES, FR), he said: "ECB monetary policy has the primary objective of maintaining price stability in the medium term. In view of the several upside risks that have been identified in the context of economic analysis and cross-checked with monetary analysis, further increases in interest rates over the course of the year are warranted… to counter the upside risks in a timely and effective manner." He stressed that maintaining price stability was the way for the ECB to support growth and jobs - there was, he said, no trade off between the two objectives.
Asked by Cristobal Montoro Romero (EPP-ED, ES) about the growth potential of the euro area , he said it tended to be estimated at 2 per cent, though some recent estimates were lower. Monetary policy was not the tool to improve this, he said: "Growth potential can only be raised by measures to increase the aggregate supply: structural reforms which enhance productivity and increase labour utilisation which means bringing more people into the labour market and using them more effectively. This would lead to higher employment rates and lower unemployment."
He warned against protectionism , which was, he said, a risk to global growth and prosperity: "Economic nationalism is not consistent with the central objectives of the EU or the fundamental principles on which it was established, in particular a fully integrated internal market. Avoiding it will enhance competition.. and the performance of the European economy."
On the potential enlargement of the euro area to Slovenia and Lithuania, Mr Papademos promised that the ECB's convergence report, to be published on 16 May , would use the same frame of analysis as in the past, which would guarantee quality and equal treatment. The Bank would be looking to see if there was sustainable convergence and if the legislation in place met the requirements of the treaty.
Regarding the stability pact , the ECB Vice President said the overall fiscal plans of the Member States were broadly in line with the revised pact, but: '"Overall progress towards sound public finances remains slow… In some cases implementation can be assessed as very gradual and not sufficiently ambitious." He said more rapid consolidation was needed to reduce fiscal imbalances while sustaining a high rate of growth.
2006-04-25 Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs Chair Pervenche BERÈS PES FR
Presentation by the European Central Bank of its annual report for 2005
20060424IPR07545 See the full text of the ECB Vice President's opening statement on the ECB website via this link
EN
1
LINK
http://www.ecb.int/press/key/date/2006/html/sp060425.en.html
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
