Economics committee approves Jürgen Stark for ECB Executive Board
Economic and monetary affairs
2006-04-18 - 20:24
MEPs in the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee voted to approve the appointment of Jürgen Stark to the Executive Board of the European Central Bank after a ninety minute hearing during which Mr Stark strongly supported the ECB's existing policies. The appointment will now be considered by the whole Parliament in May, before the EU's Heads of State or Government take the final decision.
Jürgen Stark, who is currently Vice-President of the German Bundesbank, told MEPs in his opening statement that the past seven years of the euro were a success story, with the ECB's maintenance of price stability earning the trust of citizens. He supported the " two pillar" approach of using both inflation and money supply indicators and praised the ECB's collegial decision making system. He said the idea that allowing higher inflation would lead to greater growth was not valid in the long term. He also issued a warning: "Europe must be careful because at the moment it is behind expectations, both economically and politically. We are not reforming as we should. It is the task of politicians to promote acceptance of reforms."
Responding to Alexander Radwan (EPP-ED, DE), Mr Stark spoke of a problem of "creeping renationalisation" and Member States not using the internal market: "I assume this is just a short term phenomenon and people will soon recognise the advantages of the internal market and come to their senses." John Purvis (EPP-ED, UK) said Mr Stark appeared pessimistic about the future prospects for Europe and the euro, but the ECB candidate disagreed, saying he offered a realistic picture of Europe: "We are at a critical juncture, but Europe has always emerged strengthened from such periods in the past."
Pervenche Berès (PES, FR), chair of the committee, asked whether the ECB's policies were in line with its objectives to pursue growth and employment as well as price stability. Mr Stark responded that the Treaty made clear that the main priority was inflation: "The best contribution of a central bank towards growth and employment in the medium term is to achieve price stability." Ieke van den Burg (PES, NL) voiced criticism of the appointment process, while stressing this was not the fault of Mr Stark. She asked which role on the ECB board he would like to fill, but Mr Stark refused to express a preference, saying this would be unfair on his possible future colleagues.
Wolf Klinz (ALDE, DE) asked whether it was fair to insist all the treaty's criteria be met by Member States wishing to joint the euro area, and in particular by Lithuania, when, he said, "the original eleven did not fulfil them and Greece still meets none of them." Mr Stark said the impact on the euro area of adding a small, open economy would be limited, but "qualification needs to be taken very seriously and all the criteria complied with. The reports [from the ECB and the Commission] must look at the most recent figures."
Responding to Piia-Noora Kauppi (EPP-ED, FI), who asked about the reform of the Stability Pact, Mr Stark said the pact, in his personal view, was now too flexible: "It will be hard to evaluate specific compliance because of the high degree of flexibility … In the big economies, the national debt has increased continuously. If you include the implicit debt of the social security system, Germany's debt is really over 350 per cent of GDP. We cannot get into further debt… Today's debts are tomorrow's higher taxes."
After the hearing, MEPs in the committee held a private session to discuss the candidate, during which they adopted a report approving his appointment. This will now be debated at the May plenary session in Strasbourg. According to Article 112 of the EC Treaty, members of the ECB Executive Board are appointed "by common accord of the governments of the Member States at the level of Heads of State or Government, on a recommendation from the Council, after it has consulted the European Parliament and the Governing Council of the ECB." The ECB Governing Council has already given a positive assessment in this case.
2006-04-18 Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs Chair Pervenche BERÈS PES FR
Hearing of Jürgen Stark, Candidate for the ECB Executive Board
Procedure: Consultation
Plenary Session: May I, Strasbourg
20060411IPR07232 All the documents relating to the hearing, including Mr Stark's written answers to a questionnaire from the committee, can be found via this link
EN
1
LINK
/comparl/econ/hearings/20060418/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
