So, just what is an EP political group?
Institutions
2006-04-06 - 17:49
An indepth look at the EP's Political Groups
Is the term political group confusing? Would you like to get it straight once and for all? Well the time has come. Before the end of April we will present a series of articles looking at the seven political groups in the European Parliament. We will consider their history, leaders and programmes. But let's start at the beginning by looking at the political groups and what role they play within the EU.
The political group system in the European Parliament is a very specific and special one. Instead of sticking with national interests, MEPs from political parties across the EU come together in supranational groupings, representing common interests. For example, the largest grouping - the European People's Party - European Democrats, or EPP-ED - brings together 264 MEPs from all 25 EU countries.
At the moment there are seven political groupings in the European Parliament and 43 non-attached MEPs. To set up a new political group there must be a minimum of 19 members from 5 different EU countries.
Power House of the Parliament
The political groups are vital to the running of the European Parliament: they decide what issues will be dealt with at the plenary, they can also table amendments to reports that will be voted on during the plenary and before the session they decide which position the political group will take. However, no member can be forced to vote in a particular way.
"Group co-ordinators" play an important role, providing a point of contact within their political groups for specific policy issues and organising support within committees when it comes to voting on reports.
Each political group appoints a chairman, or in some cases two. The influence of the groups is reflected in the fact that they put forward the candidates for all the important posts including the EP president, vice-presidents, committee chairmen and the quaestors.
Over the coming weeks we will publish in depth profiles of all the groups. To read more about each of the groups, be sure to take a look at the front page of the Parliament's website. The provisional timetable is as follows:
17 February - Group of the European People's Party and European Democrats
24 February - Socialist Group in the European Parliament
3 March - Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe
10 March - Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance
24 March - Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left
31 March - Independence/Democracy Group
21 April - Union for Europe of the Nations Group
20060210STO05137 EP website with the links to the websites of Political Groups
EN
1
PHOTO
20060210PHT05139.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/groups/default.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
