MEPs call for free access to EU15 labour markets for new Member States
Employment policy
2006-04-05 - 16:37
The European Parliament is calling for an end to the transitional measures restricting access to workers from eight 'new' Member States to labour markets in several 'old' Member States. Countries with restrictions in place have until 1 May 2006 to decide on whether to lift them or to extend them until 2009.
In an own-initiative report by Csaba ŐRY (EPP-ED, HU), adopted by the European Parliament, MEPs " call on the Member States to abolish the transitional measures in force, given that there are no signs of strain on the labour markets of the Member States which have opted for openness without restrictions and that the fears of massive migration have proved groundless "
MEPs suggest that those Member States that opt to extend the transitional measures, should do so on the basis of an in-depth analysis of the threat to their labour market from each individual new Member State and ask them to create, during the next stage (2006-2009), the conditions to ensure that the transitional arrangements are not continued beyond 2009.
Parliament stresses that the free movement of workers is one of the four fundamental freedoms of the EC Treaty, as well as an expression of solidarity between old and new Member States. They say that there are no signs of strain on the labour markets of those Member States which have opened their doors: fears of massive migration have proved groundless and there are beneficial effects for the economies concerned. The Parliament says the denial of opportunities for new Member State workers to work legally in most of the EU-15 has fuelled illegal work, the black economy and worker exploitation.
Third-country nationals and 'status quo clause"
MEPs note that some long-term residents from non-EU countries are in a more favourable position than citizens of the Member States which joined the EU in 2004 (as a result of Directive 2003/109/EC concerning the status of third-country nationals who are long-term residents)
Parliament calls on the Member States to enforce the status quo clause and preference rule in the Accession Treaty whereby, when a post is vacant, nationals of the new Member States have priority over third-country nationals. The 'status quo clause' also states that workers from the new Member States should not face greater restrictions than applied before the accession treaties were signed. MEPs say labour law should be strictly enforced to guarantee all EU workers are treated equally.
MEPs call on the Commission to institute proceedings under Article 226 of the EC Treaty without delay should any Member State fail to fulfil its obligations under Articles 12, 39, and 42 of the Treaty or the status quo clause of the Accession Treaty.
Call for Information campaign and better statistics
MEPs call for standardised statistics on intra-EU migration and for an information campaign to informing citizens more fully about the principles underlying, and the consequences of, the freedom of movement of workers within the EU.
Background: In May 2004, labour market restrictions were imposed, as allowed by the accession treaties, on workers from the eight new Member States in Central and Eastern Europe by all the old (EU 15) Member States except Ireland, Sweden and the UK. These arrangements can continue for up to seven years, broken down into three periods (2+3+2 years). Several Member States (Finland, Spain, Portugal) have already announced that they will open up their labour markets to citizens of the new Member States. Others have announced that they will renew the restrictions (Germany, Austria).
20060330IPR06869 Transitional arrangements restricting the free movement of workers on EU labour markets
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5312942
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
