".eu" enters cyberspace...
Information society
2006-04-20 - 09:41
European Commissioner Reding at the launch of the ".eu" domain name
The launch of the "eu" domain name and its first steps into cyberspace seem to have been a success. Over 700,000 Europeans raced to register their new .eu internet domain name in the four hours after it opened to the public on 7 April according to EURid, the non-profit body charged with overseeing registration. As of today that total had shot up to 1.5 million domain names registered, with the Germans, British and Dutch being the most enthusiastic new users.
The new initiative will allow any of the 450 million people who reside in the European Union to have a .eu web-site and e-mail address. The idea behind the name is to gradually replace existing national suffixes such as Britain's ".uk" or the French ".fr" with the pan-European .eu to allow consumers and businesses greater access and legal protection in the EU's internal market. The rapid take-up of the new name would seem to bolster the European Commission's belief that one day ".eu" could rival ".com" and ".org" as a leading internet domain name.
Originally launched on 7 December last year - registration was initially opened for a so-called "sunrise period" to allow holders of existing trademarks and other rights to register their domain names. The "land rush" period was launched for the public on 7 April. At its height 76 new names were being registered every second.
.eu want to register?
The Commission appointed the non-profit agency EURid (European Registry of Internet Domain Names) in 2003 to administer the new domain name for them. A ".eu" domain can only be obtained via one of EURid's accredited registrars. There is a basic registration fee of €10 with registrars charging their own fees over and above that - users are advised to shop around to get the best available price. Anticipating potential conflicts over names a fast-track arbitration system has already been established based in Prague.
Back in February 2002 the Parliament voted overwhelmingly to endorse the proposal for an EU domain name after Erkki Liikanen, the European Commissioner then responsible for Enterprise, assured MEPs that he shared their belief that the new name "should not be burdened by an excessive regulatory framework." The initiative is part of a European drive to encourage e-commerce - something that is hoped will help fulfil the "Lisbon Agenda" to boost economic growth and create jobs in the EU.
Later this year - on 9 May - Europe Day - the European Institutions will abandon the ".int' domain name and embrace ".eu".
20060420STO07464 How to register - all you need to know. ".eu" Info
EN
1
PHOTO
20060420PHT07466.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.eurid.eu/en/general/
EN
3
LINK
http://europa.eu.int/information_society/policy/doteu/index_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
