A barrier-free transatlantic market by 2015
External/international trade
2006-04-19 - 14:30
Transatlantic trade and investment ties have never been stronger: with 57% of world GDP between them, the EU and the USA are the engine-room of the world economy. On top of their economic links, they are united by shared values and standards. The EP Trade Committee is calling for a barrier-free transatlantic market by 2015 and regular dialogue between the EP and the US Congress.
Ten years after the signing of the New Transatlantic Agenda (1995), an own-initiative report by Erika Mann (PES, DE) adopted on Tuesday calls for EU-US relations to move in the direction of a new transatlantic partnership. The economic dimension of this partnership would be based on three key pillars: cooperation on regulatory issues, a set of operational cooperation tools (an early warning system, a bilateral mechanism for settling trade disputes and a third-generation agreement on the application of competition law) and sectoral economic cooperation agreements building on the Joint EU-US Work Programme.
The partnership agreement should provide for the removal of non-tariff barriers in key markets by 2015, through gradual regulatory alignment and mutual recognition of rules and standards. For financial services and capital markets, the target date for a barrier-free market would be 2010.
Although WTO disputes concern less than 2% of all trade, the report urges the European Commission to set up a mechanism for settling trade disputes in advance with the aim of exhausting all diplomatic channels before resorting to the WTO dispute settlement body. The early warning system should enable potential trade disputes to be identified at an early stage.
The European Parliament's role
MEPs want to strengthen the parliamentary dimension of EU-US summits by involving legislators from both sides. For this purpose, they call for "a meeting prior to every summit between the TLD [Transatlantic Legislative Dialogue] and the Senior-Level Group to exchange views on the progress of the Work Programme" .
N.B. The EP Foreign Affairs Committee will vote on the Brok report, which deals with the political framework of transatlantic relations, at its meeting on 25 April.
2006-04-18 Committee on International Trade Chair Enrique Barón Crespo PES ES
Procedure: Own-initiative
Plenary vote: May II, Brussels
20060411IPR07197
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
