The Week Ahead 24 - 30 April 2006
Institutions
2006-04-21 - 13:18
Among items on the Brussels plenary agenda will be the accession of Romania and Bulgaria, the 2004 budget discharge and Chernobyl 20 years on. Several public hearings are taking place on subjects including the future of Europe, immigration and enlargement.
Plenary session . The main points on the agenda for the mini-session in Brussels include the debate on the discharge for the EU institutions' financial management in 2004, an update on the progress of Romania and Bulgaria towards EU accession and a debate marking the twentieth anniversary of the Chernobyl disaster. MEPs will also be considering the E-call system which automatically summons help for unconscious motor accident victims. (Wednesday and Thursday) Future of Europe . Representatives of civil society organisations will be taking part in a European Forum, organised by the EP, to consider the way forward for the EU, in particular the question of the ultimate goal of European integration and the role of Europe in the world. (Monday and Tuesday) Enlargement . MEPs and MPs from countries aiming for EU membership will take part in an interparliamentary debate on one of the conditions for EU accession: the rule of law and an independent judiciary. (Monday and Tuesday) ECB . Lucas Papademos, Vice-President of the European Central Bank, will present his institution's annual report to the Economics Committee. (Tuesday) Women's rights - Roma Women, Immigration. The Committee on Women's Rights will hold a hearing on the role and place of immigrant women in the EU, as well as voting on a report on the situation of Roma women. (Tuesday) CIA/FYROM . A delegation of MEPs from the temporary committee investigating possible illegal CIA activity in Europe will be travelling to the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia for meetings with officials and witnesses. (Friday) Development - Migration, Fair Trade. The Development Committee will hold hearings to examine the development aspects of migration and of fair trade practices. (Tuesday) Open Day in Strasbourg . Parliament throws open the doors of its buildings in Strasbourg to members of the public for the annual open day. (Sunday) Borrell in Portugal . EP President Josep Borrell will be making an official visit to Portugal. (Thursday and Friday)
20060421IPR07486 For full details, see the Agenda Click here
EN
1
LINK
/news/expert/event_top_page/default/default_en.htm
EN
2
MULTIMEDIA
20060421MLT07510.pdf
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
