Opening of the session - Tribute to Phillip Whitehead
Institutions
2006-04-06 - 15:54
MEPs face a packed agenda in Strasbourg
President Josep BORRELL opened the session with a tribute to Phillip WHITEHEAD, the British Labour MEP for the East Midlands who died on 31 December 2005. Speaking in English, Mr Borrell said:
" New Year is usually a time for optimism about the future, but this year we are all saddened by the tragic and untimely death of Phillip Whitehead, the wise and able chair of our Internal Market and Consumer Protection Committee. He was highly respected across this House. He arrived in 1994 bringing his experience of making TV documentaries and as a national politician. He was a strong advocate of his country's place in the EU ."
Mr Borrell said Parliament would remember Mr Whitehead for his role in media laws and his work on food safety and consumer protection, as well as his efforts to make a reality of the plans for EU enlargement in 2004. He also recalled his skill in piloting the complex Services Directive through his committee.
" Dear Phillip we will miss you ," he concluded, as MEPs rose to observe a minute of silence.
New Committees
Mr Borrell announced to plenary the proposals of the Conference of Presidents to set up a committee of inquiry to look at the Equitable Life affair and also a temporary committee to consider the alleged use by the CIA of sites in the EU for holding illegal prisoners. In both cases, the setting up of the committees will be put to the vote on Wednesday, with the formal vote on their membership to follow on Thursday.
No changes to the agenda
The President announced that there were no requests for changes to the agenda - this was therefore adopted in the version previously circulated.
Highlights of the Strasbourg week 16-19 January 2005
MEPs will be gathering in Strasbourg for the first session of 2006 to deal with issues ranging from bathing water standards to the possible liberalisation of port services. They will also debate the programme of the Austrian presidency with Chancellor Wolfgang SCHÜSSEL .
The session opens on Monday with a Commission statement on homophobia in Europe, with reports on EU citizenship and the trafficking of women and children also on the agenda. MEPs will then have their first opportunity formally to react to December's WTO ministerial conference, as they debate a Commission statement on the subject.
Tuesday sees the first reading debate on the Commission's latest plans to liberalise port services in Europe - the last attempt was thrown out by MEPs and the issue remains highly controversial. Introducing greater openness to the EU's environmental activity by applying the Aarhus Convention comes to second reading, while the results of two (third reading) conciliation agreements with Council come to their final vote - the issues concerned are the handling of mining waste and bathing water standards.
On Wednesday, Austrian Federal Chancellor Wolfgang Schüssel, the new President-in-Office of the Council, will set out his agenda for the next six months to MEPs. One of the Austrian Presidency's aims is to move towards agreement on the future of the EU constitution project, and MEPs will be debating just that when they consider an own initiative report - by Johannes VOGGENHUBER (Greens/EFA, AT) and Andrew DUFF (ALDE, UK) - giving Parliament's assessment of how the debate should be taken forward. Wednesday will also see a debate on the report from Charles TANNOCK (EPP-ED, UK) on the European neighbourhood policy.
Thursday's sitting opens with a debate on the Lisbon Strategy from a gender perspective, followed by an oral question to the Commission on disability and development issues. The session will close, as usual, with three short debates on current human rights issues from around the world.
A number of other issues are likely to be added to the agenda. The Conference of Presidents is due to present proposals for the composition and terms of reference for two special parliamentary committees - one a committee of inquiry to examine the Equitable Life affair, the other a temporary committee to look into claims that the CIA has illegally held prisoners in EU countries - both need the approval of the plenary to be set up. MEPs will also get the chance to vote on a resolution on the European Council's proposals for the next Financial Perspective.
Timings:
The mandate of the committee of inquiry into Equitable Life and for the temporary committee on the CIA will be voted on Wednesday. The vote on the composition of these two committees is scheduled for Thursday.
The vote on the port services report is scheduled for Wednesday.
The vote on the resolution on the financial perspective is also scheduled for Wednesday.
The report by Esko SEPPÄNEN (GUE/NGL, FI) on the Maldives will be taken without debate, voted on Tuesday.
The three reports on sugar by Jean-Claude FRUTEAU (PES, FR) will be voted on Thursday.
On Thursday at 9.30am, there will be a debate on the situation in the Middle East.
The three debates and resolutions on human rights on Thursday will be:
Peru - the extradition of former President Fujimori
Egypt - violence against Sudanese refugees
Cambodia - political repression
20060113IPR04269 Briefing for Strasbourg plenary - 16-19 January 2006 Final draft agenda - 16-19 January 2006
EN
1
PHOTO
20051110PHT02195.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/omk/sipade3?PROG=AGENDA&L=EN&REF=2006-01&QUERY=ALL-SIT&NAV=S
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20051219BRI03841 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
