MEPs mark the twentieth anniversary of Chernobyl
Institutions
2006-04-27 - 16:55
Twenty years to the day after the nuclear explosion in Chernobyl, Energy Commissioner Andris Piebalgs opened the debate by paying tribute to the people who lost their lives and to the communities hurt by the accident. He said he had been in Ukraine at the time, so he felt a close personal contact with the issue.
The Commissioner stressed the substantial EU assistance provided to countries of the former Soviet Union since 1991 for nuclear safety improvements - more than half a billion euro had gone to Ukraine alone. "Chernobyl was a turning point in raising awareness in the international community of the need for the application of rules and common standards in the nuclear industry, and for immediate reaction in the case of emergencies," he said. He set out a series of international conventions under the auspices of the International Atomic Energy Agency to which the Euratom Community and all the Member States were signatories. He also reminded MEPs of the range of EU legislation aimed at ensuring nuclear safety and a swift reaction to any radiological accidents.
Mr Piebalgs also noted that nuclear power stations within the EU were being brought up to standard or would be closed, with EU assistance for the countries affected. Looking to the future, he said there were a number of legislative initiatives on the table. The EU would also be funding more research into how to deal with radioactive waste.
The leader of the EPP-ED group, Hans Gert POETTERING (DE) took the floor to express sympathy with those affected by what he called the " first European environmental tragedy of continental dimensions." " It is our responsibility," he said, " to make sure it remains the only one ." Noting that the accident took place during a military experiment at the plant, he said there was a warning here of the risks of nuclear energy in the hands of dictatorships. He said major improvements in nuclear safety had taken place since the fall of the iron curtain. " We must ," he concluded, " strive for safe nuclear power for safe energy for Europe ."
Martin SCHULZ (DE), leader of the Socialist group, also called on MEPs to remember the victims. He recalled being mayor of a German town at the time, and taking in children who had lost their families in the disaster. He agreed it was significant that the accident took place in a dictatorship: " Facts were swept under the carpet, time went by which could have reduced loss of life. Those in charge at the time have a high degree of historical responsibility ." While acknowledging that his group, like others, was not united on the question, he gave his view of the wider question of nuclear energy: although the risk of an accident was low, the damage it would cause meant that it was a risk not worth taking. The issue of military use of civil nuclear facilities and what, he said, was the US's inconsistent approach to Iraq and North Korea also persuaded him to oppose nuclear power.
Graham WATSON (UK) for the Liberals, describing Chernobyl as the "world's worst ever civil nuclear accident" called for an expression of solidarity with the victims of the accident. He said that we should understand the Chernobyl disaster as indicative of the need to develop renewable fuel. "The EU has to radically re-examine its patterns of energy consumption" if we want to avoid dependency on Russian oil. Mr Watson asserted the need for "greater autonomy", saying that "money invested in clean, green technology, is not money wasted". He therefore applauded the Union's plans to double the use of biomass, predicting benefits for jobs and industry. He said that it is time "to make a genuine commitment - to invest in technology for the future".
On behalf of the Greens/EFA. Claude TURMES (LU) declared it a "day of remembrance…to remember the thousands who have died and will die". He mentioned three political lessons to be learned from the Chernobyl disaster: a need for dignity - "the victims deserve dignity" and recognition; "a need for transparency on the consequences of the accident" ; and "a need for absolute transparency on the plans of the nuclear industry". Mr Turmes asked whether we want to risk creating more nuclear plants "in a world where accidents of nuclear chains cannot be excluded…in a world with Al Qaeda". He closed by warning that "societies can only survive if they learn the lessons of history".
Jonas SJÖSTEDT (GUE/NGL, SE) noted that twenty years on and we can still see the sickness and handicaps of the people who suffered at Chernobyl. Consequently, he called for the decommissioning of old reactors "at all costs". Mr Sjostedt spoke against a dependency on oil for our energy supply, instead recommending that "we need sustainable energy sources that mean we can reduce our dependence on nuclear energy".
Georgios KARATZAFERIS (IND/DEM, EL) said that "today we are commemorating a tragic accident…and we don't know how many victims to commemorate". He spoke of the "lingering effects of radiation" that "will continue to be present in hundreds of years' time". He also expressed great anxiety of the Bulgarian reactor being built, noting its proximity to Greece and Italy. He declared that "we are duty bound to debate and condemn nuclear power…we should call for the decommissioning of nuclear power plants…we have to be courageous as representatives of democracy".
Brian CROWLEY (UEN, IE) spoke of "the horrors which still befall the people of Chernobyl, Belarus, Kazakhstan and other parts of Europe" whilst remembering those who gave their lives for others. In speaking against the use of nuclear power, Mr Crowley made an analogy: "atomic weapons are to an army what an elephant is to a mouse", likewise believing it impossible for mankind to control nuclear power. He commended the work of many voluntary groups who have been raising money for the victims of Chernobyl. He closed by saying that it is "our responsibility to not let it happen again".
Jana BOBOŠÍKOVÁ (NI, CZ) believed that Chernobyl still raises fears and concerns but that we "must admit that the EU cannot live without nuclear energy". She called for Europe to "be realistic…Europeans won't switch to biomass or wind energy…but they would like to live, consume, produce" . She advised that the EU cannot compete with the Asian and American economies -who are dependent on nuclear energy - "with a windmill".
20060425IPR07600
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
