The Week Ahead 8 - 14 May 2006
2006-05-10 - 14:35
Political group week - Brussels
Future of Europe. To mark Europe Day, the European Parliament and the Austrian Parliament are holding a forum to debate the future of Europe. Topics for discussion will be: the European Union on the world stage; globalisation and the European social model; the outlook for the area of freedom, security and justice; and the financing of the EU. The forum will be chaired by EP President Josep Borrell and the Speaker of the Austrian Nationalrat , Andreas Khol. European Commission President José Manuel Barroso and Council President-in-Office Wolfgang Schüssel will also take part (Monday and Tuesday) .
CIA. A delegation of thirteen members of the temporary committee investigating alleged illegal activities by the CIA, led by its chair Carlos Coelho, goes to Washington DC from 8 to 12 May. MEPs will meet representatives of the US administration, members of Congress and various experts. The delegation will announce its findings at press conferences on 11 May in Washington and 16 May in Strasbourg.
President Borrell. EP President Josep Borrell takes part in the EU-Latin America summit in Vienna (Friday) .
Preparing for the plenary session. Parliament's political groups will devote the week mainly to preparations for the Strasbourg plenary session taking place on 15-18 May.
Topics on the plenary agenda include the interinstitutional agreements on the financial perspective and budgetary discipline as well as the progress made by Bulgaria and Romania towards accession. Other items are nutritional and health claims made for food products, Parliament's annual report on human rights in the world and a debate on natural disasters. Greek President Karolos Papoulias, Bolivian President Evo Morales and the President of the Palestinian Authority Mahmoud Abbas and will address formal sittings of the House.
Press briefing. Any changes to the plenary agenda decided by the Conference of Presidents will be announced at the press briefing at 11am on Friday 11 May in Brussels.
Open Day in Brussels. The European Parliament opens its doors to the public on Saturday 6 May. The theme of this year's Open Day is worker mobility.
2006-05-08 The President's diary - 15:00 Participation in the opening of the parliamentary meeting on the Future of Europe 15:00 15:30 Brussels Press conferences - 14:00 The Future of Europe - Parliamentary Forum - Andrew DUFF (ALDE, UK) 14:00 14:30 Brussels, PHS 0A50 Other events Joint parliamentary meeting on the Future of Europe organised by the Austrian Parliament and the European Parliament Members of the national parliaments and of the European Parliament will meet in Brussels on the EP's premises to discuss the 'Future of Europe' on 8 and 9 May 2006. This conference will give citizens' national and European representatives an opportunity to discuss the key issues which are of concern to them.
'Europe means the building of a supranational democracy... a new experience, an exercise fraught with perils.... Developing synergy and cooperation between the European Parliament and the national parliaments will help European democracy to move forward. This dialogue will bring together ideas and visions for the European Union of the future.'
Josep BORRELL FONTELLES, President of the European Parliament
'The future of the European Union rests in the hands of the citizens of Europe. Members of parliaments are their political representatives. Together, viewing matters from the point of view both of the Member States and of Brussels, we wish to debate the basic principles of the direction in which Europe should progress.'
Andreas KHOL, President of the Austrian Nationalrat
The issues to be addresses during the meeting, in working parties and in plenary will include: Europe in the world and the EU's borders; globalisation and the European economic and social model; freedom, security and justice; and the European Union's future financial resources.
This event, jointly organised by the European Parliament and the Austrian Parliament, will provide a contribution to the discussions of the European Council meeting, due to be held on 15 and 16 June, which will draw the initial conclusions of the reflection period.
Programme
10:00 Arrival of delegates
11:00-13:30 Opportunity for all 'European political families' wishing to do so to hold meetings, at the invitation of the political groups within the European Parliament.
15:00 Opening by Josep BORRELL , President of the European Parliament, Andreas KHOL, President of the Austrian Nationalrat, and Sissy ROTH-HALVAX, President-in-Office of the Austrian Bundesrat.
15:30-19:00 Working groups :
- Working group 1 (Hemicycle): The European Union in the world and the EU's borders .
- Working group 2 (Room 3C50): Globalisation and the European economic and social model.
- Working group 3 (Room 1A02): Freedom, security, justice: prospects?
- Working group 4 (Room 5G03): The Union's future financial resources
Continues on Tuesday, 9 May 2006
10:00 19:00 Brussels, European Parliament Click here Click here Press seminar on the Future of Europe on 8 and 9 May 2006 Programme
11:00 Parliament and the Constitution
State of play of debate in Parliament over the future of Europe
12:00 Interparliamentary cooperation and the future of Europe
11:00 13:00 Brussels, ASP 5G2 2006-05-09 The President's diary - 17:00 Meeting with Bogdan Olteanu, Speaker of the Romanian Chamber of Deputies
17:45 Meeting with Georgi Pirinski, Speaker of the Bulgarian Parliament 17:00 18:15 Brussels, European Parliament Press conferences - 12:30 Joint Parliamentary Meeting on the Future of Europe - Josep BORRELL, President of the European Parliament and Andreas KHOL, President of the Austrian Nationalrat 12:30 13:00 Brussels, PHS 0A50 Delegations Delegation from the Temporary Committee on the alleged use of European countries by the CIA for the transport and illegal detention of prisoners 8-12 May 2006 A delegation of 13 members of the temporary committee investigating allegations that the CIA used European countries to transport and detain prisoners illegally goes to Washington for five days. 09:00 18:30 Washington, USA Other events Joint parliamentary meeting on the future of Europe organised by the Austrian Parliament and the European Parliament Continued from Monday 8 May
Members of the national parliaments and of the European Parliament will meet in Brussels on the EP's premises to discuss the 'Future of Europe' on 8 and 9 May 2006. This conference will give citizens' national and European representatives an opportunity to discuss the key issues which are of concern to them.
Programme
Plenary sessions (Hemicycle) co-chaired by Andreas Khol, President of the Austrian Nationalrat, and Josep Borrell, President of the European Parliament.
9:00 Presentation of four working group reports in plenary session
10:00 General debate
14:00 Statement by Chancellor Wolfgang Schüssel, President-in-Office of the European Council, followed by
questions.
14:45 Statement by José Manuel Barroso, President of the European Commission, followed by questions.
15:30 Concluding remarks by President Khol and President Borrell
09:00 16:00 Brussels, Plenary Chamber, PHS Building Click here Citizens' Forum : "Snacka om Europa - en helt ovanlig after work" The current domestic debate on Europe in Sweden is based on a 'Yes/No' approach to Europe. The choice of this slogan/theme was made in order to reverse the debate on Europe from an ‘Yes/No’ to an ‘How/What’ perspective.
Under this perspective, a list of 8 topics considered important to people of different ages and different backgrounds includes labour market policies in the enlarged Union, the fight against international criminality, the EU budget and regional policy, the CAP, equality and education.
The order of topics will reflect the character of the region in which the debate is held (regional policy matters tops the agenda in Luleå, EU's student exchange schemes is prioritised in the academic town of Göteborg)
Participants:
Göteborg - Cecilia MALMSTRÖM (ALDE, SE), Eva-Britt SVENSSON (GUE/NGL, SE) and Lars WOHLIN (IND/DEM, SE)
Halmstad - Christofer FJELLNER (EPP-ED, SE) and Anna HEDH (PES, SE)
Lulea - Hélène GOUDIN (IND/DEM, SE), Ewa HEDKVIST PETERSEN (PES, SE) and Anders WIJKMAN (EPP-ED, SE)
Skövde - Åsa WESTLUND (PES, SE), Carl SCHLYTER (Greens/EFA, SE), Inger SEGELSTRÖM (PES, SE) and Nils LUNDGREN (IND/DEM, SE) 09:00 18:30 Sweden Restaurant Respekt, Järntorget, Göteborg; Harrys, Halmstad; Kulturcentrum Ebeneser, Lulea and Scandic Billingen, Skövde 2006-05-10 Press conferences - 10:30 Campaign for parliamentary reform - Cecilia MALMSTRÖM (ALDE, SE)
13:30 Chinese Laogai Camps - Simon COVENEY (EPP-ED, IE) and Charles TANNOCK (EPP-ED, UK)
14:00 The case of Bahar Kimyongur - the dangers of the new anti-terrorist laws for democracy - Karin RESETARITS (ALDE, AT), Chris DAVIES (ALDE, UK) and other guests
15:00 The 25th Anniversary of the European Free Alliance : g eneral a ssembl y in Brussels - Ian HUDGHTON (Greens/EFA, UK), Nelly MAES; leader of the EFA and Begona LASAGABASTER, Secretary-General of the EFA 10:30 15:30 Brussels, PHS OA50 Other events Citizens' Forum : "Snacka om Europa - en helt ovanlig after work" The current domestic debate on Europe in Sweden is based on a 'Yes/No' approach to Europe. The choice of this slogan/theme was made in order to reverse the debate on Europe from an ‘Yes/No’ to an ‘How/What’ perspective.
Under this perspective, a list of 8 topics considered important to people of different ages and different backgrounds includes labour market policies in the enlarged Union, the fight against international criminality, the EU budget and regional policy, the CAP, equality and education.
The order of topics will reflect the character of the region in which the debate is held (regional policy matters tops the agenda in Luleå, EU's student exchange schemes is prioritized in the academic town of Göteborg).
Participants :
Nils LUNDGREN (IND/DEM, SE), Carl SCHLYTER (Greens/EFA, SE) and Inger SEGELSTRÖM (PES, SE) 09:00 18:30 Sweden HamnCompagniet, Amal 2006-05-11 Conference of Presidents - - 11:00 13:00 Brussels, PHS 6B01 Other events Citizens' Forum : "Snacka om Europa - en helt ovanlig after work" The actual internal debate in Sweden is based on a 'Yes/No' approach to Europe. The choice of this slogan/theme was made in order to reverse the debate on Europe from an ‘Yes/No’ to an ‘How/What’ perspective.
Under this perspective, a list of 8 topics considered important to people of different ages and different backgrounds includes labour market policies in the enlarged Union, the fight against international criminality, the EU budget and regional policy, the CAP, equality and education.
The order of topics will reflect the character of the region in which the debate is held (regional policy matters tops the agenda in Luleå, EU's student exchange schemes is prioritized in the academic town of Göteborg).
Participants :
Karlstad - Inger SEGELSTRÖM (PES, SE), Carl SCHLYTER (Greens/EFA, SE), Nils LUNDGREN (IND/DEM, SE)
Malmö - Jan ANDERSSON (PES, SE) 09:00 18:30 Sweden Legends, Drottninggatan 4, Karlstad and Restaurant Smak, Malmö; 2006-05-12 The President's diary - 9:00 Participation in the EU-LAC Summit 09:00 12:00 Vienna, Austria Press conferences Pre-session press briefing - 11:00 11:30 Brussels PHS OA50
EN
1
LINK
http://www.futureofeurope.europarl.europa.eu/
EN
2
LINK
http://www.futureofeurope.europarl.europa.eu/future/webdav/site/myjahiasite/shared/import/Home/Programmes/Programme-27.04.06_EN.PDF.pdf
EN
3
LINK
http://www.futureofeurope.europarl.europa.eu/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AGD DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AGD DOC XML V0//EN
