Strasbourg buildings: Bureau and MEPs hear mayor set out position
Budgetary control
2006-05-16 - 15:43
"The differing nature of the contracts" is the reason for the discrepancy between the rent paid by the European Parliament to the City of Strasbourg and that paid by the City to the owner of the buildings (the real estate company Erasme). This was the explanation given to the Bureau and the Budgetary Control Committee on Monday by Fabienne Keller, mayor of Strasbourg, at meetings on Parliament's rental and proposed purchase of the Winston Churchill and Salvador de Madariaga buildings.
"We are tied to Erasme by a financial contract similar to a loan, whereas our contract with Parliament is a standard rental agreement" , explained the mayor. Since the City would have had to pay Erasme for the buildings whatever happened, "it had to protect itself in case the buildings stood vacant, against the cost of work carried out since 1979 and against various changes relating to the transition first to the ECU and then to the euro" . This justified the discrepancy between the two rental figures. In total the City of Strasbourg had borne costs of around 70-72 million euros linked to these factors over the period 1979-2005.
Mrs Keller added that the difference between the two rental figures was known and that Parliament was fully aware of the situation, as the City and the EP had held many meetings over the years at key moments in the life of the buildings. The matter should not be seen as "a subject of political polemics" , declared Mrs Keller, adding that she considered "the accusations levelled in certain quarters particularly unfair."
Regarding the purchase by the EP of the WIC and SDM buildings, Mrs Keller said "the sale … translates, as far as the City of Strasbourg is concerned, as the financial recognition of its right of restitution, which was included in the emphyteutic lease" . It is this "right of restitution" that the City of Strasbourg invokes to explain why it would have received from Erasme an amount of €29 million, equivalent to the value of the property upon the expiry of the emphyteutic lease in 2047, at which point the WIC and SDM buildings would have become the property of Strasbourg City. (It should be recalled that in December 2005 the European Parliament agreed with Erasme to buy the buildings for €136 million.)
In the view of Markus Ferber (EPP-ED, DE), rapporteur on Parliament's budget discharge for 2004, "there are no comparisons available to enable one to estimate a market price" , the EP having been the only body interested in occupying a very large area of office space in Strasbourg. Mrs Keller stated that the sale price of €1904/m2 was in fact lower than the average market price in the town centre of €2200.
Jan Mulder (ALDE, NL), the member of the Budgets Committee responsible for EP buildings policy, deplored the lack of transparency on the part of the City of Strasbourg and said it was difficult to accept that the European taxpayer should have to bear the cost of the difference between the two rents. Mrs Keller replied that the City had "supplied all the documents requested in time" .
At the end of the meeting, the mayor said she "accepted the principle" of having the whole matter scrutinised by the EU Court of Auditors following a request by the chair of the Budgetary Control Committee, Szabolcs Fazakas (PES, HU), who stressed that the purpose of the hearing had been "not to discuss the question of Parliament's seat but that of auditing money paid by the European taxpayer" .
MEPs stated their wish to meet Mrs Keller again once they have had the chance to study the documents supplied by the City. Meanwhile they are due to hold a hearing with Erasme on 31 May in Brussels, although this is still to be confirmed.
At a meeting Parliament's Bureau had with Mrs Keller before her appearance at the Budgetary Control Committee, the mayor agreed to a tripartite meeting between the EP, the City of Strasbourg and Erasme, with a view to negotiating transparently on the purchase of the buildings. The Bureau thanked Mrs Keller for the documents she had supplied and for her willingness to cooperate.
2006-05-15 Committee on Budgetary Control Chair Szabolcs Fazakas PES HU 20060515IPR08168
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
