Scotland's youth debate their European future with MEPs
European citizenship
United Kingdom
2006-05-16 - 17:09
Scotland - Europe Day 2006 celebrations (photo credit, The Scottish Parliament)
Sixth year pupils had their say on Europe at a special Youth Forum at the Scottish Parliament on Sunday 8 and Monday 9 May.
Eighty Scottish students joined 30 young people from European Member States at the “Our Voice on Europe” event. The event also acted as one of the European Parliament's Citizens' Forums - one that was lead. A report will also be sent to the European Commission as a formal submission to Plan D.
The Forum was organised by the Scottish Parliament and the Scottish Executive, the Scottish offices of the European Commission and the British Council, as well as the Office in Scotland of the European Parliament. Scottish Parliament Presiding Officer George Reid MSP chaired the Forum which was designed to find out, through debates and workshops, what young participants consider to be the key European issues. He began: "This is a people’s Parliament, open to each and every Scot, and to foreign guests who are studying or working among us. We recognise that politics is too important these days just to be left to the politicians."
David Martin MEP (Labour, Scotland, PES), who spoke at the opening session of the forum, afterwards observed: “I was hugely impressed by the high quality of contributions from all those involved. They left us with much food for thought. The future of Scottish and European politics will be in good hands if this level of expertise and enthusiasm is maintained."
Students from each school outlined their perspective on Europe, highlighting a broad range of issues including the environment, human rights, education, and opportunities for young people to live and work throughout the European Union. The schools took part in workshops on "European Legislation and Scotland”, "Scottish Identity in Europe", and "Engaging with the People".
Elspeth Attwooll MEP (ALDE, Scotland, Liberal Democrat), who took part on the second day was struck by the quality of the pupils' participation: "The way the students focused on the issues was very impressive and their comments on the European debate - particularly about how better to engage with citizens - were really valuable. Politicians and officials at both Scottish and European levels should take good heed of them."
To give a cultural aspect to proceedings, Sunday evening saw musical performances and two dance workshops - from Poland and Seville. The evening closed with pupils, elected members, and Scottish and European officials dancing in the central garden lobby of the Scottish Parliament.
Alyn Smith MEP (EFA-Greens, Scotland, SNP) , who took part in a question and answer session about current EU issues as they relate to Scotland, concluded: "It is great to see such engagement from Scottish schools - I am always struck by how positive Scottish youth are about Europe."
The Scottish schools taking part were selected by ballot from each of the eight Scottish regional constituencies. They were:
Bell Baxter High, Cupar;
Earlston High School;
Greenock Academy;
Holyrood Secondary School;
Linlithgow Academy;
Mintlaw Academy;
Nairn Academy;
Strathaven Academy.
20060516IPR08262 Details and more images - 'Our Voice on Europe' Youth Forum at Holyrood 7 MEPs for Scotland
EN
1
PHOTO
20060516PHT08272.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.scottish.parliament.uk/nmCentre/news/europeyouthforum/index.htm
EN
3
LINK
/members/public/geoSearch/search.do?country=GB&zone=Scotland&language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
