Better regulation, less red tape and a bigger voice for Parliament
Institutions
2006-05-17 - 10:41
Parliament gave its backing to four reports concerning the better lawmaking initiative, following the Commission's communication on ‘Better regulation for growth and jobs in the European Union’, within the context of the Lisbon Strategy.
Better lawmaking 2004: application of the principle of subsidiarity - 12th annual report
Rapporteur: Bert Doorn (EPP-ED, NL)
This is the annual report prepared by the EP on the application of subsidiarity principle by the EU legislator. It also concerns the improvement of the impact assessment practices carried out by the Commission on every piece of legislation. The impact assessment aims to evaluate the effect of a EU law in social, economic and environmental terms.
The report backs the Commission's initiatives on the measurement of administrative burdens and the simplification of existing legislation, under the "better regulation" principle. It stresses also the importance of improving the reputation of the EU law among the public. Nevertheless, it suggests the Commission to prepare clear guidelines on how to conduct the impact assessment, by September 2006. It proposes that the evaluation on the impact assessment uniformity should be carried out by an independent agency. In its indent 12, the report says: " the European Parliament will not consider any proposals without their being accompanied by an independently scrutinised and approved impact assessment ".
Monitoring the application of Community law (2003 and 2004) - overall position - 21st and 22nd annual reports
Rapporteur: Monica Frassoni (Greens/EFA, IT)
The report calls on the Commission to conduct a specific evaluation of the application of the annual priority criteria concerning future legislative proposals. Moreover, in the context of the "Monitoring the application of Community law" initiative, it proposes to the Commission different options to improve the conformity checking, i.e. the way Member states implement EU laws. The proposed solutions vary from a “name and shame list” to be regularly discussed in the competent committee in the EP, to regular sessions to be held with representatives of the Member States. Moreover, with regards to the citizens' right of direct complaint to the Commission in case a Member state did not correctly implement a legislation (that " represents an irreplaceable instrument for forming a consciousness of belonging to a community of law that goes beyond their State "), it proposes more transparency and better information to the public. Finally, MEPs asked for a citizens' friendly summary to be included in all legislative acts to improve people's understanding of the EU policy making.
A strategy for the simplification of the regulatory environment
Rapporteur: Giuseppe Gargani (EPP-ED, IT)
The report strongly backs Commission's proposal on the simplification of the EU law. It suggests improving the use of the following practices: the repeal of legal acts which have become irrelevant or obsolete, the codification of old directives to simplify the legislative texts and the recasting to update the EU law. All these measures should be carried out according to clear rules and procedures and should not lead to a re-writing of the EU law outside democratic control. MEPs also approved an amendment that asked to take into account the economic, social, environmental and health aspects of legislation, when considering simplification.
Better regulation, less red tape and a bigger voice for Parliament
The European Parliament gave its backing to an own-initiative report on the implementation and impact of internal market legislation.
Noting that transposition and implementation of Community law continue to be a problem, the report urges the Council and the Commission to boost their monitoring capacity and to ensure compliance with EU regulations. Sanctions for non-compliance, notes the report, should be considered. The European Parliament wants to play a central role in any such monitoring process.
Better assessments make better lawmaking
Commission President Barroso has committed to scrapping legislative proposals that no longer seem to have a raison d´être and to do away with 'absurd' laws, noted rapporteur Arlene McCarthy (PES, UK). The better regulation process, she argued "must ensure that we do not end up with 'absurd' laws in the first place."
With that in mind, members voted to call on the Commission to set up an "independent audit body" to manage the quality and independence of impact assessments of EU law . The Parliament, warned MEPs, "will not consider proposals without their being accompanied by a quality impact assessment."
Although the EU institutions have committed themselves to the use of alternative methods of regulation, no formal mechanism exists to consult Parliament on the measures that will be delivered by alternative regulation. "This absence of checks and balances" -- reads the report -- "undermines the democratic prerogative of Parliament".
The own-initiative report was approved by an overwhelming majority of MEPs.
The 4 reports are "own initiative" and regard the "better lawmaking" initiative to make EU law clearer and thus more effective.
20060512IPR08065 Monitoring the application of Community law Better lawmaking 2004: application of the principle of subsidiarity - 12th annual report Implementation, consequences and impact of the internal market legislation in force Strategy for simplification of the regulatory environment UK National Angle on better lawmaking - UK MEPs turn attention to better lawmaking and better regulation.
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5262102
EN
2
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5242002
EN
3
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5211242
EN
4
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5303362
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060425IPR07587 EN NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
