Further debate needed on security & justice
Future of Europe/European integration
2006-05-09 - 13:42
A wide range of issues related to security and justice were debated Monday in the framework of the joint Parliamentary meeting on the future of Europe. The need to improve the decision-making process in this area, while respecting national traditions, and the possibility of a common EU immigration policy were the main issues.
The meeting was co-chaired by Jo Leinen (PES, DE), the Chairman of the EP's Committee on Constitutional Affairs, and Michael Grosse-Brömer (Christian democrat), Chairman of the Bundestag’s subcommittee on European law. " Eurobarometer polls show people's concerns in this area and their expectations vis-à-vis Europe ", said Jo Leinen in his opening statement. " We have the task of re-establishing confidence among citizens in Europe ", added Mr Grosse-Brömer.
Mutual recognition: the way towards a more effective fight against cross-border crime
The working group rapporteur, Johannes Koskinen a member of the Grand Committee of Eduskunta in Finland, regretted that " it is slow and difficult " to take decisions in the area of justice and home affairs at EU level as " Member states tend to safeguard their national interests very strongly ". This idea was backed by several participants: Astrid Thors, a liberal Member of the Finnish Parliament, said that decisions in the area of justice should be taken by qualified majority instead of, as is now the case, by unanimity, while Martine Roure (PSE, FR) stated that " the pillar structure of the treaties should be abolished ".
In contrast, Elisabeth Arnold, President of the Danish Parliament Committee on European Affairs, stressed the need to proceed carefully in harmonising national criminal law as this issue affects national sovereignty. John Denham, Chairman of the UK House of Commons' Committee on Home Affairs, said: " we should focus on developing practical cooperation to solve practical problems ". According to Mr Denham, because cultural differences among Member States are so wide the solution to improving the fight against crime cannot be to extend EU competence in this area.
Mr Leinen pointed out that in certain areas a system of mutual recognition of judgments is highly desirable to efficiently tackle major cross-border crimes, such as terrorism, trafficking of human beings and international smuggling. Mr Koskinen, in his concluding remarks, said there are still different opinions on how far the EU should go in harmonising procedural law.
An EU Immigration policy?
On the issue of whether the EU should have a joint immigration policy, national and European parliamentarians had different ideas. For Michalis Chyssohoidis, a socialist member of the Hellenic Parliament, the " time has come for a common immigration policy ". Paulis Klavins, a member of the Latvian Parliament, raised the issue of countries with external European borders and said the EU should agree to some principles on a common answer to immigration related problems.
According to Ryszard Legutko, Polish Senate Vice-President, a common immigration policy is the ultimate goal but cannot be achieved now. Lord Marlesford, a member of the House of Lords’ committee for the European Union, said immigration policy must remain under national control and agreed with Mr Denham’s comment that he " didn't believe " such a goal was " attainable ". Mrs Arnold said that Europe needs minimum common standards with regards to asylum policy to avoid discrimination among the Member States in the treatment of refugees.
The rapporteur Mr Koskinen will prepare a report on the debate to be discussed tomorrow at the plenary session of the Joint Parliamentary meeting.
2006-05-08
Joint Parliamentary meeting on the Future of Europe
Working group on "What are the prospects for the area of freedom, security and justice?"
20060503IPR07842
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
