Recovery of Community Funds - OLAF should be fully independent
Budgetary control
2006-10-24 - 15:54
Parliament adopted an own-initiative report on the recovery of Community funds. This technical report highlights the possibility of closer cooperation with Eurojust and Europol needs to be explored in order to strengthen the real protection of the Union’s financial interests, as well as an evaluation of the possibility of OLAF’s full administrative independence from the Commission and the other institutions.
OLAF inquiries and national procedures
The Hosue notes that OLAF does not possess suitable information on the quantities of incriminated products, while undertaking the inquiries in a criminal law context has proved disastrous from the viewpoint of recovery, even if it is true that in strictly legal terms OLAF is entitled, on behalf of the Commission, to contest a national decision. MEPs also recall that, while in some countries recovery proceedings may be initiated even if a criminal action is under way, in others the criminal law has precedence over the civil law, so that the existence of an action on the part of a judicial authority makes it impossible to recover the disputed sums. The House deplores the fact that in some Member States irregularities and frauds are admitted only in respect of individually proven sums, that is, lot by lot, and that where no lot is present the operator is automatically deemed innocent.
The European Public Prosecutor
MEPs consider that the creation of the office of European Public Prosecutor will be a decision of major importance, since it will facilitate direct access to the national public prosecutor’s offices, thus working in the interests of a more ‘joined-up’ procedure. Parliament believes that this should help reduce complexity, since the result should be a converged use of the European Prosecutor’s services; recalls that, while OLAF enjoys powers of intervention in the context of its inquiries, it does not enjoy judicial powers.
Parliament notes that the project to establish a European Public Prosecutor must be regarded more as a long-term undertaking, and that, in order to achieve an improvement in the short term, coordination between Member States' public prosecutors must be central to plans to create added value, reducing OLAF's workload and protecting the financial interests of the Community.
The House welcomes the Commission's positive reply to Parliament's repeated demands - for public disclosure of the amounts received by and the names of the beneficiaries under the EU budget. MEPs r egret, however, that the equivalent information regarding recoveries of Community funds are excluded from the transparency initiative. Finally, the House calls on the Commission to make available to the budgetary authority and ultimately to the public the names and amounts of recoveries due or credited to the EU budget, as well as the final destination of these sums.
20061020IPR11869 Recovery of Community Funds
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5270902
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
