Brussels Plenary session: Wednesday 11 - Thursday 12 October
Institutions
2006-10-24 - 16:17
The October Brussels plenary session began with a one-hour debate on the recent nuclear tests carried out by North Korea. Prior to the debate MEPs heard from Javier Solana - the EU's foreign policy chief, the European Commission and Council. The debate on preparations for the forthcoming informal meeting of Heads of State and government (on 20 October in Lahti, Finland) was also held. Energy, illegal immigration and innovation policy were discussed.
Also debated was the recent agreement between the EU and the US about the transfer of passenger data. This deal marks a temporary solution to the problem - until July next year when it runs out.
MEPs also considered the "anti-dumping" measures that the European Union recently deployed against cheap imports of shoes from Vietnam and China.
The need for products to be labelled as "animal friendly" was also supported by MEPs, whilst Members voted to postpone membership of the European Patent Litigation Agreement.
For a full record of the two day session, read on.
20061016FCS11676
Wednesday Plenary: N.Korea, Lahti summit, passenger data, shoe imports
Javier Solana. "North Korea is a threat to peace…" Day 1 of plenary saw universal condemnation by MEPs of North Korea's nuclear test and fears it could lead to instability and an arms race. There was also condemnation of the murder of Russian journalist Anna Politkovskaya with EP President Borrell leading the tributes. MEPs debated energy, immigration and innovation - 3 issues on the agenda when EU leaders meet next week. A recent deal with the US on the transfer of air passenger data and curbs on Asian shoe imports got mixed reactions.
MEPs unite to condemn North Korean test The recent nuclear test by North Korea has provoked international outrage and fears of a destabilising arms race in the region. Javier Solana, the EU's foreign policy representative, opened the debate describing the regime as a "threat to peace and security". He said that the UN Security Council "had to act as other countries will be watching". The need for the EU to support the UN and for the international community to act as one was stressed by all speakers. José Ignacio Salafranca for the European People's Party urged the consideration of sanctions and urged leaders not to forget Iran in any multilateral response. For the Socialist group Martin Schulz said we should distinguish between a "crazy dictatorship and the starvation of it people". He contrasted the dialogue of the Clinton years with the cutting of contact under President Bush. István Szent-Iványi for the Liberals said that North Korean threats and intimidation must not be allowed to succeed while Gérard Onesta for the Greens described the country as "the biggest asylum on the world". Energy, innovation and illegal immigration top Lahti agenda Next week EU leaders gather informally at Lahti in Finland. Europe's energy needs, ways of boosting innovation and illegal immigration are on the agenda. EU leaders will have dinner with President Putin and many MEPs urged EU leaders to raise the Politkovskaya murder with him. As holders of the EU's Presidency, Finland are eager to highlight technology and innovation. Their minister for European affairs Paula Lehtomäki introduced the summit agenda and told MEPs that in innovation policy "words must become deeds". European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso warned MEPs that Europe was falling increasing behind in research. He wants to push ahead with a proposed European Institute of Technology. For the political groups the meeting with President Putin and Europe's dependence on Russian oil and gas are key issues. For the European People's Party, Françoise Grossetête condemned the murder of the Russian journalist. She struck a sceptical note and feared that innovation policy would not be realised and be cut with "the budget axe". Finally she said that legislation must offer opportunities not red tape. Martin Schultz for the Socialists said despite everything, "Russia is still an essential partner" and "we can't preach to Russia". Leader of the Liberals Graham Watson said Russia was now "tarnished" and Europe should prepare for a future without Russian oil and gas. Daniel Cohn-Bendit of the Greens made a reference to the planned dinner at Lahti and said it was nonsense to talk about bringing the perpetrators to justice "as you will be sitting down to dinner with him". Agreement with the US on the transfer of air passenger data Finland's Paula Lehtomäki and Franco Frattini, the EU's commissioner for justice, freedom and security, explained the deal on passenger data reached with the US last week. This replaces the agreement, which was annulled 1 October, and both stressed that legal clarity and certainty and a common European position was paramount. They stated that a good level of data protection had been obtained in the agreement that runs until July 2007. While the speakers for the European People's Party and the Union for Europe of the Nations group welcomed the agreement and noted some improvements compared to the previous agreement, the main speakers of the other groups raised a number of critical questions as to the interpretation of the agreement, or dismissed outright the transfer of data under the agreement. The Socialist group noted that it was very important to close the legal void but that there were a number of concerns to be addressed in the long-term agreement. Several speakers stressed the need to involve both the EP and national parliaments in order to have democratic control over the negotiations of a future long-term agreement. Measures against cheap shoes from China and Vietnam Last week the Council confirmed and extended "anti-dumping" measures against Chinese and Vietnamese leather shoe imports introduced by the Commission in April. Spanish Socialist Enrique Baron Crespo welcomed the measures as a “balanced approach”, which is not about “open or closing doors” but about defending multilaterally agreed trade rules, but was critical of the absence of a minister to answer MEPs' questions. He was also unhappy that the Commission was not represented by Trade Commissioner Peter Mandelson. While various speakers defended the measures as necessary to defend trade and the interests of European producers and workers against unfair practises, others - from across the political spectrum - criticised them as consumer unfriendly, a result of “horse trading” in the Council and poor management of globalisation.
North Korea Background on passenger data
Thursday in Plenary: Animal welfare and patents
Animal welfare was the subject of a resolution by MEPs Thursday's plenary saw MEPs approve measures that will widen animal welfare measures in the EU to include non-farm animals and introduce "animal friendly" labelling. They also voted on a resolution to postpone EU involvement in a patent scheme. Patents are a key way of protecting the fruits of innovation and stimulating economies across the European Union.
The resolution on animal welfare passed overwhelmingly by MEPs calls for: animal friendly labelling of products, a more proactive approach by the EU on animal welfare in World Trade Organisation talks and, finally, a ban on seal and other "cruel" products. MEPs also called upon countries to ban dog and cock fighting - although a measure to extend this to bull fighting was voted down. The resolution also called for a ban on the importation, exportation, trading and processing of dog and cat fur. The resolution was based on a report by German Christian Democrat Elisabeth Jeggle. Patents: the key to innovation Translating new ideas into new products is key to boosting Europe's economy. A part of this is the protection of new ideas and products - so that the inventor can reap the benefits. While there may be consensus on this, there is still disagreement on how best to protect patents in Europe. Thursday, MEPs approved a resolution postponing EU membership of the European Patent Litigation Agreement (EPLA) - a course of action advocated by the European Commission. Joining the EPLA would lead to the creation of a court with jurisdiction over all patents in the EU. MEPs do not reject membership, but have reservations over the present text, - in particular the lack of democratic control over procedures to grant a patent. Members see the best way forward as the creation of a "Community Patent". EU fundamental rights agency postponed MEPs voted to postpone a final vote on two reports on the EU fundamental rights agency, to be based in Vienna. Members wanted the scope of the new body to be extended to intergovernmental cooperation in policing, justice and immigration and counter terrorism. Postponing the vote will allow the European Commission and Council to consult and reach a compromise. MEPs support the establishment of the agency but would like to see greater parliamentary involvement in it. In particular, MEPs want parliament to be consulted on the proposed 5-year framework of the agency and the appointment of its director. Animal welfare Patents EU fundamental rights agency
EN
1
PHOTO
20061012PHT11640.jpg
EN
4
PHOTO
20061013PHT11656.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061010IPR11533 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060901BKG10232 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061010IPR11536 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061011IPR11564 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061011IPR11558 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
