Freedom of the press in Russia: MEPs pay tribute to murdered Russian journalist
Human rights
2006-10-25 - 20:58
In adopting a joint resolution on EU-Russia relations after the murder of the Russian journalist Anna Politkovskaya, MEPs pay tribute to the work and merits of Anna Politkovskaya, a highly respected investigative reporter known as the symbol of honest journalism in Russia, who was awarded many prizes, among others the Olaf Palme Prize.
Anna Politkovskaya courageously stood up in defence of human life and dignity, exposed and objectively reported on various forms of crimes against humanity, especially in Chechnya.
The House expresses its sincere condolences to the family of Anna Politkovskaya and to her friends and colleagues in journalism and the human rights movement.
MEPs condemn in the strongest terms the murder of Anna Politkovskaya and call on the Russian authorities to conduct an independent and efficient investigation to find and punish those responsible for this cowardly crime. MEPs call on the EU and the Council of Europe to monitor these investigations closely. The House voices its deep concern over the increasing intimidation, harassment and murder of independent journalists and of other persons critical of the current government, and reminds the Russian Government that a continuation of this tendency will negatively affect Russia's overall reputation. MEPs call on the Russian authorities to fight actively against intimidation of independent journalists and human rights activists and to give full protection to independent journalists who expose serious cases of injustice in their country and to human rights organisations and their representatives who defend the victims of human rights violations.
The House urges the Council, in this context, to give serious thought to the future of relations with the Russian Federation, debating the subject with the European Parliament and civil society with a view to placing democracy, human rights and freedom of expression at the core of any future agreement and instituting a clear mechanism to monitor the implementation of all the clauses of such an agreement. Parliament calls for the EU-Russia Human Rights Dialogue to be stepped up so as to make it more effective and result-oriented, while fully involving the European Parliament at all levels, with a view to strengthening this element in the new Partnership and Cooperation Agreement due to be negotiated soon.
MEPs express their deep concern at the fact that under the new legislation on civil society organisations more than 90 non-governmental organisations have been forced to cease their operations in Russia. The House urges the Russian authorities to speed up the registration procedures allowing in the meantime those organisations to carry out their activities until their application is correctly dealt with and brought into the register. Parliament calls on the Russian Government not to use the vagueness of the rules of the new law as a pretext to stop the critical voices of civil society.
Finally, the House says that it is aware that the only way to truly honour Anna Politkovskaya's passionate commitment to truth, justice and human dignity is to make common efforts to realise Anna Politkovskaya's dream of a democratic Russia which fully respects the rights and liberties of its citizens.
20061020IPR11905 Joint motion for a resolution on EU-Russia relations after the murder of the Russian journalist
-//EP//TEXT MOTION P6-RC-2006-0531 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
