President Borrell in Lahti: "the EU cannot trade human rights for energy"
Institutions
2006-10-20 - 15:48
Speaking on Friday morning in Lahti, Finland, regarding relations between the European Union and Russia, Josep Borrell, President of the European Parliament, said "the EU cannot trade human rights for energy".
At a press conference ahead of the summit of heads of state or government of the Union, Mr Borrell explained that it was important for the Parliament that the EU take sufficient account, in its relations with Russia, of the political situation and human rights in the country. "For several months now, Parliament has noted with concern a weakening of democracy in Russia, stricter control over the media and growing difficulties for the political opposition".
"Gas-flow for cash-flow"
He went on: "it is clear that Europe needs Russia, but Russia also needs the European market to sell its energy. They have the ‘gas-flow’, we have the ‘cash-flow’. The EU would lose its credibility if it accepted a trade-off with human rights".
Mr Borrell outlined to journalists some of the topics he plans to raise during the meeting of the European Council, in particular the lack of a real European immigration policy, energy policy and innovation and competitiveness.
"Unfortunately I do not see any real desire to move towards an immigration policy at European level. Seven years after the Tampere accords, a number of decisions which were announced there have not been followed up or have been adopted by the institutions but not transposed into law by many Member States". Only six Member States have enacted the directive on the status of refugees. The directive on freedom of movement and the right of residence of European citizens and their families has been enacted by only thirteen Member States. "The key directive for fighting illegal immigration, the one on returning immigrants to their country of origin, has been on the Council's table for over a year", added President Borrell.
European Technology Institute
Turning to measures needed to develop a European innovation policy, President Borrell said he was in favour of practical measures. "We talked a great deal about innovation at the Hampton Court summit a year ago. We must act now, for example by setting up a European Technology Institute which is genuinely useful, does not duplicate existing structures and can guarantee to use research budgets efficiently".
2006-10-20
Informal Meeting of the European Council, Lahti, Finland
20061016IPR11683
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
