EU consumer organisations: "one voice" vital
Consumers
2006-10-19 - 19:01
Consumer organisations: Hand in hand for a united approach?
Is a single model of consumer protection feasible in an EU market of 450 million people? In an age where goods and services flow across borders and can be traded worldwide on the internet, is the old national model of consumer protection still valid? Last week a public hearing in Parliament discussed consumer organisations across Europe and how to develop a common approach.
25 states of protection?
Consumer organisations exist in all European countries. But their traditions, roles and challenges differ a lot. According to Karel Pavlik, a Czech consumer expert, there is a wide gap between older EU members and the ones who joined in 2004. He noted that in countries "based on long-term democratic developments" consumer protection is high and well established (some going back 50 years), whereas the states that became independent after the fall of the Berlin Wall lack this.
However, consumer rights are the same across Europe - concerning health and safety, the right to information and the right to organise to defend oneself. Unfortunately, a lot of consumers are unaware of this the hearing was told. Malgorzata Niepokulczycka, a member of a Polish consumer organisation, said they were trying to make consumers aware of "the fact that they are not alone, they can use help of organisations and institutions aiming to protect their interest".
What should be done?
The hearing concluded that a single European definition of a consumer organisation was difficult. However they must always be "independent and transparent".
The need for cooperation between different countries at a European level is vital. "It is essential that consumer organisations speak with one voice," according to Camilla Hersom of the Danish Consumer Council.
Jim Murray of the European Consumer's Organization (BEUC) suggested a "mentoring system" - whereby more experienced and established organisations would liaise with their less experienced partners.
Parliament and consumers
The European Parliament has an Internal Market Committee whose job it is to ensure consumers are protected when new EU legislation is passed. MEPs in the committee and the wider parliament have continually emphasized the need for simpler, more understandable and better focused consumer protection legislation that will be easier to enforce.
In February last year MEPs approved a report on a proposed EU-wide "directive on unfair commercial practices" which will come into force in December 2007. It aims to outlaw unfair practices, create common EU rules to replace the diversity of national laws, and to improve the protection of consumers considered to be "vulnerable".
The EU Treaties say consumer protection must be taken into account in defining and carrying out different policies and activities. This has been seen in Parliament's consideration of the REACH package of legislation on Chemicals and the Services directive on the provision of public services in the EU. It was also taken into account in a report endorsed by MEPs in February on "the effects of globalisation on the internal market".
20061017STO11730 Parliament's Internal Market Committee Unfair commercial practices directive - EU press service release BEUC (Bureau Européen des Unions de consommateurs - European Consumer's Organisations)
EN
1
PHOTO
20061017PHT11732.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/committees/presentation.do?committee=1241&language=EN
EN
4
LINK
http://www.beuc.org/Content/Default.asp?PageID=149&LanguageCode=EN
-//EP//TEXT PRESS NR-20050203-1 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
