Highlights of the Strasbourg Plenary session 23-26 October
Institutions
2006-10-23 - 16:32
Highlights of the week
MEPs face a packed agenda for the Strasbourg October plenary session with issues ranging from the anniversary of the 1956 Hungarian uprising, press freedom in Russia and the results of the Summit meeting in Lahti to breast cancer, the 2007 EU budget, a debate with European Central Bank chief Jean-Claude Trichet and the announcement of the 2006 Sakharov Prize Winner for human rights and freedom of expression.
The week starts of with the Schengen Information System. The Civil Liberties Committee is signalling that it wants a first reading agreement with the Council on legislation to allow the enlargement of the Schengen Information System to the ten new Member States. The House will also debate financing the protection of the environment. Tuesday starts with statements from the President and political groups on the commemoration of the 1956 Hungarian uprising. The debate marks the 50th anniversary of the uprising against the communist regime and the Soviet occupation of 1956. At midday Wednesday, President László Sólyom of Hungary will formally address the House.
MEPs then turn their attention to breast cancer as part of breast cancer awareness month. Parliamentarians will compare best practice among Member States. Every two minutes a woman is diagnosed with breast cancer and every six minutes someone dies of it somewhere in the EU. Every year it claims 88,000 women and 1,000 men. The House then turns to a series of culture and media reports with votes on several legislative programmes including the Erasmus grant for students and support for European cinema. President Borrell and a Minister representing the Finnish Presidency will formally sign the conciliation agreement text on the European capitals of culture. The next capitals of culture are: Luxembourg in 2007, Liverpool in 2008, Linz and Vilnius (2009), Essen and Pecs (Hungary) in 2010 Wednesday starts with MEPs debating the "peace process in Spain". The House will also debate the results of the informal summit of Heads of State of government 20 October in Lahti, Finland. Finnish Prime Minister Matti Vanhanen and Commission President José Manuel Barroso will take part in the debate. In the wake of the murder of Anna Politkovskaya, the House will vote on a resolution on freedom of the press in Russia.
MEPs then turn their focus to Syria with a debate on the EU-Syria association agreement. The Foreign Affairs Committee is convinced that the association agreement could give a decisive impetus to the political, economic and social reforms needed to improve the country’s situation. The committee reiterates, however, that respect for democratic values, human rights and civil liberties are prerequisites, and that, to this end, an effective control mechanism should be included in the agreement’s human rights clause. In the evening, the House holds a joint debate on toxic waste and the protection of the environment, including Commission and Council statements on the exporting of toxic waste to Africa. The Conference of Presidents will declare the winner of the 2006 Sakharov Prize for freedom of thought and human rights. The winner will receive the award from President Borrell during the December plenary in Strasbourg. Jean-Claude Trichet, the President of the ECB will participate in the annual debate on the ECB. MEPs will consider a report from the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee which praises the ECB’s handling of interest rate policy, while warning of the need for caution when raising rates to avoid endangering growth. The House will also debate and vote on funding for rural development and CAP payments. The session ends as usual with three debates and votes on resolutions relating to human rights. On this occasion the topics are: Tibet, the trial of Rios Montt (former dictator of Guatemala) and Uzbekistan.
20061020STO11819
EN
1
PHOTO
20060925PHT10933.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/eplive/public/freetext_page_webstreaming/default/default_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061005BRI11415 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
