European Globalisation Fund supported but scope broadened
Employment policy
2006-10-26 - 17:50
The Employment Committee on Thursday gave general backing to the Commission's proposal to establish a European Globalisation Adjustment Fund. The fund will provide up to €500 million each year to help reintegrate into the labour market workers made redundant due to changes in global trade patterns. MEPs in the committee nevertheless adopted several amendments, mainly to widen the scope and beneficiaries of the fund and to define eligible action in a more precise way.
In the report by Roselyne Bachelot-Narquin (EPP-ED, FR), adopted by 34 votes in favour to 3 against with 2 abstentions, the committee stresses that, notwithstanding the positive effects of globalisation on growth and jobs, it can also have negative consequences for the most vulnerable and least qualified workers in some sectors. Assistance from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund (EGF) should therefore provide solidarity and support for individual workers made redundant as a result of structural changes in world trade patterns. It should not finance the restructuring of companies or sectors - only active labour market measures shall be supported and not passive social protection measures, says the committee. The EGF should also have the aim of stimulating economic growth and creating more jobs in the European Union.
Who is eligible for funding from the EGF?
MEPs in the committee want to guarantee that more workers can be supported via the EGF. In general they agree with the Commission that assistance should be concentrated on workers made redundant in those areas most adversely affected by economic dislocation due to changes in world trade patterns, but they want to broaden the intervention criteria. An intervention should, they decided, not only be possible if the result of the economic disruption is that 1000 workers lose their job in an company, but also, in small labour markets or in exceptional circumstances, when at least 500 workers are concerned and a there is a serious impact on the employment and the local economy, or when during a period of 12 months at least 1000 workers loose their jobs in one or more companies in a particular region.
Where does the money come from?
No specific financial provision for the EGF has been made in the EU's financial framework for 2007-2013. The Commission proposal says a maximum amount of €500 million per year will be financed through funds that have been under-spent against the other budget ceilings. The Committee set out some detail on how this should operate.
When will the EGF be up and running?
The EGF can start as soon as the new regulation enters into force, at the end of the present codecision procedure. The Finnish Presidency would like to adopt a Common position on 1st December. Informal negotiations are going on between the rapporteur, shadow rapporteurs and the Council with the aim of finding an agreement in first reading to make the fund operational as soon as possible. The first reading vote in Parliament is currently planned for November's session in Strasbourg.
2006-10-26 Committee on Employment and Social Affairs Chair Jan Andersson PES SE
Procedure: Codecision, first reading
Plenary vote: November I, Strasbourg
20061020IPR11842
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
