MEPs denounce and fully reject Transnistria referendum on independence / South Ossetia - MEPs call for a peaceful resolution to the conflict
External relations
2006-10-26 - 15:20
Parliament adopted two separate resolutions on Transnistria and South Ossetia respectively. On Transnistria, the House strongly denounces the attempt in the Moldovan region of Transnistria to establish its independence in a unilateral way by organising a so-called referendum. On South Ossetia, MEPs reiterates their call for a peaceful resolution of the conflict and its commitment to support the peace process.
MEPs denounce and fully reject Transnistria referendum on independence
In adopting a resolution on Moldova and Transnistria, the House strongly denounces the attempt in the Moldovan region of Transnistria to establish its independence in a unilateral way by organising a so-called referendum.
MEPs call on the Government of the Russian Federation to withhold its support from this move and in particular from the holding of so-called referenda on the independence of the region. The House calls on the Government of the Russian Federation to give its fullest support to the multilateral efforts to find a solution to the conflicts in its neighbourhood. Parliament calls on the Government of the Russian Federation, furthermore, to fulfil the commitments made in 1996 in the Council of Europe and reflected in OSCE Summit decisions (Istanbul, 1999 and Oporto, 2002) concerning the withdrawal of Russian troops and arms from the territory of Moldova. The House expresses concern over the lack of progress on this issue.
Parliament fully rejects the organisation and outcome of the 'referendum' on independence for the Moldovan region of Transnistria and its possible accession to the Russian Federation as this is in sharp contradiction with the internationally recognised sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Moldova and as the repressive regime in Transnistria does not allow for the free expression of the popular will.
MEPs stress that the resolution of the Transnistrian issue constitutes a crucial element for promoting political stability and economic prosperity in the Republic of Moldova and in the whole region. Parliaement stresses the need for a peaceful solution to the conflict, in line with the UN Charter and Conventions and OSCE declarations, and with full respect for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of the Republic of Moldova within its internationally recognised borders.
Parliament calls on all parties to the conflict to refrain from any measures that would lead to a further escalation of the situation, and to return immediately to the negotiating table in the 5+2 format and work towards a speedy and transparent solution of the conflict.
The House calls on the Council, the Member States and the Commission to continue to give their fullest support to a political and peaceful solution of the regional conflicts in the neighbourhood which the EU shares with the Russian Federation, and urges them to discuss these matters at their next meetings with the President and Government of the Russian Federation.
MEPs call on the Government of Moldova to undertake confidence-building measures and put forward new proposals for the inhabitants of Transnistria, providing positive incentives in order for them to fully support a peaceful reunification of the state, with minority language rights and local autonomy being safeguarded.
South Ossetia - MEPs call for a peaceful resolution to the conflict
In adopting a joint resolution on South Ossetia, MEPs reiterates their call for a peaceful resolution of the conflict and its commitment to support the peace process, and call on all parties to act responsibly by refraining from unilateral steps and inflammatory and aggressive statements which serve to exacerbate the situation and may degenerate into violence.
The House reaffirms its full support for the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Georgia and calls on the Russian authorities to fully respect the sovereignty of that country within its internationally recognised borders. MEPs strongly condemn the attempts by movements in the Georgian regions of Abkhazia and South Ossetia to establish independence unilaterally. Parliament calls on the Government of the Russian Federation to withhold support from all of these movements and to give its fullest support to the multilateral efforts to find a solution to the conflicts in its neighbourhood. The House condemns the fact that South Ossetia will hold a referendum on independence on 12 November 2006, and reminds the parties that a similar referendum on independence in 1992 was not internationally recognised.
MEPs call, in that connection, on both parties to sign the joint document on refraining from the use of force and on security guarantees and to engage in constructive negotiations in order to overcome the present stalemate. MEPs regret the fact that the meeting of the Joint Control Commission which took place in Vladikavkaz on 12-13 October 2006 did not yield any results.
Parliament stresses that neutral, effective and impartial peacekeeping operations are essential for resolving territorial conflicts in Georgia. The House looks with interest, in that connection, to new proposals concerning the existing tripartite joint peacekeeping force deployed in the conflict area around the ceasefire line between Georgia and South Ossetia. The House points out that a new force should incorporate an element of police support, to combat crime and lawlessness. MEPs underline that the EU should be prepared, if necessary, to commit troops to a new peacekeeping force.
MEPs call on the Russian authorities to rescind all the measures recently taken against Georgia and against the Georgian population on its territory. Parliament calls, further, on the Russian authorities to lift their unjustified import ban on products from Moldova and Georgia. The House calls on the Council and the Commission to include the question of frozen conflicts and their resolution on the agenda for the next EU-Russia summits.
Finally, the European Parliament welcomes the conclusion and the signing of the ENP Action Plan for Georgia. MEPs expect that its implementation will give a further boost to the political and reform process in that country. The House also welcomes the statements by the High Representative for the CFSP Javier Solana, who recently said that the EU intends to become more actively engaged in the resolution of conflicts in Georgia, and calls on the Council to provide the EU Special Representative for the South Caucasus with all the necessary means and resources to make this action more effective and visible.
20061020IPR11906 Joint motion for a resolution on Moldova (Transnistria) Joint motion for a resolution on the situation in South Ossetia (Georgia)
-//EP//TEXT MOTION P6-RC-2006-0539 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT MOTION P6-RC-2006-0537 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
