Bird flu danger still clear and present but under control in the EU
Agriculture
2006-05-31 - 11:35
Members of the Agriculture Committee, meeting on 30 May, heard reassuring news on bird flu, which is "under control in the EU", according to the Commissioner for Public Health and Consumer Protection, Markos Kyprianou. Labelling and other consumer protection, animal health and animal welfare issues were also discussed during a debate on the 2007 legislative programme.
On bird flu the Commissioner said " The first wave with affected wild animals has been sorted out. The impact on captive animals was minimal ". He stressed, however, " this does not imply that we can rest on our laurels ". The danger had not vanished even if bird flu no longer topped the headlines. Decisions had been taken to help the sectors concerned, as consumers' " rather exaggerated reaction " had led to reduced demand for poultry meat.
The situation, he added, was being closely monitored in the EU as well as in other parts of the world, such as Indonesia, where cases had recently been confirmed of human infection within a family from the H5N1 avian influenza virus. However, the Indonesian cases had so far not caused a change in the level of alert, said Mr Kyprianou. He agreed that the situation in Romania was of concern for the country itself and also posed a threat to the EU. This was the only case on the European continent of a continuously growing outbreak. Romania had asked for help from the FAO and WHO and had not taken up the EU's offer of assistance. Mr Kyprianou said the debate on vaccination was still ongoing. Financial assistance was earmarked for Africa, where the situation was not as bad as expected, and would include training for the authorities.
EU origin labelling?
Many MEPs raised the issue of labelling. The possibility of an "EU origin" label was discussed and it was noted that labelling of origin would give consumers a choice. Some speakers said the question of labelling and consumers' right to information was more difficult when people were eating out. The Commissioner agreed that clear and accurate information was vital so that consumers could make the right decisions.
Among other issues raised were food safety, animal health, animal welfare and competition from third countries. As pointed out by committee chair Joseph Daul (EPP-ED, FR) and other speakers, EU farmers face cheap imports from non-EU countries. Mr Kyprianou suggested European farmers could use labelling based on animal welfare as a "niche market" for competition.
2006-05-30 Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development Chair Joseph DAUL EPP-ED FR 20060529IPR08513
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
