The Parliament and Human Rights
Human rights
2006-11-13 - 09:48
Human rights and human wrongs are regularly debated by MEPs
One of the most important roles of the European Parliament is to act as a human rights watchdog - both in the EU and beyond it. During its plenary sessions it holds regular debates on human rights issues around the world - the last one focused on Zimbabwe, North Korean refugees and civil conflict in Sri Lanka. The Parliament also regularly adopts resolutions that condemn or highlight a particular situation - the last one adopted was on human rights in China.
What does the Parliament do to promote human rights?
Debates and resolutions are an effective way for MEPs to draw international attention to human rights violations. See the links below for the latest debates and resolutions.
Public hearings: The Parliament's political groups and committees often organise public hearings on issues of humanitarian concern. Recent hearings have been on the situation in East Timor, Tibet and Algeria.
Human Rights Committee : Parliament has a permanent subcommittee on human rights which examines apparent breaches of international law. Parliament also issues annual reports on the human right situation in and beyond the EU, whilst MEPs act as "election observers" outside the Union to ensure the transparency of elections.
Assent or dissent? Legally, MEPs have a trump card they can choose to play. The EU Treaties state that "Association agreements" (covering trade and political links) between the EU and the third countries plus other agreements with "significant budgetary implications" must be rubber stamped by Parliament before ratification. This means they must be debated and this provides an important mechanism for scrutinising the agreements and recommending changes. In the September plenary an association agreement with Albania was discussed. MEPs backed the agreement but added important caveats about the need to tackle corruption and improve the implementation of laws.
Sakharov: Parliament also awards the annual "Sakharov Prize" for freedom of thought around the world.
Financial support: In last year's wrangle over the EU budget an important aspect was funding for the promotion of human rights. The work of the current European Initiative for Democracy and Human Rights (EIDHR) is to be built with a new programme that will promote human rights over the coming years.
History of Human Rights
Since the founding of the European Union, human rights have rested upon the European Convention on Human Rights (signed in 1950) and the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights of 1948. These represent important milestones in the moral and philosophical reconstruction of Europe and the world after the devastation of world war. The founding Treaties of the EU were based on the principles of Liberty and democracy, respect for the rule of law and fundamental freedoms.
Debates - how are the subjects chosen?
The subjects to be debated are nominated by the Parliament's 7 political groups, an Inter-parliamentary delegation, a committee or a group of 37 MEPs acting together. The final decision on what to debate rests with the "Conference of Presidents" (Parliament's President plus the leaders of political groups).
20060912STO10568 Last debate on human rights Parliament's subcommittee on human rights Texts adopted - Parliamentary resolutions
EN
1
PHOTO
20060911PHT10566.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/activities/expert/committees/presentation.do?committee=1302&language=EN
EN
4
LINK
/activities/expert/ta.do?language=EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060901IPR10256 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
