Juncker on stability pact, Lithuania's euro application and ECB appointments
Economic and monetary affairs
2006-05-31 - 09:46
Jean-Claude Juncker told MEPs on Tuesday that euro area Member States were not doing enough to consolidate their budgets now that growth had improved. Speaking to the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee, the President of the euro group and Prime Minister of Luxembourg also backed the Commission's decision on Lithuania's application to adopt the euro and agreed that there should be no national reservation of seats on the ECB Board.
Mr Juncker said the results of the reform of the stability and growth pact had been positive, especially regarding the corrective arm, with ambitious budgetary consolidation in many Member States. Growth in the euro area was now picking up to its potential. However, he warned that Member States were in danger of repeating the mistakes of the end of the last decade: as growth improved they were not making sufficient use of the 'good times' to reduce deficits and consolidate further: "I will be making a clear call to Member States to make an extra effort to respect the Pact."
The Euro group president said he was aiming to improve the quality of the regular discussion on economic policy he has with Economics Commissioner Joaquin Almunia and European Central Bank President Jean-Claude Trichet, by broadening the agenda to include less formal interaction, and by including dialogue with the social partners.
Margarita Starkevičiūtė (ALDE, LT), Alain Lipietz (Greens/EFA, FR) and László Becsey (EPP-ED, HU) were among a number of MEPs who criticised the Commission's decision not to recommend Lithuania for membership of the euro area, despite the country missing the inflation criterion by a very small margin. Mr Juncker said that while he did not always agree with the Commission and the ECB, on this occasion he did: the Commission must respect both the formalities of the Treaty and their substance: "The small inflation difference for Lithuania is just a snapshot. There will be a different picture over the cycle and the Commission and the Bank also have to look at the sustainability of the situation." He said he had personally urged the government of Lithuania to reconsider their decision to seek early euro zone membership when it became clear a negative opinion was likely, but they had gone ahead. "It would be wrong to rank the Maastricht criteria, saying one is more or less important than others," he added.
Many MEPs, including Piia-Noora Kauppi (EPP-ED, FI), Ieke van den Burg (PES, NL), Udo Bullman (PES, DE) and committee chair Pervenche Berès (PES, FR), raised objections to the procedure used for appointing members of the Executive Board of the European Central Bank, notably that it did not lead to diversity among the candidates and that seats on the board appeared to be reserved for certain Member States. Mr Juncker said that when the recent proposal of Jürgen Stark to replace Otmar Issing was approved, he had insisted on noting in the minutes that this did not set a precedent that a national of a particular Member State should be replaced by someone from the same Member State. Noting that "original sin is the reason for all other sin" he criticised the European Council for deciding in advance in 1998 that the second ECB President would be from France. "There was nothing in the treaty to say that should be the case. I supported the appointment of Trichet, but [this 1998 commitment] led to the impression that there is a sort of right in terms of appointments. No Member State has the right to impose a candidate." While willing to consider how to improve the system, Mr Juncker said he thought the idea of an expert panel choosing three candidates to take part in hearings in Parliament was not a practical solution.
Mr Juncker was taking part in a hearing on the European Central Bank's annual report for 2005, as part of the preparation for an own initiative report on the subject, which will be drawn up by Ms Berès and debated at a subsequent meeting of the committee. MEPs also heard from the Governor of Central Bank of Hungary, Zsigmond Jarai, and Jean Pisani-Ferry of the Bruegel think tank.
2006-05-30 Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs Chair Pervenche Berès PES FR
Hearing on the ECB Annual Report 2005
20060529IPR08508
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
