Become a "virtual" MEP in online game
Information
2006-11-06 - 11:20
Become an online MEP
Ever wanted to become an MEP? Well now's your chance with an online game that allows you to take part in virtual debates, votes and even draft your own resolutions. You can also test your EU know-how. Points are awarded for successfully predicting the outcome of a vote, by answering questions correctly or by getting other players to support your resolution. This is a group game; you can join one of the existing political groups in the Parliament or create your own. Log in and join the contest!
To set up your own group you need 19 players - just as with political groups in the European Parliament. Unlike in the real Parliament the most numerous group is the Liberal ALDE group. Other important fictional groups are called "CP", "Development and Freedom" and "eYouth". Party factions may form coalitions to outwit their opponents. The winners are the ones with the highest points by 30 March next year.
Parliamentary points in cyberspace
Points are awarded as follows;
Forecasting the outcome of a vote - contestants forecast the outcomes of selected European Parliament votes. For their forecasts the players get positive and negative points depending on accuracy.
Internal votes - players can collect points for participation.
Resolutions - contestants create drafts of legal acts, which are then voted upon by all of the participants.
EU current affairs questions - points are awarded for correct answers.
"Raise awareness"
The game was the brainchild of the Polish "Robert Schuman Foundation" who were concerned at the low turnout at the European Parliamentary election of 2004. Michał Kwietniewski - the man behind the project, said the aim was "to raise to rise the awareness and familiarize young citizens" with the EU's directly elected Parliament. The initial success of the Polish version led to the launch of the international version.
The questions on the EU were set by Polish MEP Jan Kułakowski, a member of the Liberal ALDE group. A skilled negotiator himself, he describes the game as "a chance to get into the roles previously unknown to young people and give them the opportunity to create a reality instead of just consuming it ".
Want to enter?
Log on at the website below and just follow the instructions. The number of the game’s contestants is limitless and you can play in English, French or Polish. Good luck!
20061025STO12150 Be an MEP
EN
1
PHOTO
20061026PHT12276.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.bemep.eu/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
