New EU wide strategies to tackle natural disasters
Regional policy
2006-05-18 - 14:55
MEPs develop measures to tackle disasters
The EU would be better able to tackle natural disasters such as floods, drought and fires through improved coordination at European level, according to a series of reports adopted by MEPs on Thursday. They suggest a range of measures including the setting up of a European Civil Protection Force, an agriculture disaster fund, funds to relieve the suffering of disaster victims, restrictions on monoculture and increased reforestation. MEPs also want tougher fines for fire starters.
Regional aspects
Parliament says the Commission should submit a proposal on a European strategy to combat natural disasters. It is calling for the setting up of a "European Civil Protection Force" and a European Monitoring Centre for drought and desertification. Parliament wants compensation to be made available to natural disaster victims and their families - and also to farmers whose crops are destroyed.
In a report adopted by 498 votes in favour 35 against 20 abstentions by the committee Chairman, Gerardo Galeote Quecedo (EPP-ED, ES) on natural disasters, MEPs point out that fires once again destroyed thousands of hectares of forest in 2005 and have cost the lives of more than 30 civilians and firemen, and the phenomenon – which has become an annual scourge for the regions and countries affected – is getting worse.
In response, the House says that that Commission should draw up a European strategy to combat natural disasters. It should include a compulsory approach for comprehensive risk prevention, and devise a technical protocol for joint action by the Union.
MEPs say a survey should be done of the locations which are most vulnerable to fires and to prolonged droughts - and also of the resources available at those locations. The House calls for the creation of a "European Civil Protection Force". Specifically on forest fires, MEPs consider that within the 2007-2013 financial framework, a Community forest-fire protection programme must be designed to promote adequately funded forest-fire awareness-raising, prevention and risk-management initiatives dovetailing with agricultural- and structural-policy measures.
Call for directives on fire prevention and management of drought and desertification
Parliament says the Commission should propose a directive on prevention and management of fires in the EU to best use available Community and national resources for the problem. It says a similar proposal on the prevention and risk management of drought and desertification is equally necessary. MEPs also call for a European Drought and Desertification Monitoring Centre to be set up.
Compensation
MEPs urge the Commission to make available the resources needed to relieve suffering and satisfy the material needs of all the victims of natural disasters and their direct families, by means of the European Solidarity Fund and other Community instruments. They also call for an agriculture disaster fund to compensate any loss of income stemming from crops losses of farmers affected by natural disasters.
Improved Community action needed against natural disasters - Agricultural aspects
A report on the agricultural aspects of natural disasters drafted by Luis Manuel Capoulas Santos (PES, PT) also passed by a large margin today (397 votes in favour 70 against and 26 abstentions).
The report suggests " eligibility criteria that are better adapted to the circumstances of natural disasters, including drought and frost" for the EU Solidarity Fund, as well as the introduction of a flexibility clause that would allow unspent CAP money to be made available for disaster relief. MEPs also affirm that "serious market crises constitute unforeseen and exceptional events which expose farms to risks that may be as great as those caused by natural disasters" and that compensation for these should also be envisaged. In addition, the report "believes that the drawing up of risk maps and management plans should not be restricted to flooding […] but should cover drought and forest fires" as well. Parliament maintained its support for measures aimed at reducing the combustibility of forests and reiterated its call for the establishment of a European forestry strategy that would contain viable management measures and preventive actions for natural catastrophes.
Learning to cope with natural disasters - Environmental aspects
The natural disasters of 2005 made a deep impression on MEPs, who have responded with various proposals and appeals for more preventive measures. When MEPs resumed work in September 2005 following the summer recess, they commemorated the victims of fires and floods in Europe and then - on 8 September - adopted a resolution which led to three own-initiative reports, on the agricultural, environmental and territorial aspects of natural disasters.
Parliament prepared for these reports by sending fact-finding delegations to Germany, Austria, Spain, Portugal, France and Italy. In addition, a public hearing was held on 20 March. Also in March MEPs adopted a report by Dimitrios Papadimoulis (GUE/NGL, EL) on civil protection and in May they will adopt a report by Rolf Berend (EPP-ED, DE) on the new Solidarity Fund.
This report on the environmental aspects adopted with 450 votes in favour 38 against and 13 abstentions highlights the role of climate change in aggravating natural disasters but refuses to accept that nothing can be done. Instead it suggests ways of managing the countryside better, in particular forests, as well as technical prevention measures.
MEPs believe there is often not enough coordination at European level of the measures taken in response to disasters. They want to see more sustainable water management as well as awareness campaigns which would be conducted and financed by the European Social Fund or by specific programmes such as Forest Focus.
They also call on the Commission to co-finance the building of infrastructure and the acquisition of technological equipment for fighting forest fires. Examples would be satellites and other leading technologies for prevention, detection and help to extinguish fires. To combat floods and desertification, monocultures should be restricted and reforestation encouraged. The areas of the Natura 2000 network affected by fires or floods should also be restored using Community funds.
As many fires are not caused by natural disasters but by vandalism, MEPs want to see tougher penalties imposed for such crimes.
20060512IPR08117 Press release on the new EU Solidarity Fund designed to deal with natural disasters EU Solidarity Fund
EN
1
PHOTO
20060517PHT08354.jpg
EN
3
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/comm/regional_policy/funds/solidar/solid_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060512IPR08118 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
