Human Rights: Nepal, Sri Lanka and Taiwan
Human rights
2006-05-18 - 16:40
As usual, the Strasbourg plenary session ended with three debates on human rights issues around the world. MEPs called for support for stabilisation in Nepal, condemned the latest attacks in Sri Lanka and asked that Taiwan be able to participate in the work of the World Health Organisation.
Nepal: encouraging a return to stability and democracy
On Nepal, Parliament strongly welcomes the return to democratic rule, which was achieved thanks to the engagement of millions of citizens in a people's movement. It conveys its deepest sympathy to the families of all who have lost their lives or have been seriously injured during the protests.
MEPs welcome recent developments in Nepal encouraging a return to political stability, including the restoration of Parliament, the establishment of an interim government on 2 May, the initiative to set up a Constituent Assembly to draft a new Constitution, the announcement of a unilateral three month's ceasefire and the reaffirmed commitment from the 7-party Coalition and the Maoists to the 12-point peace agreement of November 2005.
Parliament says the restoration of the sovereignty of the parliament's democratic authorities is only a first step towards real peace and a lasting democracy, and that substantial progress needs to be made in a number of areas in order to consolidate the situation, including: democratic control of the Royal Nepalese Army and local militia to end the human rights abuses; addressing the root causes of the conflict and ensuring that there is greater economic prosperity and a better redistribution of wealth for all throughout the country; respect for minority rights; the necessary devolution of power to the regional and local levels; a more representative electoral system.
MEPs encourage the Maoists to permanently renounce violence and to return to the political arena. They call for parliamentary elections to be held at an early stage, and suggests an EU election observation mission. In the meantime, they call for the sending of an ad hoc European Parliament delegation to assess the situation and to conduct talks with all relevant forces.
MEPs are deeply concerned about alleged extrajudicial killings, widespread torture, impunity and other human rights violations committed by both sides. They call on the Nepalese government and other parties to the conflict to do all in their capacity to ensure full and transparent investigations of human rights violations, including unresolved cases of forced disappearances, and insists that adequate sentencing of those convicted will be essential for the re-establishment of social peace. They stress that all restrictions on media freedom should be lifted immediately, and that all political prisoners, including journalists and human rights activists, should be released. Parliament welcomes the fact that the government has already revoked a number of controversial royal ordinances curbing press freedom and controlling non-governmental organisations.
MEPs reiterate support for the UN Office of Human Rights in Nepal which must continue to carefully monitor the human rights situation. They support Nepal's new government's decision to freeze the previous administration's purchase of military planes and weapons and the recruitment of soldiers, and call on the Council and the Member States to continue the freeze on all military aid. They further call on the international community to establish a Contact Group, to be made up of Nepal's key partners and international organisations (the EU, the US, India and the UN), to provide coordinated international action with regard to Nepal. They propose that the European Parliament appoint a special rapporteur to monitor the situation.
Parliament calls on the Council, the Commission and the Member States to support the peace process by: assisting all armed groups to demobilise and disarm; using development and humanitarian assistance to consolidate peace and economic development; sending human rights observers; encouraging international financial institutions to give priority to macroeconomic stability and transparency, rather than forcing ambitious economic reform proposals on a fragile democracy.
MEPs urge the Council and Commission to work closely with the UN and other members of the international community to support the Nepalese Government on the road to democracy. They call on them to offer further technical, logistical and financial assistance to Nepal, including practical planning for a ceasefire monitoring mission in cooperation with other donors, should this be requested by Nepal.
They ask the Council to consider appointing a Special Representative for Nepal, with the aim of encouraging greater political engagement in Nepal on the part of the EU and to sharpen its political analysis and level of understanding during the delicate transition. They repeat their call for a follow-up to the 2002 London International Conference, to be organised by the Contact Group of key partners, which should set out the principles and values needed to underpin a peace process in Nepal.
Parliament welcomes the plan of Nepali civil society activists to start the process by organising their own conference in Kathmandu this coming year. Finally it calls on the Nepalese Government to protect Tibetan refugees in transit to India, and end the suspension of exit permits without delay.
Sri Lanka: Parliament condemns latest attacks
In its resolution on Sri Lanka, Parliament strongly welcomes the move by the Government of Sri Lanka and the LTTE to return to the negotiating table in February, and condemns, therefore, the LTTE's unilateral refusal to participate in the second round of negotiations in Geneva that were scheduled for April 2006. It urgently calls on the LTTE to resume peace negotiations with the Government of Sri Lanka without delay, to be prepared to decommission its weapons and to set the stage for a final political settlement of the conflict. It severely condemns the renewed campaign of attacks by the LTTE, the high level of human rights violations committed by both sides and the constant breaches of the ceasefire agreement.
MEPs deplore the gross violations of the Ceasefire Agreement by the LTTE through actions at sea, in particular the attack of 11 May on the Sri Lankan naval force, which resulted in many casualties and put SLMM monitors in grave danger. They call on the parties to the Ceasefire Agreement to ensure the security of the SLMM which is an unarmed body invited by both the Government and the LTTE to monitor the Ceasefire Agreement, in order to allow the mission to fulfil its mandate, and commend the contributing countries, Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden, for their invaluable work. They call on both the LTTE and the Government of Sri Lanka to refrain from further actions liable to jeopardise the peace process, and in particular attacks on civilians.
Parliament condemns the appalling abuse of children through the recruitment of child soldiers, which is a war crime, and calls on all rebel groups and notably the LTTE to stop this practice, to release those it holds and to make a declaration of principle not to recruit any children in the future. It urges the Government of Sri Lanka to put into place legal measures to prevent and criminalise the practice. MEPs recognise that the LTTE does not represent all the Tamil peoples of Sri Lanka and calls on the LTTE to allow for political pluralism and alternate democratic voices in the northern and eastern parts of Sri Lanka which would secure the interests of all peoples and communities. It strongly condemns the particular repression against Tamil language press and Tamil organisations, and calls for a thorough investigation into the murders of Mayilvaganam Nimalarajan and Dharmeratnam Sivaram, as well as the two employees of the newspaper 'Uthayan'.
Parliament says Sri Lanka's recent election as a member of the UN Human Rights Council places an obligation on the government to manifest its commitment to uphold the highest standards in the promotion and protection of human rights. It welcomes the announcement of new memebrs of the Sri Lanka Human Rights Commission and stresses the need for an effective independent investigation into all alleged human rights violations by security forces or armed groups, bringing the perpetrators to justice in accordance with international fair trial standards, and insists that all parties should subscribe to comprehensive human rights agreements as a key element of future peace negotiations.
MEPs urge both sides, as an immediate gesture of goodwill, to cease the use of anti-personnel landmines and to assist in their removal. To this end, the Government of Sri Lanka should set an example by signing the Ottawa Convention and the LTTE should sign the Geneva Call 'Deed of Commitment'.
Parliament is worried that a deal to share international aid has still not been implemented, and believes that aid sent to Sri Lanka by the EU, and other international donors, in response to the tsunami must benefit the victims of that disaster without regard for their ethnic or religious denomination. It is concerned about the distribution and use of tsunami funds, which have not had the expected impact on the everyday lives of the victims or on Sri Lanka's recovery. MEPs note that the political gridlock on the 'Post-Tsunami Operations Management Structure' has already delayed the release of a further € 50 million in aid, hindering reconstruction work in the North and East of Sri Lanka.
Parliament deplores the fact that the demands of heavy defence costs have for many years diverted resources away from urgently needed investments in economic and social infrastructure in Sri Lanka. Finally, it calls on the EU Member States to do everything in their capacity in order to stop all illegal attempts by the LTTE to uphold a system of forced taxation among sections of the Tamil community living in the European Union.
Taiwan should be able to participate in the WHO
In a resolution adopted with 66 votes in favour, 21 against and one abstention, Parliament insists on better representation of Taiwan in international organisations and takes the view that it is unfair to continue to exclude more than twenty million people from the world community. It calls on the Director General of the World Health Organisation (WHO) to immediately include the Taiwan Centre for Disease Control as a participant in the WHO Global Outbreak and Alert Response Network, and to ensure the rapid exchange of relevant information on a regional and global basis.
MEPs call on the Director General and all WHO Member States to ensure that Taiwan has direct access to and can attend all technical meetings of the WHO which are relevant to the maintenance and improvement of public health in Taiwan and the rest of the world and, in addition, to allow Taiwan to meaningfully participate in the technical activities and events of the relevant Regional Office of the WHO.
Parliament also calls on the People's Republic of China to consider the possibility of observer status for Taiwan within the World Health Organisation or at least in the World Health Assembly as its most important decision-making body, in order to protect the health of the people of Taiwan, of international representatives and foreign employees on the island, and of the entire population of the globe. It reiterates its call on the Commission and the Member States to support Taiwan's application for observer status in the WHO.
20060512IPR08119
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
