Seminar sends a clear signal against Homophobia
Fundamental rights
2006-05-18 - 13:03
Participants in a European Parliament seminar to mark International Day against Homophobia (IDAHO) on Wednesday appealed for urgent action at all levels to fight homophobia and discrimination experienced by lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people.
EP President Josep Borrell opened the seminar, condemning all forms of discrimination against people on the basis of their sexual orientation. He said that the European Parliament had always fought against discrimination of all kinds and that homophobia is a very current issue, where vigilance and action are of extreme importance.
"Homophobia must stop in Europe," said Thomas Hammarberg, Council of Europe (CoE) Commissioner for Human Rights. He said the CoE was looking into legislation to ensure all basis for homophobic acts had been removed and that this was implemented in practice. Louis-George Tin, a founder of the IDAHO, called for the universal abolition of homophobic laws. He added that France and Belgium now officially recognise IDAHO.
MEPs want firm action against homophobia
Michael Cashman (PES, UK) said that the seminar was organised on the basis of Parliament's resolution on homophobia of 18 January, with one of its aims being international recognition of IDAHO. He stressed that Member States have to respect their human rights commitments, and if they do not the Commission and Council should take action. Jean Marie Cavada (ALDE, FR), Chair of the Civil Liberties Committee, appealed for the memory of the homosexual victims of World War II to be honoured and the truth clearly stated in school textbooks. Like many participants, he drew attention to recent events in Poland and stressed that EU has to speak out forcefully as " laws not only have to be adopted but also respected." Patrick Gaubert (EPP-ED, FR) spoke out against "the deafening silence and total indifference" regarding Poland, calling for Parliament to say "no" to homophobic developments there. Thijs Berman (PES, NL) said Parliament should act to make it possible for homosexual couples to adopt children. Sophia In't Veld (ALDE, NL) said homophobia was not so much about legislation as about attitude. She said religious leaders have an important role to play and called on the Vatican to stop "inciting fear and hatred." Alexander Stubb (EPP-ED, FI) said Parliament always needs to give a clear signal when it comes to discrimination - issues in many Member States needed to be raised, he said, mentioning Latvia and Poland: "Action can be taken but for that we need better legislation."
At the end of the seminar the participants adopted an appeal on the fight against discrimination based on sexual orientation and for the official establishment of IDAHO. The text urges the UN to act firmly, starting by adopting a resolution on sexual orientation and human rights. The UN should also together with the Members States, the EU and all other regional organisations support and promote IDAHO. The EU is asked to complete its anti-discrimination legal framework and Member States to adopt appropriate legislation and take further action.
2006-05-15 Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs In the chair Michael Cashman PES UK
Seminar to mark International Day Against Homophobia
20060515IPR08167
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
