“Today’s Europe needs new goals” - European Parliament President Borrell
Future of Europe/European integration
2006-05-31 - 19:40
Public debate in Frankfurt: the panel met over 250 members of the public
During a public debate in Frankfurt/Oder, the President of the European Parliament, Josep Borrell, made an impassioned appeal for a stronger contribution to the realisation of a “new European dream”. President Borrell was taking part in a discussion on “Europe’s Aims – Europe’s Borders” at the European University Viadrina with over 250 members of the public plus the President of the University, Gesine Schwan, Polish MEP, Janusz Lewandowski and the German Minister for Europe, Günter Gloser.
Josep Borrell made it clear that in his view Europe is undergoing a crisis. “Not in terms of the way it functions, but in relation to the way people view Europe, and this crisis has been building in the six years since the Treaty of Nice was established.” In his opinion the French and Dutch “no” votes in the referendum on the Constitution did not cause the current crisis, instead the “no” vote came as a result of the smouldering crisis brought about by the Treaty of Nice. According to Borrell, “the public doesn’t see [Europe as] a strong political project.”
His view is that today, after the achievement of the original dream of peace between the European nations, new goals are needed, together with the ambition to realise them. “Europe is something we aspire to. The hope of peace, economic progress and social justice. It is an ambitious project,” he conceded, but went on to say that this Europe could be a role model for the whole world. “Only Europe can shape the world in a fair and sustainable manner.” Europe must be aware of this responsibility because it was clear that “if we do not do it, then nobody will.”
The President of the Viadrina European University, Gesine Schwan, stated that in particular the people expected answers from the EU to the great challenges posed by a globalised world. One answer would be an effective joint economic policy that would offer assistance to the losers in the globalisation process. Gesine Schwan also called on the public to participate: “Europe is only as good as it’s citizens. It is everyone’s responsibility to do something for Europe,” she said.
Nevertheless, several participants in the debate expressed the view that Europe seems to many people to be very distant from them. “There is a large gap between European policy-makers and those who must bear the brunt of their policies,” observed one participant.
The MEP, Janusz Lewandowski, felt that in his own experience there was much to be positive about: “Europe is better than it is perceived to be.” Examples of this were, in his view, the successful compromise over the Services Directive, as well as on the financial perspectives. In spite of this “Europe is suffering a credibility crisis,” said Lewandowski “and to overcome this there are no easy solutions.” Lewandowski deeply regretted the fact that for many countries, and people, Europe seems to be a kind of zero-sum game. “But this is not the truth – with Europe everyone can be a winner.”
Other participants felt that certain matters of concern had been neglected by the EU, for example the consistent implementation of a policy for peace. “I haven’t noticed the doves of peace flying over the EU lately,” said one, and a student from the university criticised the fact that there had been too little public information and discussion of the EU’s mission to the Congo.
Günter Gloser, Germany’s Minister for Europe, alluded to how important Europe was and still is as a peaceful and democratic role model for Central and Eastern European states. “The prospects of accession were both right and important,” said Gloser, especially for Bulgaria and Romania. The promise of entry to the European Union had had a stabilising effect. But which, and how many, countries could the EU accommodate? Gloser mentioned the Ukraine and Belarus as examples: “The question is, what can the EU offer to these countries in order to help them on the way to democracy and constitutional legality?”
One student felt that even within the EU there was “too little transparency,” and another called for “more power and influence for the European Parliament.”
President Borrell seized on these desires and those for a “more social Europe” to canvass passionately for more political commitment on Europe: “Just because we want something, it does not mean that it will simply fall from the sky. Work on it, discuss it and make suggestions, so that the politicians can carry it through.”
20060529STO08524
EN
1
PHOTO
20060529PHT08526.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
