Solidarity and Liberty – a Path Towards a Unified Europe
Information
2006-06-14 - 17:39
Poland, August 14, 1980: the Gdansk shipyard strike breaks out. The Solidarity movement is born and a process is set in motion, which, according to many, changed the face of Europe by putting an end to the Yalta system. Has Europe learned its lesson? That remains to be seen. Under the banner “The Path towards Unified Europe”, a series of events organised in Brussels may help answer this question.
The collapse of the totalitarian regime in Poland was preceded by a long series of events: the student uprising in 1968, the protests of angry workers in 1956, 1970, and 1976, which were brutally quashed by authorities. Then came the birth in 1980 of Solidarność, the first civil movement and open labour union to be legalized in Eastern Europe, which was quickly crushed under martial law in December 1981. After operating underground for seven years, it finally resurfaced and spearheaded the drive to democracy in Poland by setting up the first non-communist government in this part of Europe.
Solidarity, Liberty, Europe
The memory of the tragic events in Hungary in 1956 and in Czechoslovakia in 1968 – but also solidarity and support coming from the other side of the iron curtain – gave the Poles a unique sense of responsibility: this revolution was not only theirs. Solidarity, liberty, peace, human rights were values shared by the whole of Europe. Such was the intended meaning of the “Message to the Workers of Eastern Europe” issued at the First Conference of Solidarność. An unacceptable “counter-revolutionary” interference for the communist regimes in other countries in the Soviet Bloc. But the seed was planted. In the favourable setting of the political thaw which took place with the Perestroïka in Russia, it bore fruit. The unification of Germany and the collapse of the Berlin Wall, the Velvet Revolution in Czechoslovakia, the independence of the Baltic countries, and, finally, the accession of the Central European countries to the European Union, all bear testimony to this incredible acceleration of history.
Janusz Lewandowski, Polish Christian Democrat :MP and President of the Parliamentary Budget Committee, outlined the events taking place in Brussels:
"I am part of the Solidarność generation. I was fortunate enough to witness and participate in the liberating awakening of the Poles in August 1980 and in the civil movement uniting 10 million members. That very movement exerted decisive pressure on the liberation of our part of Europe from the yoke of totalitarianism. Today, we are organising a series of events in Brussels to commemorate those incredible events of 25 years ago. But the aim is not merely to remember. The Solidarność movement was a peaceful one. It bears a message that remains pertinent to the world today: it is possible to attain far-sighted objectives of historic proportions by denouncing violence and terror! Our slogan of bygone days 'there is no liberty without solidarity' takes on a particular meaning at a time when some doubt the validity of European cooperation and unity.”
A Celebration in Brussels
A committee comprised of MEPs Janusz Onyszkiewicz (ADLE), Dariusz Rosati (PSE), Wojciech Roszkowski (UEN), Jacek Saryusz-Wolski (PPE-DE) and Janusz Lewandowski (PPE-DE) has made possible the realisation of numerous events to commemorate the 25 th anniversary of Solidarność. A series of exhibitions, a rock concert at the Rond Point Schuman in Brussels, a Polish Film Festival and a conference with Lech Walesa, Leo Tindemans, Bronislaw Geremek, and Vytautas Landsbergis at the Open University of Brussels are just a few of the events on the programme. A special web site has been set up for those seeking further information. The MEPs are also getting ready to adopt a joint resolution that would mark August 31 as Liberty and Solidarity day.
20050913STO00298 The Path Towards Unified Europe -- Official Site and Programme of Activities
EN
1
PHOTO
20050913PHT00282.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.solidarity.be/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
