Air passenger data - what can be achieved by September deadline?
Justice and home affairs
2006-06-13 - 14:50
Commission Vice-President Franco Frattini told MEPs on Monday that the best solution on air passenger data transfer to the United States was to conclude a new agreement with the same content as the old one, but using a different legal basis under the "third pillar". He was speaking to the Civil Liberties Committee on the Court of Justice's decision to annul the existing agreement with effect from 30 September. The main point debated by MEPs was whether the content should also change.
Mr Frattini said that having " no new agreement before 30 September would have negative repercussions ". The Court had not taken a view on the content, he continued, recalling that the current agreement expires in 2007 in any case, after which negotiations on the content could take place. He warned that a failure to find an EU level solution, resulting in national bilateral agreements with the United States after 30 September, would lead to " legal uncertainty" .
Renegotiation of the content?
Civil Liberties chair Jean-Marie Cavada (ALDE, FR) said that that a new decision would directly affect EU citizens and "must be subjected to thorough interinstitutional dialogue". Some MEPs rejected the idea of keeping the same content: Kathalijne Buitenweg (Greens/EFA, NL) said a condition should be the 'push'-system, which enables each airline to transfer only legitimate data and only in respect of flights to US destinations. Alexander Alvaro (ALDE, DE) called for a proper consultation procedure and said it is " better to revise once and do it well. " Martine Roure (PES, FR) asked why similar agreements to the ones reached with Canada and Australia could not work with the United States. She also called for " a proper mechanism of control ". (Ms Roure's report on data protection in the field of police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters, the so-called "third pillar", will be debated in plenary on 13 June.) Sarah Ludford (ALDE, UK) stressed that the Council " needs to pass third pillar data protection measures. " Stefano Zappalà (EPP-ED, IT) and Hubert Pirker (EPP-ED, AT), on the other hand, agreed with the Commissioner's proposal, saying the problem needs a solution before 30 September.
This issue is also on the agenda of Parliament's political group leaders for their meeting of 14 June.
The European Court of Justice annulled the decisions of the Commission and the Council to transfer air passenger information to the American authorities, considering the legal basis of these decisions inappropriate. This followed from the European Parliament's decision in September 2004 to take the case to the Court.
2006-06-12
Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs Chair : Jean-Marie Cavada (ALDE, FR)
20060612IPR08878
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
