Vote on transfer of personal data in police and judicial cooperation postponed
Justice and home affairs
2006-06-14 - 16:03
The European Parliament decided to postpone a report endorsing a proposal on the protection of citizens' personal data processed in the framework of police and judicial co-operation in criminal matters. Although MEPs believe the proposal will bring more uniformity and consistency to the EU´s data protection principles, they decided to wait until the Council meets again in July, hoping the Finnish presidency will be more willing to take into account Parliament's demands.
Even if the final vote was postponed, MEPs voted through all the 60 amendments tabled, approving them to make clear their support to the position of rapporteur and LIBE members. In broad terms, MEPs endorse the Commission proposal to extend data protection rules to the transfer of information in police and judicial cooperation, an action field which depends directly on Member States and which falls out of the scope of existing community laws to protect data so far. In broad terms, Parliament amendments limit the use and access to personal data to the very necessary cases and when there is a real threat to public security.
The Commission proposal responds to an old claim from the Parliament, who since the creation of the III pillar has been calling for standards on data protection in the context of judicial and police cooperation: The issue is particularly relevant now that the European Court of Justice decided to annul existing agreements between the EU and US government on the transfer of personal data of air passengers flying into the United States. It is a priority of the MEPs to push for a quick adoption of this draft decision by the Council, which would affect future agreements with the USA.
Strict criteria to collect and access data
Data collection and access to national governments or competent authorities must be limited " to specific purposes ", only " if strictly necessary ", and carried out with the " principles of proportionality and necessity " and for the purpose of " preventing a threat to public security or to a person ", say MEPs. This personal data made available to a given Member State might be further transferred to another only with the consent of the authority which made available the information in the first place. MEPs also voted to delete the paragraph allowing access to data to different authorities other than the " competent authorities " established by each Member State.
Sensitive data such us biometrics or DNA information will follow additional specific safeguards to ensure they are accurate and that they can be challenged by the subject of such data. MEPs also demand a different treatment for personal data depending on the status of the person concerned: information related to " non-suspects " will be treated " only for the specific purpose they were collected, for a limited period of time and with adequate limitations on access to them and on their transmission ".
Transfers to third countries
One of the main concerns for MEPs is the potential access to personal data that authorities from third countries could ask in the name of fight against terror and organised crime. In this sense, MEPS adopted an amendment forbidding such transfer to competent authorities outside the EU except if the transfer " is provided by a law clearly obliging or authorising it " and if the Member States can ensure that the level of protection afforded by the third country is adequate. This assessment would be based on concrete criteria listed in the text. Only exceptionally, this adequacy decision can be omitted if it is to prevent an imminent serious danger threatening public security.
Finally, Parliament adopted other amendments to give the citizen the right to deny the accuracy of some personal information and mark it on the database, as well as to impose criminal sanctions to authorities in case of intentional offence or gross negligence.
20060614IPR09001 Protection of personal data
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5279032
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
