The Dalai Lama visits the European Parliament
External relations
2006-05-31 - 15:09
The 14th Dalai Lama met MEPs on Wednesday, notably discussing relations between Tibet and China. He recommended "patience and effort" on the part of MEPs when dealing with China, and said that slow and gradual change in the country would be the best way to contribute to a peaceful negotiated solution.
The Dalai Lama was taking part in a meeting of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, explaining Tibet's ambitions to MEPs. He insisted that "we are not seeking separation" from the People's Republic of China, only an autonomous status under its constitution. He likened the ideal arrangement to that Quebec and Scotland within Canada and the UK, and insisted that the Tibetan issue was "one of a preservation of an ancient culture and an anchoring of the Buddhist tradition."
In response to a question by Dirk Sterckx (ALDE, BE), Chairman of the Delegation for relations with China, on the ongoing bilateral discussions between Tibet and China, the Dalai Lama said "there has been some improvement in the debates." Kelsang Gyaltsen -t he Dalai Lama's envoy for European Affairs - emphasised that four main points of contention remain prominent: the refusal by the China to recognise that changes within Tibet are necessary; the Chinese insistence on a 'common understanding' of the history of relations between Tibet and China; the belief that the exiled Tibetan leadership would expel non-Tibetans from its territory, were it granted autonomy; and the fear that any concessions would be a stepping-stone to full independence.
Answering Geoffrey Van Orden (EPP-ED, UK) on the impact of Chinese economic growth on Tibet, the Dalai Lama said that they were seeing some benefit, but that "the rich-poor gap is increasing" and "in the countryside, some areas are still very backward: without roads, electricity or education. " Simon Coveney (EPP-ED, IE) asked about the political situation in Tibet. The Dalai Lama said, "Inside Tibet, there is no sign of improvement, repression has intensified and religious freedoms are more restricted."
He quoted an ancient Tibetan saying, "one medicine for a hundred ills" and suggested that this medicine for Asia would be a democratic China. He pointed to the fact that currently, China is led by "a communist party without a communist ideology." He suggested that "in order to become a genuine superpower, China needs respect from the rest of the world, needs moral authority," and that the peaceful resolution of the Tibet issue could help provide this.
Vytautas Landsbergis (EPP-ED, LT) asked the Dalai Lama to share his vision of Europe with Members. He replied that he was "one of the admirers of the EU" and thought of it "as a model" in the world. Of the European Parliament, he said "whenever I come here, I have a feeling of reunion."
2006-05-31 Committee on Foreign Affairs Chair: Elmar BROK EPP-ED DE 20060529IPR08509 The EP's Committee on Foreign Affairs:
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/committees/presentation.do;jsessionid=A097B1E6D8DE2546DB60882A3EF20930.node1?committee=1232&language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
