Air passenger data: MEPs look to the future
Justice and home affairs
2006-06-07 - 14:13
MEPs in the Civil Liberties Committee put forward a three point plan on Thursday to ensure that the EU is able quickly to reach a new agreement with the United States on the transfer of personal data by airlines flying to America which respects proper standards of data protection, and gives the Parliament a real say on the content. The meeting came two days after the Court of Justice’s decision to annul the EU’s current agreement with the United States.
Many MEPs expressed their satisfaction that it was Parliament which took the case to court in June 2004, on the basis that the agreement on transfer of passenger name records violated EU data protection laws. The Court annulled the agreement with effect from 30 September. MEPs agreed a three point plan for Parliament's future strategy, which was set out in a formal letter from the Civil Liberties chair Jean-Marie Cavada (ALDE, FR) to EP President Josep Borrell, Commissioner Franco Frattini and Austrian Interior Minister Liese Proko.
Institutional debate
First, MEPs in the committee say it is essential to begin a debate with the Council and Commission on the different legal bases on which a new agreement could be founded. Parliament will present an oral question to both institutions at the July plenary.
The main point at issue during the committee's discussion was whether to focus only on the appropriate legal basis or whether it was possible to modify the content of the agreement to ensure better data protection. " We need to avoid a failure to get an agreement before 30 September, " said Hubert Pirker (EPP-ED, AT). " We should not have too many hearings, what we need to do is to find a proper legal basis quickly ". Johannes Voggenhuber (Greens/EFA, AT) said Mr Pirker's comment revealed there was already "real pressure from the US government. We don't have to limit ourselves to a definition of the legal basis but also need to discuss the content". Sophie In't Veld (ALDE, NL) agreed, saying " We need to renegotiate a better deal with the United States. Why can't they behave like the Canadians, with whom we have a good agreement?".
National Parliaments
Second, MEPs say it is vital to involve national parliaments in the debate on data protection standards for the transfer of PNRs, since " the Court just confirmed the national competence over public security issues ", as Mr Cavada put it in his letter . European governments should, say MEPs, avoid leaving national parliaments out of the loop as they did when they signed the first agreement.
New rules for the third pillar
Third, the EU institutions need to agree on the rules on data protection within the public security domain. Currently, there is a Community directive on data protection, but it does not cover measures adopted through the so-called third pillar (including public security, police and judicial cooperation). MEPs in the committee therefore ask the Council to speed up the adoption of a draft decision on data protection in third pillar areas, which has been proposed by the Commission. Parliament is already working on a consultation procedure report on the proposals, drafted by Martine Roure (PES, FR).
2006-05-29 Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs Chair Jean-Marie Cavada ALDE FR 20060531IPR08602
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
