Is the EU prepared for a bird flu pandemic?
Public health
2006-06-14 - 15:10
The European Parliament is proposing a leading role for the Commission as well as the creation of a European Influenza Task Force representing all the Member States in order to be able to act rapidly and decisively to control avian influenza.
The report by Adamos ADAMOU (GUE/NGL, CY) adopted with 612 votes in favour, 26 against 7 abstentions on pandemic influenza preparedness and response planning in the EU says that one of the most important aspects of properly dealing with the problem of a possible human avian influenza pandemic is having the correct, scientifically proven, information regarding drugs, vaccines, natural resistance to the disease as well as reliable epidemiological data.
Mr Adamou said "It cannot be stressed enough that there is a strong need to strengthen the co-ordination activities between the Member States. It is empirical to ensure equal access to anti-viral drugs for all Member States irrespective of their size and economic strength. Furthermore, research and development must be promoted in order to make available the pandemic vaccine as soon as possible, and when this happens, equitable distribution of this pandemic vaccine must be ensured. What is important in order to stop a possible pandemic from arising is prevention and not only treatment. Equally important to all the above is the protection of the livelihood of small and medium-sized livestock farmers who have been literary whipped out from bird flu as well as the implementation of Community legislation relating to health and safety at work in order to ensure the adequate protection of workers, particularly those in high infection risk groups. "
MEPs stress that the Commission must play a strong coordinating role between the Member States in all activities relating to pandemic preparedness in the European Union and say that the Commission should take steps to ensure that sufficient antivirals and vaccines are available for those who are exposed to the virus in the event of an outbreak in one or more Member States. Furthermore, Parliament considers that, in the event of an influenza pandemic in the EU or in neighbouring States, the Commission should within 24 hours be able to adopt crisis measures such as quarantine and disinfection measures at airports in connection with flights from certain regions and travel restrictions.
The report therefore suggests the creation of a European Influenza Task Force, coordinated by the Commission, on which the European Parliament is represented and in which all the above-mentioned fields of expertise are brought together at European level.
MEPs emphasise that rapid and decisive action must be taken to control avian influenza and so prevent a human pandemic and must also be taken to prepare for a possible human pandemic, so that the means to control it should it occur, are available. MEPs highlight the need to strengthen surveillance systems, rapid reporting and alerting systems, data analysis and epidemiology for animal and human diseases. The report stresses the importance of education and correct information in the event of crises and that appropriate instructions should cover not only compliance with hygiene rules but also the provision of information in areas such as mobility, transport and employment and accentuated the need for sufficient funds to be made available by the Commission and the Member States in order to provide people with more pertinent, understandable and tangible information and thus raise public awareness.
The report urges the Commission to work for a more coherent international framework in the follow-up of the Beijing pledging conference that goes beyond crisis management and addresses the issues of building up a better infrastructure for animal health in developing countries, as well as advancing research in animal health products that can be used in developed as well as developing countries.
20060608IPR08825 Pandemic influenza preparedness and response planning in the European Community
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5320262
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
