The port services directive: an overview
Transport
2006-06-08 - 13:09
Attempts to open up the port services industry to competition have always been fraught and their ultimate success uncertain. Those in favour believe competition is needed to boost growth and jobs, while opponents claim liberalisation could lead to widespread job losses and a deterioration in working conditions.
In 1997, in a Green Paper on ports and maritime infrastructure, the Commission stated its wish to include ports in the trans-European transport network and draw up rules to liberalise the port services market. The Lisbon Agenda specifically provides for all areas of transport to be liberalised and the Lisbon European Council of 28 March 2001 even called on the Commission, Council and Member States to speed up liberalisation. In response, the Commission unveiled a paper in February 2001 on improving the quality of port services together with a draft directive on access to the market in port services (otherwise known as the first port services package). This first draft directive contained no rules on competition between ports, something which was only proposed when the legislation was passing through the European Parliament.
Tough negotiations followed between the institutions. After nearly three years, the Parliament and Council representatives finally agreed a deal in the Conciliation Committee. However, when this deal came up before the full Parliament on 23 November 2003 MEPs rejected it, thereby killing off that particular piece of legislation.
Following this vote, the Commission might have been expected to drop the whole issue. However, less than a year later, on 13 October 2004, the Prodi Commission, at the instigation of the then Transport Commissioner Loyola de Palacio, brought forward a new draft directive on access to the port services market.
20060124BKG04626
The Commission's new text
The new draft directive sought to make Community ports more competitive, thereby promoting maritime transport with the aim of cutting congestion and environmental pollution. The port services market is extremely complex, being governed by a great variety of national and other rules. Port services differ widely in their nature and ports themselves are organised in a multitude of ways. The Commission stressed the need for a Community legal framework to introduce competition into three types of service - handling, piloting and passenger services (for embarking and disembarking) - while respecting labour rights and safety standards. The idea was to allow competition between different providers. The Commission also said that most of the arguments put forward in the original proposal of 2001 remained valid.
For this reason the new directive was based on the original 2001 proposal, although it did take account of many of the amendments adopted in Parliament's first and second readings, in the Council's common position and in the texts agreed in conciliation.
The main new points in the Commission's latest text were as follows:
In general, "self-handling" for cargo and passenger operations, i.e. the option for a company to provide certain port services for itself where these are normally provided by a third party, can be performed by using land-based staff of the company which provides self-handling. Self-handling would require prior authorisation. For short-distance transport and "highways of the sea", self-handling could be performed by land-based staff of the company but also by the ship's crew, which would allow crews to load and unload their own ships. In other cases, only land-based staff of the company could carry out these services. The principle of self-handling- which had been one of the main reasons why the previous directive was rejected by Parliament - was thus reintroduced albeit in modified form.
Greater competition would be introduced via a system in which port service providers would have to apply for authorisation from the port authorities. By a deadline following the directive's entry into force, all service providers in a port would need authorisation in order to operate. The periods of validity of authorisations issued by the authorities would be shorter. At present the rules for granting authorisation for pilotage vary from country to country. The Commission therefore proposed stricter criteria than those already mentioned for granting authorisation to carry out pilotage services, so as to guarantee safety and public service obligations.
The rules on compensation to previous suppliers were simply outlined in the new text and the transitional measures for previous suppliers were effectively dropped (new authorised service providers were to be required to pay compensation to the previous supplier on a basis laid down in the directive).
The legislative process
Most parties involved were surprised how quickly the new draft proposal was brought forward. Unusually, the Commission drew it up without prior consultation or any assessment of the provisions it was intending to propose. Its failure to take account of Parliament's vote and the lack of dialogue with those working in the industry aroused disappointment and the directive continued to divide MEPs.
Opinion of the Internal Market Committee
Parliament's Internal Market Committee, which was required to draw up an opinion on the directive, rejected the Commission's proposal on 14 September 2005 when it adopted by 23 votes to 3 the opinion by Swedish MEP Eva-Britt Svensson (GUE/NGL), thereby taking a position similar to that of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs in its opinion drafted by Stephen Hughes (PES, UK).
Vote of the Transport Committee
When the lead committee, the Transport Committee, voted on its draft report on 21 November 2005, there was a surprising, indeed unprecedented, outcome: the Commission's initial proposal was referred to plenary.
What happened was that 13 compromise amendments by a rapporteur Georg Jarzembowski (EPP-ED, DE) were adopted but the final proposal as amended by the EPP-ED and the ALDE was finally rejected by just one vote (24 in favour, 23 against and 2 abstentions). MEPs also voted against the amendments seeking to reject the proposal as a whole, which were tabled by the PES, GUE/NGL, Greens/EFA and IND/DEM groups and British and Belgian Members of the EPP-ED group. However, the Transport Committee finally approved a draft legislative resolution by an equally close margin (26 in favour and 24 against).
Members of the committee thus amended the draft directive only to then reject the text as amended. The report tabled to plenary thus proposed no amendments and the original proposal of the Commission remained on the table.
However, the adoption of compromise amendments suggested that the rapporteur had found solutions to some of the issues raised in the committee's discussions with port industry representatives. For example, the compromise proposed to exclude self-handling from the scope of the directive. Self-handling is the main concern of dockers, who feared that allowing shipowners to use their own staff to load and unload ships will mean that professional port service providers would face competition from unskilled cheap labour. The dockers' union described this threat as "social dumping".
Debate in plenary: speeches by key players
European Commission
The aim of the directive is "to modernise ports and increase their work volumes" stressed Jacques Barrot, Commission vice-president responsible for transport. He pointed out that these needs were identified in 2001 and that the goal was to liberalise port services in line with the treaty, as confirmed by the European Council, the Lisbon Agenda and the White Paper on Transport. The ultimate aims were to complete the internal market, reduce congestion on the roads and boost the cohesion of outlying networks, while protecting safety, employment and social security. "Ninety percent of external traffic transits through ports. For the sake of efficiency we must therefore have a clear framework to encourage investment" said Mr Barrot, who nevertheless stressed that he was "aware of the reservations encountered" and was open to discussion.
Rapporteur
Rapporteur Georg Jarzembowski (EPP-ED, DE) stated that "all those who work in ports are in favour of transparency" and it would therefore, in this regard, be "inconceivable to me to reject this directive". He noted that "differing views" existed regarding market access. "Existing service providers may not want it but shipowners and transporters believe this legislation is needed: it would enable them to choose the best providers by price and would break monopolies". It would allow "freedom of establishment in ports in the same way that this exists elsewhere" and would allow "new actors to play a full part". Mr Jarzembowski also underlined the safety net which the planned transition period would provide. For dock workers "our proposals are the right ones", as "we want to remove some of the provisions on self-assistance and self-handling". The directive should thus allow "more efficiency in ports and lower costs for consumers, while guaranteeing fair access to the market". Mr Jarzembowski warned that a rejection of the directive would leave a "gap in European legislation" and spell "legal uncertainty" for maritime transport.
Committee on Employment and Social Affairs
Speaking on behalf of the Employment and Social Affairs Committee, Stephen Hughes (PES, UK) said that it was important to take decisions calmly while taking account of the dockers' frustrations. "The Commission should have thought twice before putting on the table a directive which had been rejected by Parliament." Self-handling was not viable, said Mr Hughes, as the industry needed trained, skilled personnel. "The Commission will therefore have to review the directive thoroughly" after the expected rejection of the text.
Political groups
In the words of Marianne Thyssen (EPP-ED, BE), "the European Parliament rejected the first port package and now the Commission is sending us another package with a fresh coat of varnish. But underneath it's the same thing. We had hoped for more respect". Highlighting the divisions within her own group, she was of the view that "we are heading for a rejection". She therefore urged the Commission to seek out a new approach, adding "but this time do you intend to present it to members of the industry?"
Wilhelm Piecyk (PES, DE) argued "the dockers have certainly gone too far and we must condemn this violence but the directive belongs in the dockside rubbish container". Attempts to change existing arrangements would have grave consequences for workers. The argument that ports were not competitive enough was not sufficient justification. Selection procedures would lead to discrimination and the result would be to serve Europe's ports up "on a silver platter to its major rivals in Asia". The Socialist Group representative urged that "healthy conditions of competition" should be put in place.
Anne Elisabet Jensen (ALDE, DE) for her part was disappointed that "fifty years after the creation of the European Union, we still do not have a framework directive on ports". She underlined "the numerous obstacles to movement and establishment", adding that within her group, which she acknowledged was "divided", "many will vote against". "We backed the rapporteur, who wanted to amend the directive to make something more sensible out of it. We need a text which allows for fair competition. We must break up the monopolies and relieve the burden on land infrastructures and switch more to maritime transport" she said. She also urged the Commission to "examine the consequences if the text were rejected before drafting a new proposal".
Joost Lagendijk (Greens/EFA, NL) said that "the absurd action of a minority of hotheads must not make us lose sight of the need to defend the interests of workers in this industry". The stakes were high if one were talking about replacing trained personnel with unskilled staff. Moreover, he added, many vessel owners believed the new legislation to be too bureaucratic. The European Union should only legislate if it could provide added value. "One piece of legislation cannot solve the problems of the ports of southern Europe".
On behalf of the GUE/NGL Group, Erik Meijer (NL) believed that "for dockers, the directive brings only problems". He stressed that the 2003 proposal "had aroused criticism even before it was rejected" and he called for the same treatment to be given to the "delayed action bomb left to us by Loyola de Palacio". He claimed that the motive of the former Spanish Transport Commissioner was simply to "promote sea transport between Italy and Spain in order to bypass the route along the southern coast of France".
Plenary vote
The amendments calling for the port services directive to be rejected were adopted by 532 votes for, 120 against and 25 abstentions on Wednesday 18 January 2006 at Parliament's Strasbourg plenary session. This vote thus signals the rejection by Parliament at first reading of the Commission proposal.
However, even after this clear vote, the proposal could continue down the legislative path.
Firstly, Transport Commissioner Jacques Barrot, who spoke after the vote, has announced his intention to consult the Commission on the future of the text: "I will propose that the Commission accept the consequences of this vote. I will also propose that work continue with all parties concerned".
Secondly, Rule 52 of Parliament's Rules of Procedure provides for a proposal to be referred back to the parliamentary committee responsible (the lead committee). Under this procedure, the text is examined by the committee and then submitted once more to the full Parliament within two months. If the Commission decides to withdraw its proposal, Parliament must confirm its rejection by adopting a resolution.
In fact it is highly unlikely that the Commission will ignore the strong message sent by Parliament on 18 January. It will therefore probably withdraw its proposal. In other words, the draft directive in its current form can be considered politically as dead and buried.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
