Opening of the 11th ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly in Vienna
Development and cooperation
2006-06-22 - 17:46
The eleventh session of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly, which brings together MEPs and parliamentarians from 79 ACP (Africa, Caribbean and Pacific) countries, started its work on Monday 19 June in Vienna. Migration, aid, corruption and trade were among the issues raised in the opening speeches.
Josep Borrell, President of the European Parliament said: "I have done what I can to support the development of bi-regional assemblies, and this Assembly was the pioneer. With the Cotonou Agreement, you have become a full parliamentary assembly, almost entirely composed of elected members of parliament. Furthermore, the European Parliament has taken up the model of the Assembly elsewhere: in the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly, which I have chaired for a year, and in the proposal for a Euro-Latin American Assembly with all the regional parliaments of Latin America, which will be constituted in the near future.
"Europe cannot be a fortress. Those who believe that a new wall along our southern border will protect them are completely mistaken. If Europe does not go to the South, the South will come, illegally or clandestinely, to Europe. We will propose that the question of migration be placed at the heart of the ACP-EU partnership so that policy can be worked on jointly, in a spirit of co-development. We will also support the action plan adopted by the ACP ministers in April to create a migration observatory."
Glenys Kinnock (PES, UK), Co-President of the Joint Parliamentary Assembly (JPA) said: “In the coming weeks, World Cup goals will count. Our task here is not a game, but we too will focus on goals – the Millennium Development Goals. 2005 was a watershed and now we need to take stock and assess whether things are on track.
"On levels of aid, there is a lot of 'creative accounting' going on by donors. True aid figures continue to be obscured because official figures still count debt-cancellation deals as new foreign aid. Once we take into account this clear inflation of the figures, the G8’s overall increase in aid for 2005 stands at a meagre 9%."
On fighting corruption, Mrs Kinnock said that "we should heed the example set by the Nigerian Finance Minister who is seeking root and branch reform of her Government’s systems. This includes ensuring that Nigeria signs up to transparency in the accounts of the oil industry, and puts in place an audit on all government contracts. If this example is not followed, I fear that ACP countries’ efforts to meet the MDGs might be severely damaged."
Louis Claude Nyassa (Cameroon), Acting ACP Co-President said: "Although we are progressing towards agreement on the Economic Partnership Agreements which is scheduled for December 2007 and the entry into force of the new trade ACP-EU regime from the 1 January 2008, there are still many concerns of the ACP countries. For the EU negotiators, more emphasis is put on market access, while for the ACP, the main concerns lies in the development dimension of the Economic Partnership Agreements."
The Assembly was also addressed by Dr Heinz Fischer, President of the Republic of Austria, who officially opened the session. The JPA will examine the reports of its committees on: energy in the ACP countries; the role of regional integration in the promotion of peace and security; fisheries and their social and environmental aspects in developing countries. Urgent resolutions will be tabled on avian flu and the situation in Sudan.
The meeting will close with a press conference of the two Co-Presidents, Glenys Kinnock and René Radembino Coniquet (Gabon) which will take place on Thursday 22 June at 1pm.
2006-06-19
ACP EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly - 11th session, Vienna
Co-presidents: Glenys Kinnock PES, UK) and René Radembino Coniquet (Gabon)
20060616IPR09098 Follow the link below for more details on the ACP-EU JPA
EN
1
LINK
/intcoop/acp/10_01/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
