Equitable Life policyholders let down by regulatory failings?
Petitions
2006-06-22 - 09:22
British and Irish financial services regulators faced a barrage of questions at Wednesday's meeting of the Equitable Life committee of inquiry, with MEPs wondering if consumers had been let down by a system in which no-one seemed to be accountable.
The committee first heard evidence from Clive Maxwell of the UK Treasury, David Strachan of the UK Financial Services Authority and Christopher Daykin of the Government Actuary's Department.
They told MEPs that Community directives had been properly transposed in the UK and that the regulatory bodies had done their job correctly. They pointed to the findings of the report of Lord Penrose's inquiry, which had stated that "principally, the society was the author of its own misfortunes". Moreover, said Mr Strachan, the UK insurance supervision regime was "risk-based" and "neither can nor should aim to prevent all failures", since over-regulation was not in consumers' interests.
MEPs questioned these officials closely. Many felt that no-one was willing to take responsibility for the plight of policyholders, as there were different authorities in different countries and, even within countries, one supervisory authority had succeeded another over time.
John Purvis (EPP-ED, UK) spoke of a "miasma of regulatory authorities" and said policyholders appeared to have "fallen between stools". Mr Purvis and Robert Atkins (EPP-ED, UK) both accused the regulators of "complacency". Sir Robert asked whether the UK regulators "would admit to any failures".
Ashley Mote (NA, UK) said Standard and Poor's credit agency had drawn attention to the problem of Equitable Life as early as 1988. He added that the Penrose report had revealed that "the UK regulators knowingly permitted Equitable Life to operate with a huge asset deficit for more than a decade".
Manuel Medina Ortega (PES, ES), vice-chair of the committee, compared the situation to air traffic control in Europe. With the latter, a plane leaving one control zone is properly handed over to the next zone "but with insurance this transfer does not seem to be taking place".
Irish regulators give evidence
On the situation in Ireland, Mary O'Dea and Anne Troy of the Irish Financial Services Regulatory Authority told MEPs that IFSRA had been set up only in 2003, its statutory role did not allow it to act as a legal representative for Equitable Life's Irish policyholders and the only assistance it could give was to provide information to policyholders, which it was doing.
Future improvements they would like to see included better Conduct of Business rules (covering the selling of insurance policies), the institution of a complaints ombudsman in every EU country and new rules on insolvency. Like several other speakers they strongly supported the EU's Solvency II project.
Finally, the committee heard evidence from Colin Slater, a British specialist in forensic accounting and himself an Equitable Life policyholder. His main point was that "Equitable Life was brought down by 10 years of over-bonusing and the regulators knew about it".
At Wednesday's meeting the committee also adopted its draft interim report, which includes a request for a 3-month extension to its mandate to enable it to study the report by the UK Parliamentary Ombudsman due for publication in November.
2006-06-21 Committee of Inquiry into the crisis of the Equitable Life Assurance Society Chair Mairead McGuinness EPP-ED IE
Procedure: Own-initiative
Plenary vote: July, Strasbourg
20060615IPR09087 Follow this link to see the full text of the draft interim report and amendments proposed to it Follow this link for a press release on a previous hearing with the Equitable Life Chief Executive and others The secretariat of the committee produces a verbatim transcript of the meetings, which is published on the committee website once available
EN
1
LINK
/meetdocs/2004_2009/organes/equi/equi_20060621_0900.htm
EN
3
LINK
/comparl/tempcom/equi/default_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060426IPR07644 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
