China: Foreign Affairs committee calls for progress on human rights
External relations
2006-07-12 - 18:33
Although the Foreign Affairs Committee says EU and China have an "increasingly positive trade relationship" and that it looks forward to "closer cooperation", its report on China, adopted on Wednesday, takes a critical line on the political and human rights situation in the country - on issues ranging from Tibet to Taiwan, and the death penalty to animal welfare.
The own-initiative report by Bastiaan Belder (IND/DEM, NL) on EU-China relations acknowledges the increasing importance of the growing economic relationship between the Union and the People's Republic, but also airs several concerns. It condemns the loose enforcement of anti-dumping regulations, the "artificially low value" at which the Chinese currency is pegged, and urges the Chinese government to "considerably improve the protection of Intellectual Property Rights."
Political system, Taiwan, Tibet, Human Rights
On the political front, the committee speaks out in favour of more pluralism, institutional modernisation, and a truly independent judiciary. It says the "will and approval of the 23 million citizens of Taiwan must surely be respected and taken into account in negotiations with China on Taiwan's status." It also urges both Japan and China to "refrain from any action which might offend the historic memory or the sensibilities of the other." The committee strongly recommends that "the EU arms embargo against China remain in place until greater progress is made on human rights issues."
The report "urges China to abolish the death penalty" and expresses concern "about recent reports of continuing serious human rights abuses in Tibetan areas of China." It calls for a Chinese law "guaranteeing genuine religious freedom," and expressly calls on the government "to cease its persecution and imprisonment of […] Christian groups," as well as Falun Gong practitioners. The committee also expresses its concern that "the practice of torture remains widespread in China" and condemns "the existence of the Laogai labour camps" and police psychiatric and "re-education" methods used against detainees. It also urges China to "protect the welfare of, and prevent cruelty to, animals," especially in the fur industry.
Dissenting views
The report was adopted with 42 votes in favour to 14 against with 2 abstentions. Socialist members voted against, having argued that report was unduly focused on the human rights situation in China, and did not sufficiently address other aspects of the relationship. A significant number of amendments are therefore likely to be tabled when the report comes to the plenary session in September.
2006-07-12 Committee on Foreign Affairs In the chair: Elmar Brok EPP-ED DE
Procedure: Own-initiative
Plenary vote: September I, Strasbourg
20060707IPR09701 Follow the link below for all the documents from the meeting
EN
1
LINK
/meetdocs/2004_2009/organes/afet/afet_20060711_0900.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
