Transitional justice - building a more just and democratic future
Human rights
2006-08-31 - 19:22
EU police training mission in Bosnia-Herzegovina (EUPM)
Civil war and dictatorship can leave appalling physical and mental scars. How societies find strategies for recovery and reconciliation after such trauma was the subject of a public hearing by Parliament's Human Rights Subcommittee on 28 August. It examined the concept of "transitional justice" for societies in Europe, Africa, the Americas and the Middle-East. Human rights abuses, the fate of victims and a need to prevent atrocities were discussed by MEPs and speakers.
What is Transitional Justice?
Transitional Justice focuses on how societies address the legacy of past human rights abuses, mass atrocities, or other forms of severe social trauma, including genocide or civil war in order to build a more democratic, just and peaceful future.
It involves a variety of different approaches and strategies: prosecuting the perpetrators - as with the Tribunal for Yugoslavia in the Hague; establishing "truth commissions" - as in South Africa, forging efforts toward reconciliation, offering financial compensation for the victims and erecting memorials to remember those who suffered. Reforming state institutions like the police and the army - as the EU is helping the government of Bosnia-Herzegovina to do - is also vitally important.
South Africa - Truth and Reconciliation in action
One of the key speakers was Alex Boraine - Deputy Chair of the "Truth and Reconciliation Commission", which examined the Apartheid era in South Africa. He spoke of the need for a just society rather than justice in the Courts. "There are limits to law" and realistically it is not possible to prosecute all those involved, he said, noting that political compromise was a fact of life. The South African example has inspired other countries and societies. At the time of writing there are 28 such commissions worldwide. Mr Boraine concluded by saying "reconciliation is about rebuilding bridges - the abstract ones..."
Nowhere is justice and reconciliation needed more than in Rwanda. Neighbours and communities turned upon one another in the genocide of 1994 in which up to 1 million died. Esther Mujawayo-Kiener - a victim of that horror - spoke of the need "to name and identify the crimes and the perpetrators as well as the victims." Without this, "reconciliation is not possible" she said.
How can the European Union help?
The role of transitional justice in the EU's emerging Security and Defence Policy (ESDP) was outlined by Michael Mathiessen - a human rights representative for the EU's foreign policy chief Javier Solana. He told the hearing that in June European Heads of Government endorsed a report on ESDP, which for the first time mentioned the need for transitional justice arrangements to be taken into account during future EU conflict prevention and crisis management missions. The forthcoming EU contribution to the United Nations force in the Middle East could take this into account.
Mr Mathiessen said to general agreement that the Parliament should ensure future EU programmes, over which it has some control, take account of transitional justice approaches.
Several MEPs spoke of the lessons and experiences that Europe had in post-conflict situations. Indeed the very idea for the EU arose from the need to heal divisions in Europe after two world wars. In Bosnia-Herzegovina, for example, the creation of a multi-ethnic police force and purging government ministries of those who are not open to reconciliation is a major challenge towards reconciliation.
20060830STO10183 Press Service report on Transitional Justice Hearing Background documents on meeting Parliament's Human Rights Subcommittee
EN
1
PHOTO
20060829PHT10174.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/meetdocs/2004_2009/organes/droi/droi_20060828_1500.htm
EN
4
LINK
/committees/droi_home_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060828IPR10121 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
