A European Social Model for the future: a unity of values with a diversity of systems
Social policy
2006-09-06 - 15:14
The European Parliament has adopted an own-initiative report on the future of the European Social Model. Supporting this model, the report outlines the concept of the European Social Model which reflects a common set of values implemented in different ways in the Member States. The House underline the urgent need for the concept to be reformed and stress what has to be done in future to preserve the model.
The European Social model: not a cost, but a positive factor in the EU's economic growth
The European Social Model "reflects a common set of values, based on the preservation of peace, social justice, equality, solidarity, the promotion of freedom and democracy and respect of human rights". According to MEPs, "in the last 60 years this set of common values has allowed a growing EU to successfully become an area of greater economic prosperity and social justice". They underline that social policies, when appropriately designed "cannot be regarded as a cost but, instead, as a positive factor in the EU's economic growth".
Although Member States have different social systems, and have implemented these values in different ways, they commonly aim to attain a balance between economic growth and social solidarity, and this is reflected in the European Social Model as a unity of values with a diversity of systems, members underline.
Urgent need to reform to preserve the model
MEPs stress the necessity to preserve and enhance the values associated with the European Social Model and the high social standards already achieved. They are convinced that the economic and social systems must be urgently reformed where they fail to meet the criteria of efficiency and socially sustainable development, and where they are inadequate to tackle the challenges of demographic change, globalisation and the IT revolution.
Also to restore citizen's confidence in the EU project, which provides jobs, growth and prosperity, the EU's commitment to a Social Europe needs to be renewed, members stress.
Actions needed on EU and Member State level
Members underline that even if employment and social policy remain broadly within national competence, the EU needs to create an economic and social framework which allows Member States to implement reforms as necessary at national level, according to their own economic, social and political circumstances
They call on the Commission and the Council to respect the initial equilateral triangle of the Lisbon Strategy and to develop an approach that is better balanced between economic coordination on the one hand and employment and social protection policy on the other
The Commission is asked to take further initiatives to achieve full implementation of the internal market, having regard to exclude any race to the bottom in social, consumer or environmental standards . The Commission shall also incorporate already now the social dimension in its impact analyses, in accordance with the social clause provided for in the proposed Constitutional Treaty.
Members recognise the advantages of 'flexicurity' systems which Member States should adopt. They consider them as a means of promoting reconciliation of work-life balance and work and life-cycle concepts.
Since many Member States are far from achieving the Lisbon Strategy objectives they are called to achieve, in particular, the specific targets set for employment, especially of women and young people, Research and Development investment, child care and lifelong learning.
Member States shall furthermore undertake reforms in order to ensure the financial sustainability of national social systems, without prejudicing acquired rights, mutual support and intergenerational solidarity. They should also improve the coordination of their tax policies with a view to avoiding harmful tax competition, ensuring sustainable financing for social protection and making tax policy more employment friendly. The EU funds, such as the European Structural Funds, shall be used more efficiently to co-finance national reforms.
MEPs underline that any successful reform of the social systems should involve all stakeholders, in particular the social partners and civil society.
20060901IPR10244 A European social model for the future Green paper "Promoting the mental health of the population. Towards a strategy on mental health for the EU"
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5296432
EN
2
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/health/ph_determinants/life_style/mental_health_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
