1 minute speeches: around the Plenary in 60 seconds
Institutions
2006-09-06 - 19:54
Stop watch, 60 seconds and that’s it
After the traditional opening remarks by the President of the Parliament - for 30 minutes the floor of the House is given to individual MEPs who are allowed to speak or ask a question for 1 minute on anything they deem to be of "political importance". This subjective definition guarantees a wide variety of subjects. The speakers reflect a balance between those who have spoken previously, nationalities and political groups.
Diverse range of subjects
As MEPs mainly speak in support of their Political Group regarding matters on the agenda, the 1 minute speeches allow them to "get things off their chests" and raise issues of individual interest. Some of the subjects tackled recently include: human rights violations, racism, homophobia, religious freedom, pollution, foreign affairs, environment, humanitarian aid and unemployment.
MEPs can also use the time to publicise and support the cause of individuals. For example a Scottish Member recently took up the cause of one of his foreign-born constituents who faced - in his view - unfair deportation. He asked for support from fellow Members.
The subjects are usually not on the official agenda, and members can speak on issues they feel strongly about, or issues that have been in media. In typically political style, MEPs often use the opportunity to score points off their political opponents, whether they are in the European Parliament or in national assemblies.
Competition to speak is fierce, as the opening of a plenary session has quite a high profile in the press. The opening of this weeks' Plenary saw twice as many MEPs applying to speak as time allowed.
Rule 144: MEPs and their 60 seconds
According to rule 144 of the European Parliament's Rules of Procedure, MEPs are entitled to a 60-second speech on any matter of "political importance.
MEPs usually address the Plenary in their native tongue. Twenty languages are currently used in the Parliament. There are a number of ways to keep up:
- Live via the website on EP Live
- Video on Demand gives access to previous speeches
- All questions and speeches are published verbatim on Parliament's website via the "CRE" “Compte-rendu exhaustif”.
20060905STO10339 CRE Previous speeches
EN
1
PHOTO
20060905PHT10323.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/cre/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
3
LINK
/eplive/vod/Calendar/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
