Opening of the Strasbourg session - Borrell on Lebanon and influx of immigrants
Institutions
2006-09-04 - 19:18
Opening this, the first plenary session after the summer recess, President Josep BORRELL set the stage for the coming week's work in Parliament by referring to a number of events which had occurred over the summer.
Regarding the war in Lebanon, Parliament had issued an early call - on 20 July - for an immediate ceasefire and had urged the EU Member States to speak with a single voice. The Euromediterranean Parliamentary Assembly had then called for European participation in a peace-keeping force. In the end, on 25 August, EU governments had responded to these calls. Now, said Mr Borrell, " the EU is embarking on its largest-ever military mission ". It faced a " challenge to its political credibility " but this was also " an opportunity to support effective European diplomacy throughout the region and to revive the peace process ".
Turning to the influx of illegal immigrants in the islands of Lampedusa and the Canaries, the President highlighted the figures: 10,000 had arrived at Lampedusa and 20,000 in the Canaries since the start of the year and hundreds had perished at sea. Moreover, this was not a one-off event but " a permanent, structural problem " which meant that " Europe must formulate a common policy for managing migration" and "commit itself to the development of Africa ".
Other topics highlighted by Mr Borrell were the planned attacks on airlines flying between the UK and the USA, and the recent bombings in Turkey. All available resources should be deployed to deal with such threats, he said, but they must also be " acceptable from the point of view of respecting our liberties ". In relation to Thursday's debate on the personal data of air passengers, he noted that Ireland had brought an action over the directive on data retention, which called into question the " delicate balance " Parliament had reached with Council on this issue.
Following the death of Hungarian MEP István PÁLFI on 15 July, the President asked the House to observe a minute's silence.
Highlights 4-7 September Strasbourg
After the summer recess, MEPs return to Strasbourg for the first of two plenary sessions in September. In a much modified agenda, the House will debate and vote on resolutions on subjects ranging from the Middle East, China and the failure at the WTO to the costs of interpretation in the EU institutions and the future of the European Social Model. The President of Finland, Mrs Tarja HALONEN , will formally address the House at 12 noon on Tuesday. President Halonen will hold a joint press conference with EP President Josep BORRELL immediately afterwards.
At 5pm on Tuesday 5 September, President BORRELL will also hold a joint press conference with the Prime Minister of Bulgaria - Mr Sergei STANISHEV .
Monday 4 September 2006
The session starts with a debate on the taxation of cars with the Economics Committee calling for cars to be taxed on pollution rather than registration. MEPs will tackle a legislative report on funding to deal with pollution caused by ships. The last point Monday evening is a debate with a resolution on forest fires and flooding.
The House will debate the recent elections in the Democratic Republic of Congo.
Tuesday 5 September 2006
Tuesday starts with a debate on the suspension of negotiations on the WTO Doha Development Agenda.
Parliament will also debate and vote on a resolution on the counterfeiting of medicines.
John BOWIS (EPP-ED, UK) has a report on improving the mental health of the population - towards a strategy on mental health for the EU. The report draws attention to the "sizeable differences" in mental health expenditure in individual Member States and welcomes the Commission's commitment to mental health promotion.
At midday on Tuesday, Finnish President, Mrs Tarja HALONEN will address the House in a formal sitting.
The House will also vote on a report related to the costs of interpretation incurred by the EU institutions.
Tuesday afternoon sees the Council presentation of the 2007 preliminary draft budget for the EU set at some €125.75 billion.
The House will also debate a report co-authored by Proinsias de ROSSA (PES, IE) on the future of the European Social Model.
MEPs then turn their attention of the system for exchanging emissions quotas and their national action plans.
Wednesday 6 September 2006
Wednesday morning starts with a debate on the EU's future role in Kosovo.
The House will debate the Stabilisation and Association Agreement with Albania including a statement from the Finnish Presidency.
Parliament then turns its attention to EU-China relations with a report which takes a critical line on the political and human rights situation in the country - on issues ranging from Tibet to Taiwan, and the death penalty to animal welfare.
Wednesday afternoon is dedicated to a wide ranging debate on the situation in the Middle East. The Foreign Affairs Committee has voiced their support for the EU reinforcement of UN forces in Lebanon. They called for a clear definition of the mandate and the mission of the peacekeepers, and for the disarmament of Hezbollah, the strengthening of democracy in Lebanon and a stronger political role for the EU in the region. Vote on the resolution will be take place on Thursday.
Diana WALLIS (ALDE, UK) will be putting forward a report recommending that the EU accedes to the Hague Conference on private international law.
Thursday 7 September 2006
There is a joint debate on protection of passenger data with a report on the transfer of data to the US to prevent and combat terrorism.
On Thursday, MEPs debate the European natural and architectural cultural heritage in rural and insular areas.
As usual the session ends with three human rights debates and resolutions on the following subjects:
1) Sri Lanka
2) North Korean asylum seekers, particularly in Thailand
3) Zimbabwe
20060901IPR10224 Briefing - 4-7 September 2006 Final draft agenda - 4-7 September 2006
EN
2
LINK
/omk/sipade3?PROG=AGENDA&L=EN&QUERY=ALL-SIT&NAV=S&REF=2006-09
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060706BRI09653 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
