Services Directive, REACH, EU Budget on MEPs' autumn agenda
Institutions
2006-08-28 - 19:54
Parliament's autumn session promises to be noteworthy
After a hot summer, during which leaders of the European Parliament's political groups called for a ceasefire in Lebanon, MEPs return for an autumn that promises to be just as hot politically. Among the "hot topics" are the 2nd reading of the Services directive, the "REACH" package on chemical industry regulation, the 2007 EU budget and the accession of Romania and Bulgaria to the EU. A report on Turkey's progress towards EU-accession will also be discussed.
At the end of July Parliament heard what EU ministers made of their changes to the proposed Services directive, which aims to boost economic growth and employment by removing barriers to trade in services across the EU. It has already proved controversial with some fearing it could undermine the "European social model" of social security guarantees and others believing Parliament amendments could weaken the effects of the legislation. After an EP vote earlier this year, the Commission revised its proposal and it is this revised legislation that the Council approved in July. Since ministers reached an agreement on the new draft, it is possible that the services directive may be tied up by the end of the year.
Tough talks ahead on REACH, Budget
Can the EP REACH a conclusion on the revision of the EU's chemical substances policy, which has been under discussion since October 2003? Tough talks are expected on the proposal for a comprehensive system for the registration, evaluation and authorisation of chemicals - REACH. Some amendments were adopted with a narrow majority during the first reading in Parliament and are likely to come under further scrutiny.
The 2007 budget is also likely to entail a lot of negotiation in the coming months. Since it often runs to over 1800 pages and 1500 separate budget lines, it requires a lot of work to get a timely agreement and those involved worked on it over the summer. The Budget committee has intense negotiations with the Commission and Council ahead and will also have to handle myriad amendments from other committees, political groups and MEPs.
The proposed Seventh Framework programme for research and technological development 2007-2013 cleared its first hurdle at the Parliament in June after fierce debate on energy and embryonic stem cell research. The Commission revised its proposal to take into account many of the EP's suggestions and priorities and research ministers reached a political agreement in July, which should allow the €54.6 billion programme to get final approval from the Parliament and be up and running next year. Ministers agreed with the Parliament in setting strict scientific and ethical controls over stem cell research. Nevertheless, MEPs have a lot of work ahead of them to get the programme approved by the end of the year.
Romania and Bulgaria's EU aspirations on agenda
The EU aspirations of Romania and Bulgaria face a crucial test in coming months. In late September the Commission will report on whether they have made sufficient efforts to reform their judiciaries and fight corruption. MEPs will debate the report when it is released. Parliament passed a resolution in June supporting EU membership if the countries continue the reform process.
A positive report, endorsed Ministers and Parliament would mean both join the EU on schedule on 1 January, 2007. If they join 35 Romanian and 18 Bulgarian MEPs will sit in the EP representing 29.6 million citizens.
Turkey 's progress towards EU accession will be debated by MEPs in the first September Plenary session.
20060828STO10115 Debate on enlargement
EN
1
PHOTO
20060828PHT10117.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060512IPR08066 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
