Costs of interpretation in the EU institutions - call for pragmatic solutions
Budgetary control
2006-09-05 - 14:54
MEPs adopted an own initiative report on interpretation expenditure incurred by the Parliament, the Commission and the Council. The House sees multilingualism as essential cultural and linguistic diversity and ensures equal treatment of EU citizens. Parliament also considers that multilingualism is an expression of the EU's cultural diversity, and that while the increasing number of official languages calls for pragmatic solutions in the preparatory work within the institutions.
This report follows the presentation in November 2005 of a Special Report by the Court of Auditors on the interpretation expenditures of Parliament, Commission and Council for the year 2003. (See link at the end of the article)
The report says that the total cost of all the linguistic services of the EU institutions, translation and interpretation combined, represent merely 1 % of the total EU budget. MEPs consider that multilingualism is one of the key features of the European Union, which highlights cultural and linguistic diversity and ensures equal treatment of EU citizens. The House also considers that multilingualism is an expression of the EU's cultural diversity, which must be preserved, and that, therefore, while the increasing number of official languages calls for pragmatic solutions in the preparatory work within the institutions, multilingualism must be guaranteed to ensure the legitimacy and diversity of the European Union.
MEPs note that the overall cost of interpretation in 2003 was €57m as regards the European Parliament and €106m as regards the Council, the Commission, the European Economic and Social Committee, the Committee of the Regions and some agencies. MEPs are, however, very concerned that in 2003 approximately 16% (€25.9m) of the total interpretation costs of €163m represented costs for services supplied but not used and for stand-by arrangements.
Parliament is of the opinion that the Parliament, the Council and the Commission should endeavour to reduce 'implicit or explicit stand-by duty', these arrangements accounting for €18m spent on interpretation services supplied but not used. The House notes that reserve interpreters should be available for ad hoc meetings with a short request time.
European Parliament costs
MEPs note that the full cost for an interpretation day is almost 30% higher in Parliament than in the Council or the Commission, one reason being that very few local interpreters can be used during Strasbourg sessions, which increases Parliament's interpretation costs in Strasbourg by 13 %.
Parliament also urges its administration to raise Members' awareness of interpretation costs. Parliament also asks if the administration makes best possible use of the language profiles of Members. MEPs stress that this should not lead to a ranking of official EU languages.
The House notes that in 2003, it spent €4m on interpretation services made available but not used due to late requests or cancellations. MEPs also ask that last-minute cancellations and last-minute requests be discouraged. Finally, MEPs call on the interpretation services to be more flexible in their service planning and request system.
20060901IPR10242 Court of Auditors' Special Report No 5/2005 on interpretation expenditure incurred by the Parliament, the Commission and the Council SPECIAL REPORT No 5/2005 Interpretation expenditure incurred by the Parliament, the Commission and the Council, together with the institutions’ replies
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5303102
EN
2
LINK
http://www.eca.europa.eu/audit_reports/special_reports/docs/2005/rs05_05en.pdf
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
