MEPs want to be present at negotiations of passenger data agreement with USA
Justice and home affairs
2006-07-14 - 10:38
MEPs in the Civil Liberties Committee are calling for Parliament to have observer status in negotiations for the new EU's agreement with the United States on the transfer of personal data by airlines flying to America. On Thursday, the committee adopted a recommendation to the Council which also says that the agreement should expire in November 2007. After that, MEPs want to see Parliament granted full co-decision rights over future agreements on passenger name records.
Following the decision of the European Court of Justice to annul the existing agreement on passenger name records (PNR) with effect from 30 September 2006, the committee's recommendation says that a new deal should be reached with the US government before that date to avoid "a legal lacuna at European level" for the transfer of passenger data.
The two-step negotiation strategy proposed by the rapporteur, Sophie In't Veld (ALDE, NL), and supported by the committee, says that the EU should reach a new short-term international agreement to run from October 2006 to November 2007, the period originally covered by the US/EU deal annulled by the Court, with MEPs present at the negotiations as observers.
For the medium and long term, MEPs proposed "a more coherent approach (...) towards the exchange of passenger data". By the time of the review of the agreement in 2007, MEPs want the Council to give Parliament full co-decison rights on PNR issues so they can ensure future agreements are properly respect data protection safeguards.
Such a change would mean invoking the so called "passerelle" clause of the Treaty, which allows the Council, by a unanimous decision, to move policy areas from decision making by unanimity in Council and consultation of Parliament to qualified majority voting in Council and co-decision with Parliament.
Finally, MEPs propose a dialogue this year with parliamentarians from the EU, US, Canada and Australia, to help prepare for the review.
2006-07-13 Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs In the chair Stefano ZAPPALÀ EPP-ED IT
Procedure: Recommendation to the Council
Plenary vote: September I, Strasbourg
20060707IPR09696
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
