Europe's security and defence in a new and dangerous century
Security and defence
2006-07-24 - 15:20
EU Military operation in Bosnia-Herzegovina
The impact of globalisation has shown that conflict and instability can flow as freely as trade. As the threat from the USSR has faded, so new dangers for the 21st century have arisen. Terrorism, weapons of mass destruction, the consequences of regional conflicts (in the Middle-East and Africa) and instability caused by failed states (as in Yugoslavia) are pressing. How the EU defends itself and guarantees its security was discussed at a hearing in Parliament with MEPs and experts on 13 July.
The hearing comes ahead of a report that Karl von Wogau, MEP, chair of Parliament's subcommittee on security and defence, is currently drafting on the future of the European Union's fledgling security and defence policy (ESDP). (See the link below for a full report of the hearing).
Experience in the field: Bosnia to the Congo
In a sense, EU security and defence policy is a tangible reality. In Bosnia-Herzegovina a military force of 7,000 personnel from 33 nations (22 from the EU) is helping with the stabilisation and rebuilding of the country after the civil war. They also provide a secure environment for an EU police mission training a multi-ethnic Bosnian police force.
Over the coming weeks an EU force of several hundred soldiers will be deployed for four months in the Democratic Republic of Congo during elections following years of warfare. Their mandate is to provide a safe environment for elections - while protecting civilians and the 250 election monitors led by Philippe Morillon MEP. This follows EU aid and an emergency military deployment in 2003 (Operation "Artemis") which stabilised the country. A police training mission followed in 2005.
"Petersberg Tasks" - humanitarian aid and peacekeeping centre stage
A combination of hard military power and soft political and economic power is what the EU is best placed to "bring to the table". In 1999 at the Cologne European Council EU heads of government decided that the Union "must have the capacity for autonomous action, backed by credible military forces...in order to respond to international crises". The deadline for such readiness was set for 2003.
The goal was military forces of up to 50,000-60,000 troops volunteered by EU members able to deal with crisis management tasks - or "Petersberg Tasks". These include humanitarian and rescue tasks, peacekeeping and crisis management, if required by the use of combat forces. In 2003 the Council confirmed the EU had achieved "operational capability across the full range of "Petersberg tasks". In practical terms this means the EU is now able to deploy troops within 60 days for up to one year - although how many personnel could be brought together would depend on EU states.
European Security Strategy: UN Charter a "fundamental framework"
That year also saw Javier Solana appointed as the Union's foreign policy chief or "High Representative". His role is to coordinate between the 25 EU members and report back to the Council of Ministers on foreign policy developments - on Monday he briefed EU foreign ministers on the crises in Lebanon - having just returned from a visit to the Lebanese Prime Minister as the first international leader to do so.
In 2003 he oversaw the drafting of the "European Security Strategy" (dubbed the "Solana doctrine"). It outlines the threats Europe faces: terrorism, weapons proliferation, regional conflict, rogue states, crime and state failure - and advocated a unified EU response.
Multilateralism is the key to peace and stability in the Solana doctrine: "no single country is able to tackle today's complex problems on its own" it states. All EU military actions have taken place following United Nation's Resolutions and the "fundamental framework" of the UN's Charter is paramount in the document.
Brussels - Washington- "Berlin +"
If the EU is to develop a defence and security policy its relationship with NATO - and thus the United States, is crucial. The "Berlin +" agreement in 2003 (signed by Mr Solana and the then NATO Secretary-General Lord Robertson) outlined the manner of cooperation between the two organisations - and allowed the EU to tap into the planning expertise and logistical assets of NATO. The two are now jointly operating in Afghanistan. Whether this is a model for the future - only time will tell.
20060719STO09917 Press Report: Hearing on the European Security and Defence Policy ESDP operations since 2003 Council: Security and Defence explained Parliament's Security and Defence subcommittee Parliament's Foreign Affairs Committee
EN
1
PHOTO
20060718PHT09905.jpg
EN
3
LINK
http://www.consilium.europa.eu/uedocs/cmsUpload/ESDPoperations.jpg
EN
4
LINK
http://www.consilium.europa.eu/showPage.asp?id=261&lang=en&mode=g
EN
5
LINK
/activities/expert/committees/presentation.do?committee=1301&language=EN
EN
6
LINK
/activities/expert/committees/presentation.do?committee=1232&language=EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060707IPR09703 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
