Improving the mental health of the EU population
Public health
2006-09-06 - 17:55
MEPs adopted a report drawn up by in response to the Commission's Green Paper on a strategy on mental health for the European Union. Parliament says that Member States should work together to find and implement effective strategies to reduce suicide, particularly among young people and other at risk groups.
The report says that mental ill health affects everyone in the EU either directly or indirectly, and during the course of any one year 18.4 million people in the European Union aged between 18 and 65 are estimated to suffer from major depression.
The report highlights some 58 000 European Union citizens commit suicide each year, more than the annual deaths from road traffic accidents or HIV/AIDS, and points out that ten times this number attempt suicide. The report also sets out that one in four people in Europe experience at least one significant episode of mental ill health during their lives.
MEPs draw attention to the "sizeable differences" in mental health expenditure in individual Member States and welcomed the Commission's commitment to mental health promotion.
Parliament calls for the Green Paper to be followed up with a proposal for a directive on mental health in Europe and "the defence of and respect for the civil and fundamental rights of persons suffering from mental disorders". Any such proposal should involve partnership and consultation with those who have experienced or are experiencing mental health problems, their families and carers and advocacy NGOs, associations of family members and other interested parties.
MEPs want the key target groups identified by the Commission (children, employees, older people and disadvantaged members of society) to be extended to include those with severe mental illness, those with long-term and terminal illnesses, the disabled, prisoners, ethnic and other minority groups, those sleeping rough, migrants, those in precarious jobs and the unemployed. They also feel that the Green Paper did not take due account of the gender dimension. The report acknowledges that men and women may have different mental health needs, and called for more research in order to develop separate approaches and treatments for the two sexes.
Among its many recommendations, the House calls for "a multi-disciplinary and multi-agency response" to tackling complex mental ill health situations, such as those involving children or adolescents. It also urges employers to introduce "Mental Health at Work" policies with a view to ensuring the best possible jobs for and best possible incorporation into the labour market of persons with mental disorders.
Pointing out that one of the greatest challenges in mental health is the ageing of Europe's population; the report wants to see more research into neurodegenerative diseases or other psychiatric illnesses in the elderly. MEPs also stress that the "defeat of stigma" should be at the heart of any future mental health strategy, for example by establishing annual campaigns on mental health issues in order to combat ignorance and injustice. Parliament also wants to see mental health services reformed with a view to providing high-quality community care at home or in sheltered accommodation, regular monitoring and assessment and respite care. The Commission is urged to support continuing reforms in any Member State that practised the abuse of psychiatry, over-use of medication or incarceration, or "inhumane practices such as caged beds or excessive use of seclusion rooms".
Other points raised in the report include the need for more research into therapeutic and psychological interventions, into the development of more effective drugs with fewer side-effects, and into determinants of mental disorders and suicide. There should also be greater involvement of service users in all aspects of mental health research.
Challenges in some of the new Member States
The House urges the Commission to support continuing reforms in any Member State that practised the abuse of psychiatry, over-use of medication or incarceration, or inhumane practices such as caged beds or excessive use of seclusion rooms, particularly in some of the new Member States. MEPs stress that in some of the new Member States mental health indicators in society are as a rule drifting in the wrong direction, with a lot of suicides, violence and dependencies, especially on alcohol. The House underlines that these countries inherited inadequate mental health care systems and large psychiatric and care institutions which increase social exclusion and stigma, while at the same time there is a lack of community services which need to be integrated into general health and social protection systems. MEPs call on the Commission to place the reform of psychiatry on the agenda for EU accession negotiations. The House considers that prison is not a suitable environment for those suffering mental ill health and that alternatives should be actively pursued.
Lastly, the House calls for the Commission to set up a "Mental Health Coordinating and Monitoring Group" to collect information on mental health practice and promotion in the EU, to assess the adequacy (in terms of numbers and training) of existing mental health professionals and infrastructure, and to disseminate information on best practice.
20060901IPR10238 Improving the mental health of the population - towards a strategy on mental health for the EU
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A6-2006-0249 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
