Highlights of the Strasbourg Plenary session 25-28 September
Institutions
2006-09-25 - 17:32
Red carpet treatment for Lebanese and Liberian leaders
MEPs return to Strasbourg for what appears to be a particularly full agenda for the second Plenary session of September. Topics on the agenda include: Turkey, Romania and Bulgaria, Darfur, air quality, immigration, freedom security and justice, the discharge of the EP budget, teaching of foreign languages, the removal of shark fins, fish-stocks in the North Sea, EU-India relations and nanosciences and nanotechnologies.
On Wednesday the Lebanese Prime Minister Fouad Siniora and Political Group leaders will have a discussion in an open meeting of the Conference of Presidents from 5.30pm. The House will hear from the President of Liberia - Mrs Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf on Tuesday at 12:00.
On Monday evening, MEPs in the Foreign Affairs and Development Committees will whittle down the candidates for the 2006 Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought from ten to a short list of three candidates. The winner will be selected in October. Monday 25 September The major themes for Monday are environment and education. MEPs will debate and vote on two reports by the Environment Committee calling for more ambitious targets for air quality and atmospheric pollution in Europe.
A report on education will focus on appropriate teaching materials including the European dimension in the national school curricula.
Monday also sees MEPs debating the discharge of the EP budget for 2004. MEPs are likely to closely scrutinise the Parliament's purchase of the Winston Churchill and Salvador de Madariaga buildings in Strasbourg. Tuesday 26 September Tuesday starts off with a debate on public services with Commission President José Manuel Barroso. Parliament will discuss to what extent EU rules should affect the way in which public services are provided in the EU members. On Tuesday at midday, the President of Liberia - Mrs Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf will formally address the House. Tuesday afternoon is dedicated to enlargement. MEPs will debate the accession of Bulgaria and Romania. Olli Rehn, Enlargement Commissioner, will formally announce on the same day (26 September 2006) the Commission's latest position with the release of "monitoring" reports.
Parliament then turns its attention to Turkey. The Foreign Affairs Committee will be tabling a report welcoming the start of the EU's accession talks with Turkey and stating that Parliament remains firmly committed to accession as the goal of the negotiations. However, it adds that major reforms are still needed and expresses regret that Turkey's reform process has slowed down. In the evening, the House will focus on the latest developments in the Galileo programme (European satellite navigation system). Wednesday 27 September On Wednesday morning there will be a debate on "area freedom, security and justice" (AFSJ) and immigration. The latter debate is likely to focus on the influxes of illegal immigrants at the EU's border regions, particularly the Canary Islands but also Malta, Italy (notably the island of Lampedusa), Greece and Cyprus. Wednesday afternoon sees a debate on the deepening crisis in Darfur followed by a debate on EU-India relations. Parliament will then turn its attention to fisheries: the removal of shark fins on board fishing vessels and the exploitation of plaice and sole stocks in the North Sea.
Thursday 28 September The House tackles nanosciences and nanotechnologies. MEPs believe nanotechnologies can help address needs such as public health, energy and transport, and contribute to the EU's competitiveness and sustainable development goals. They will also debate and vote on patents as well as the recent Europe-Asia summit held in Helsinki.
20060925STO10931 More info / Press info
EN
1
PHOTO
20060925PHT10933.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060829BRI10137 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
