Posting of workers directive: clarifications and better enforcement needed
Employment policy
2006-09-13 - 18:42
Members of the Employment Committee are concerned that the Posting of Workers directive is not being implemented properly in some Member States and is therefore failing to achieve its aims. They called on Wednesday for urgent action by the Commission and Member States to change this situation. So far, however, they are not asking for changes in the directive.
The Directive applies to companies which send employees to work temporarily in a Member State other than the one under whose laws they are employed. It seeks to guarantee the free movement of persons and services while ensuring that posted employees benefit from certain minimum protective provisions of the Member State in which they are working.
In an own initiative report by Elisabeth Schroedter (Greens/EFA, DE), adopted by 28 votes in favour to 13 against with one abstention, MEPs in the committee stress that there is not necessarily a contradiction between the freedom to provide services and the upholding of fair competition on the one hand and ensuring workers' protection on the other. They say many difficulties result from differences of interpretation of key concepts, the fact that many workers are unaware of their rights under the directive and the difficulty for the host Member State to monitor compliance with the directive due, amongst others, to a lack of information flow between the two Member States concerned.
Information, cooperation and guidelines
The report says the solution includes increased information and simple procedures that enable people to know their rights. The Commission should actively support these measures, and take an active position to make the cooperation between Member States more effective and efficient, particularly to counteract unfair competition and social dumping.
Following the deletion by Parliament of Articles 24 and 25 from the proposed services directive, the Commission has drawn up guidelines on the interpretation of European Court of Justice case law on posting of workers. MEPs welcome this move, but are concerned that in some cases the Commission goes beyond the Court's judgements. Among other points, in contrast to the Commission, MEPs in the committee say that the employer must have a person available in the host country in those cases where the social partners share responsibility for enforcing the directive.
Sham self-employed workers and subcontracting
One strategy to circumvent the minimum standards of the directive is so-called "sham self-employment". While MEPs agree this directive is not the place to deal with self-employment issues, they perceive a growing problem and ask the Commission discuss with Member States ways to ensure transparency and uniformity in the criteria for determining the status for workers as self-employed persons.
The report says many abuses exist in the subcontracting and outsourcing of cross border workers. MEPs ask the Commission to close the existing loopholes - especially regarding the question of liability.
2006-09-11 Committee on Employment and Social Affairs Chair Jan Andersson PES SE
Procedure: Own-initiative report
Plenary vote: October II, Strasbourg
20060908IPR10493
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
