Nuclear non-proliferation treaty endangered?
Security and defence
2006-09-15 - 15:15
MEPs heard on Thursday from a variety of experts, EU officials and civil society representatives on the threats facing the nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT). The public hearing, organised by the Subcommittee on Security and Defence, addressed both the general prospects for non-proliferation as well as the specific threat to the NPT regime by Iran's nuclear ambitions.
The NPT "reflects a world that no longer exists," said Lars-Erik Lundin, Head of Unit and Deputy Political Director of security policy at the European Commission. According to Dr Bruno Tertrais, of the French foundation for strategic research, the deficiencies of the treaty include an "exceedingly permissive" withdrawal clause, and a "dubious distinction between civilian and military applications of nuclear technology."
Nevertheless, the experts agreed that the idea of amending the treaty was "a non-starter". Prof. William C. Potter (Centre for Non-Proliferation Studies at the Monterey Institute of International Studies, USA) suggested that governments should reinterpret some of the NPT's provisions, instead, such as Article 5 on the peaceful applications of nuclear explosions.
External challenges to the NPT
More important than the treaty's internal flaws, however, is the current set of external threats to an international non-proliferation regime. Prof. Potter underlined the danger of non-state actors acquiring nuclear weapons, either by getting a hold of a tactical nuclear weapon (TNW) or by building a crude nuclear device using highly-enriched uranium (HEU) that can be found in many civilian applications. Dr Bernd W. Kubbig (Peace Research Institute Frankfurt), emphasised the peril of establishing double standards in non-proliferation, as exemplified by the recent US-India agreement.
The hard case today: Iran
Most pressing, however, are the nuclear ambitions of Iran, a topic that gave rise to a lively debate at the hearing. Several participants argued that the Iranian push for a nuclear deterrent sprung from the government's thirst for international prestige or its hegemonic aspirations, and not from a perception of real threat from its neighbours. This prompted Angelika Beer (Greens/EFA, DE) to ask whether it was time to re-evaluate the EU's goal of keeping Iran nuclear-free. "We should consider a possible nuclear Iran," replied Dr. Kubbig, who advocated an incremental approach, with a 5-10 year timeline, a comprehensive "grand bargain" on security in the Middle East, and an objective to "integrate Iran instead of isolating it."
Dr Tertrais disagreed: "I don't want to integrate [Iranian President] Ahmadinejad. That would be appeasement." He also noted that one of the main stumbling blocks in the Iranian crisis is the US administration's insistence on regime change in Tehran. "Regime change and nuclear non-proliferation talks are mutually exclusive," he claimed. Dr. Pierre Goldschmidt (former Deputy Director General of the IAEA and Head of its Safeguards Department) suggested instead that the international community follow the example of secret diplomacy with Libya that led to the abandonment of its nuclear programme.
The future of non-proliferation: what way forward?
Hannes Swoboda (PES, AT) asked whether the EU had any "general, coherent strategy for non-proliferation," which could be explained to European voters. Mr. Lundin described the Commission's efforts at controlling TNW in the former Soviet Union through the TACIS program, while Jean-Claude Brunet, a representative of Mr Solana, described the difficulties in starting Council discussions on any nuclear issue, since the Member States hold such a wide variety of views on nuclear power.
Karl von Wogau (EPP-ED, DE), the Chairman of the Subcommittee, asked whether stable mutually assured destruction (MAD) arrangements were forming on a regional basis, replacing the bipolar deterrence system of the Cold War. Janet Bloomfield, honorary vice-president of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament wondered instead whether more nuclear-free zones could be established worldwide, such as the recent agreement in Central Asia. She gave her support to a written declaration by the EP calling for the withdrawal of US nuclear weapons from European territory, which is still awaiting the required number of signatures to be adopted.
Prof. Potter suggested replacing all HEU in civilian applications that, for the most part, require only low-enriched material. Mr Kullig called on the EU to push for a universal acceptance of the "additional protocol" designed to enable the IAEA to verify compliance in non-nuclear weapons states. More ambitiously, Dr Stephen Pullinger, Director of the International Security Information Service (ISIS) Europe, spoke out in favour of a "new 'International Nuclear Settlement'" with extensive disarmament goals. Ms Bloomfield took the idea one step further, and advocated a total "phasing-out of nuclear power" of all kinds, civilian and military.
2006-09-11 Subcommittee on Security and Defence In the Chair: Karl VON WOGAU EPP-ED DE 20060908IPR10500 The Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT): Council Common Position on the Non-Proliferation Treaty (2005): Documents of the hearing:
EN
1
LINK
http://disarmament2.un.org/wmd/npt/npttext.html
EN
2
LINK
http://www.eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/site/en/oj/2005/l_106/l_10620050427en00320035.pdf
EN
3
LINK
/meetdocs/2004_2009/organes/sede/sede_20060914_1500_audition.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
