Claudio Baglioni's concert highlights immigration issues
Immigration
2006-09-13 - 18:32
Claudio Baglioni live on 13 September at 19.00 - 20.30
Thousands of illegal migrants try to reach Europe every year. The risk is high. Criminal organisations are trying to exploit their desire for a better life. The EU needs to find a quick and appropriate answer to this issue. A concert by Italian artist Claudio Baglioni will take place in the European Parliament Plenary Chamber in Brussels on Wednesday evening to raise awareness about immigration issues in the EU.
The event is organised by the independent Italian Socialist MEP Lilli Gruber, together with the Civil Liberties' committee Chairman Jean-Marie Cavada (a French Liberal ALDE Member). Gruber says: "It's time for the EU to take its responsibilities on this important and delicate issue. We need to be more brave to cope with immigration in a positive way, primarily perceiving it as a resource."
The event can be seen live from the European Parliament Hemicycle in Brussels on the Parliament's website on Wednesday 13 September at 19.00 - 20.30. The concert will be on "EP Live" (see link below).
Italian singer Claudio Baglioni is a well-known musician and composer in his home country. For the last few years he has been active in raising awareness of humanitarian issues, in particular immigration. He has already organised several concerts in the island of Lampedusa which has been inundated with illegal immigrants.
Speaking prior to the concert Claudio said that "the EP is an arena where you can dream to make a pipe dream true. A world where people could soon experience a better and more balanced life expectation and happiness. The starting signal for a new world passes through Europe and the EP. The purpose of my appearance is to ask MEPs to duly take into consideration not only this problem, which represents only a fever, a symptom, but the the real disease…looking at the immigration not only as a phenomenon to eradicate, but to contemplate it in terms of integration and balancing of the economic world ".
Illegal immigration
Large numbers of legal and illegal migrants arrive in the EU together with asylum-seekers every year. Europe's ageing society and gaps in its employment market highlights the need for immigrants, while at the same time the mass influx has made the need for action in managing migration flows a priority.
In particular certain Mediterranean countries have been very affected by illegal immigration. During the summer 10,000 African immigrants landed illegally at Lampedusa in Italy and a further 20, 000 in the Canary Islands. Many others did not reach their destination alive. Organised crime often accompanies and profit from illegal immigration. Smuggling and trafficking networks take advantage of people seeking a better life.
What happens next?
On 27 September the EP will debate immigration with Council and Commission during its next Strasbourg plenary session. MEPs have already visited detention centres in Mediterranean countries to gather further information and will continue these visits in the autumn starting with Greece.
20060912STO10575 Concert live Civil Liberties (LIBE) Committee Baglioni website
EN
1
PHOTO
20060907PHT10474.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/eplive/public/freetext_page_webstreaming/default/default_en.htm
EN
3
LINK
/activities/expert/committees/presentation.do?committee=1248&language=EN
EN
4
LINK
http://www.baglioni.it/home.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
