Plenary session 4-7 September
Institutions
2006-09-18 - 16:04
The conflict in Lebanon, Turkey's EU aspirations, measures against pollution and programs to combat domestic violence were just some of the issues discussed in the Plenary session. Multilingualism, efforts to tackle mental health problems, protection of passenger data and reform of the European social model were some others debated during the week.
Parliament reopened after its summer recess with the first of two plenary sessions in Strasbourg. What follows is a day-by-day account of the sitting. All the main issues are covered with links to other articles should you wish more information.
20060911FCS10564
Monday in Plenary
President Borrell opens the September plenary session Parliament's President Josep Borrell used his opening remarks to recall the "tragic events" of the war in Lebanon and the "dramatic humanitarian issues" raised by migration into Europe. Later, Parliament's Foreign Affairs Committee debated Turkey's progress towards EU membership. MEPs expressed support for eventual membership, but said Ankara must work harder on political reform. They voted on a draft resolution in preparation for Parliament's next Plenary session. (See more below).
War in Lebanon
President Borrell reminded MEPs that Parliament had been at the forefront of calls for a ceasefire. He recounted a meeting of the leaders of Parliament's Political Groups on 1 August that called for an immediate ceasefire, a halt to attacks on civilians and a UN force with a strong European contribution. During the crises the Parliament had urged EU members and institutions to "speak with one voice" he recalled. The deployment of an EU force was now "a test of credibility" for the Union he said. Also welcomed were diplomatic initiatives by the Euro-Med Parliamentary Assembly (EMPA) during the crises which were "an example of European and Arab Parliamentarians working together". Immigration
This summer 10,000 African immigrants landed illegally at Lampedusa in Italy and a further 20, 000 in the Canary Islands. Hundreds more are feared drowned in the attempt. President Borrell spoke of the "dramatic humanitarian issues" this raised and that wealth inequality meant this influx "would not be a one-off". He called for EU immigration and development policy to tackle the problem. Floods and fires
MEPs debated yesterday a resolution on floods and fires which affected some EU countries this summer. The resolution will be put to a vote on Thursday this week. Turkey
At a meeting of Parliament's Foreign Affairs Committee later in the evening, MEPs showed their concern over the slowing down of political reforms in Turkey when they voted a draft resolution in preparation of Parliament's next Plenary session. MEPs made clear that they firmly hoped that Turkey will eventually become a member of the EU, but that it will have to work harder on the changes which are necessary for Turkey to fulfil all the conditions for EU membership. For now, the MEPs are increasingly worried about Turkey's refusal to admit vessels and airplanes from Cyprus, an EU member state but which also continues to be divided in a Turkish northern and a Greek southern part. The resolution which was voted on Monday evening warned that the EU governments in September last year had said that Turkey must admit the Cypriot planes and vessels by the end of 2006 or risk a halt to negotiations. The MEPs in the Foreign Affairs Committee also referred to "persistent shortcomings" in such areas as the freedom of expression, religious and minority rights, the role of the military in state matters, law enforcement, women's rights and trade union rights. Read more? For more on these and other subjects, please click on the "Info" link below.
More information on Turkey? See the Press Info below
Opening of Plenary Session Info on Turkey
Tuesday in Plenary
MEPs support "polluter pays" principle MEPs voted to tax cars based on their level of pollution instead of registration. They also voted to increase spending in programs to combat violence against women and children and endorsed more money for measures against pollution and oil spills at sea. All the debates were available in 20 languages - an issue discussed in a report on multilingualism.
The car tax report drafted by Danish Liberal MEP Riis-Jørgensen includes some of the following proposals: - phasing out car registration taxes over 5-10 years - EU passenger cars tax based largely on CO2 production - the inclusion of other pollutants (soot particles and nitrogen oxides) - progressive taxation of pollutants. Mrs Riis-Jørgensen said: “It is an important signal to the car industry. It will come up with better, less polluting cars.” He stressed this would not mean extra taxes. "Daphne III" – fighting violence against children, young people and women MEPs overwhelmingly voted to approve €125 million in EU support over the next six years to help organisations that tackle violence against children, young people and women in Europe. The money is vital, as according to German Socialist MEP Lissy Gröner who drafted the report, "a mere 17% or so of the projects submitted to date have received funding" under the "Daphne" programme. This initiative, launched in 1997, supports organisations to fight against violence, including: fighting domestic violence, supporting victims of trafficking, contribution to the prevention of inter-ethnic violence in schools and integration of help to neglected and abused children. Efforts to widen Daphne to include the fight against drugs were refused as it would be too wide a mandate. Pollution at Sea: European Maritime Agency gets more funding. MEPs welcomed extra funding of €154 million for the European Maritime Safety Agency to help prevent pollution from shipping through patrol vessels and satellite equipment. The agency was founded after the "Erika" and "Prestige" oil tanker disasters . Multilingualism - interpretation costs Parliament adopted report by Finnish Conservative Alexander Stubb about spending on interpretation and ways to improve working methods in multilingual EU institutions. The report highlights areas in which savings could be made while underlining that multilingualism and the ability to understand other speakers in the European Parliament is crucial for European democracy. While the total cost of translation and interpretation in all EU bodies represents just 1% of the EU budget, the report says efforts should be made to cut costs by increasing awareness of interpretation costs, reducing stand-by time for interpreters and optimally managing needs and resources. and taking a pragmatic approach. Today in the Plenary : MEPs debate the EU's future role in Kosovo, a stabilisation agreement with Albania and, this afternoon, the situation in the Middle-East.
Info on car taxation Daphne program against domestic violence Pollution at sea Multilingualism
Wednesday in Plenary
Mental health problems affect millions across the EU A strategy to fight mental health problems in Europe, ways of combining social welfare protection with economic growth and an Association Agreement between the EU and Albania were just three issues MEPs endorsed on Wednesday.
Mental Health - "defeat of stigma" should be at the heart of any policy Parliament strongly backed a report by British Conservative MEP John Bowis calling for EU-wide legislation on mental health that would "defend the civil and fundamental rights" of sufferers and would be drawn up in partnership with them, their families, carers and NGO's. The report also backs measures to, if possible, take people out of mental institutions. MEPs voted to widen the original definition of "key target groups" in the European Commission's Green Paper on mental health to include those with severe mental illness, long term and terminal illness, the disabled, prisoners, ethnic groups, those sleeping rough, migrants, the unemployed and those with job insecurity. The original mentioned only children, employees, older people and the disadvantaged. A gender element was also included as mental health issues can affect men and woman differently. The importance of this issue reflects the fact that 18.4 million people in the EU suffer serious depression each year with 58,000 people committing suicide. European social model - combining economic growth and social solidarity MEPs approved a report that spells out ways the EU can maintain its "social model" of high social standards and economic growth in the face of globalisation, demographic change and the information technology revolution. To deal with these challenges, it calls for reform of economic policies and social systems across the Union. In particular, policies that will boost employment - specifically among woman and the young - are advocated. The importance of research and development is also highlighted. Reform should also ensure that national social systems are financially healthy to provide continued social support. An economic and social framework at a EU level should be established to allow members to implement reform at a national level. Albania - Parliament backs closer links with EU MEPs voted for closer economic and political ties between the EU and Albania through a "Stabilisation and Association Agreement". MEPS said that while Albania has progressed it still has a lot of work to do. Problems include the electoral system, the lack of “a stable and transparent legal environment”, corruption, low level of implementation of laws and organised crime. Some MEPs questioned the level of media freedom in the country.
Mental Health in the EU European Social Model EU-Albanian relations
Thursday in Plenary
MEPs back calls for protection of passenger data International affairs dominated the last day of the Strasbourg plenary. MEPs adopted a resolution on the Middle-East, reiterating that "there is no military solution to the conflict". On the issue of the transfer of information on European air passengers to the US government, (which the European Court of Justice ruled must end by 30 September), MEPs supported a report that calls for the US to ensure offer adequate protection for this data. A report on human rights in China was also adopted.
Lebanon, Middle East - peace and stability needed in Europe's "neighbourhood" That was the message that emerged from a heated debate on the issues on Wednesday, with a compromise resolution being voted upon on Thursday. It called for political will to tackle the "root causes" of the recent crises. In the text Parliament expressed "deep regret" at the civilian lives lost during the conflict and the continuing humanitarian catastrophe in Lebanon. On international mediation in the region, the deployment of 7000 personal from EU members as part of a UN force was welcomed. The resolution called for a "democratic and sovereign Lebanon" to play a role, as well as that of the Arab League and the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly (EMPA). MEPs agreed to send a fact-finding mission to Lebanon, Palestine and Israel. Passenger data - EU and US In the global fight against terrorism, the United States government sees data about air passengers as a legitimate intelligence tool to help prevent further terrorist attacks. However, when this data involves information about foreign nationals, in this case EU citizens, the issue is certain to be controversial. The European Court of Justice set a deadline of 30 September, 2007, to end the practice of passenger data on Europeans who travel to the US being transferred to the US government. This has led to a great deal of uncertainty about what will happen next. In this context MEPs supported a report by Dutch Liberal MEP Sophie in 't Veld calling for the US to offer adequate protection regarding the privacy of this data. The report calls for the Council of Ministers to negotiate an interim agreement with the US until November 2007 under Parliamentary scrutiny, and for a new one after that. MEPs are concerned that the US will negotiate bi-lateral agreements with countries- and want US customs officials to work on a case-by-case basis rather than by requesting information wholesale. In the debate the Ms in 't Veld called for joint action in the fight against terrorism. EU- China The abolition of the death penalty, forced labour camps and the illegal trade in organs were three things MEPs called for in adopting an own-initiative report on EU-Chinese relations by Dutch MEP Bas Belder of the Independence/Democracy Group. The report also calls for retaining the EU arms embargo against China and want the Chinese currency to be valued at a more flexible rate. MEPs also discussed human rights conditions in Sri Lanka, Zimbabwe and the situation of North Korean asylum seekers, in particular in Thailand with three resolutions being adopted.
The next sitting will be held on 25 September 2006 in Strasbourg.
Passenger data Resolution on the Middle East Resolution on China Human rights debates Post Plenary
EN
1
PHOTO
20060905PHT10330.jpg
EN
4
PHOTO
20060906PHT10370.jpg
EN
9
PHOTO
20060906PHT10372.jpg
EN
13
PHOTO
20060908PHT10484.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060901IPR10224 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060904IPR10273 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060901IPR10225 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060901IPR10236 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060901IPR10226 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060901IPR10242 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060901IPR10238 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060901IPR10244 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060901IPR10245 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060901IPR10254 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060901IPR10250 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060901IPR10251 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060901IPR10256 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060901BRI10216 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
