Musharraf at the Parliament: "a unique privilege to interact with you"
External relations
2006-09-18 - 13:23
Pakistan's President Musharraf makes his case
Pakistan's President, General Pervez Musharraf, rounded off a two day visit to the European Parliament on Wednesday by meeting with the leaders of its political groups and EP President, Josep Borrell. His message was that the West should see his country as a key ally in the war on terror and that MEPs could help the EU and Pakistan increase trade links. He also thanked the EU for the humanitarian assistance it had given following the 2005 earthquake.
Following their meeting Mr Borrell complemented the efforts of President Musharraf to "build confidence" with India in disputed Kashmir and paid tribute to the Pakistani army's fight against terrorists and the Taliban movement. He said that concerns over issues such as human rights and nuclear proliferation had been raised by leaders of parliament's political groups during the meeting.
Musharraf tells MEPs: enhanced EU-Pakistan co-operation is needed
During Tuesday's meeting with the foreign affairs committee the President spelt out the challenges for Pakistan and faced some tough questions from MEPs about his rule. You can read a full report of the meeting by clicking on the link below.
The main thrust of his presentation was the need for the EU to support Pakistan in "overcoming difficulties". These "difficulties" are daunting. The democratic and economic development of Pakistan needs substantial assistance - and improving market access to the EU for Pakistani goods was a key Musharraf demand. Internally the Pakistan army has been engaged in extensive combat operations against Al-Qaida and members of the Taliban movement. Mr Musharraf pledged to keep fighting the "Talibanisation" of parts of Pakistan. He asked for EU help with the ongoing dispute over Kashmir which has poisoned Indian-Pakistan relations for nearly 60 years.
Mr Musharraf stressed the "moderate, religious and tolerant" nature of his country and said that it had only gone nuclear to meet the threat that a nuclear armed India posed.
MEPs challenged President Musharraf on the "democratic deficit" in Pakistan (where there are no democratic elections and no separation between the military and politics). They also called for a moratorium on the death penalty and questioned a lack of religious tolerance.
The Chair of the Foreign Affairs committee, German Christian democrat Elmar Brok, underlined that Pakistan is going through a decisive period in its history, while playing a vital role with its "enormous range of different responsibilities".
British Socialist Neena Gill, Chair of Parliament's Delegation for relations with South Asia said that Pakistan is "an important ally of Europe in the fight against international terrorism". However, she urged the President to act to “eliminate gender discrimination in all its manifestations" in Pakistan as well as instances of "honour killings" of women (who may have been accused of adultery). Ms Gill said the President must "ensure that human rights are respected throughout Pakistan".
Questioned about his own future as a General and President, he said, "I'll take decision in 2007 according to the constitution of Pakistan".
20060914STO10661 Musharraf in the Foreign Affairs committee
EN
1
PHOTO
20060913PHT10651.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060908IPR10492 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
