Science and Politics
Research and innovation
2006-09-22 - 15:36
STOA provides a "laboratory" where politics and science meet
Funding for genetic research, chemical legislation and the Galileo satellite project: just three recent issues MEPs have dealt with. You don't have to be Einstein to understand them - but some scientific knowledge helps and the input of the scientific community is vital. That is the reason Parliament set up a science and technology body in 1987 - to provide practical advice on scientific matters and bring together MEPs, researchers and scientists to discuss science issues.
It is known as "Scientific Technology Options Assessment" (STOA). The chair of the 15-member panel is Belgian Socialist Philippe Busquin. As a former European Commissioner for Research he has experience of the field. He described the objectives of STOA’s work as "providing strategic advice on developments in science and technology - their opportunities, risks and their ethical dimensions".
This was reiterated by Parliament's Vice-President Mario Mauro who explained that STOA " looks at the work done by national and regional parliamentarian Technology Assessment bodies, organised in the European Parliamentary Technology Assessment (EPTA) network. Their projects often examine subjects of interest for the European Parliament”.
This month STOA held a workshop with public health researchers to discuss the growing resistance by the population to common antibiotics. A report for the panel suggested that 50% of common bacteria in the wild may have become resistance to common antibiotics.
The chair of the workshop, Swedish Christian Democrat Anders Wijkman called this a "major threat to society". He was surprised by the results of the discussion. "I thought before the meeting that the most urgent thing was to stimulate more research to develop a new generation of antibiotics. But the advice we got was to focus on limiting over prescription and overuse...today's antibiotics are prescribed too casually."
Also in September, representatives of the European Space Agency (ESA), academics and MEPs met in a STOA workshop to discuss the potential uses of "Galileo" satellite technology. The uses range from navigational products and services, managing transport in the EU to technological "leisure" uses such as mobile phones.
The joint EU-ESA project envisages four satellites becoming operational by 2008. It is designed to give Europe its own global navigation system under civilian control, and is an alternative to the US's Global Positioning System (GPS).
The scientific know-how STOA and MEPs can access is formidable. Since 2005 a group of five leading European scientific institutes have been contracted to provide scientific services for Parliament on social, environmental and economic aspects of technological developments.
20060921STO10850 STOA homepage The single market goes into orbit Gallileo
EN
1
PHOTO
20060921PHT10856.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/stoa/default_en.htm
EN
4
LINK
http://www.esa.int/esaNA/galileo.html
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20050819STO00999 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
