Forest fires and floods - MEPs want EU to strengthen civil protection capacity
Regional policy
2006-09-07 - 18:17
In adopting a resolution on forest fires and floods, MEPs express their solidarity with the relatives of those who have lost their lives as well as the inhabitants of the damaged areas, in particular in Galicia, and thanks all those – professionals and volunteers – who helped to extinguish the fires and rescue the victims of the floods.
The resolution was adopted by 534 votes in favour to 10 against and 29 abstentions. The House calls on the Finnish Presidency-in-Office to pay particular attention to the development of the Union’s rapid response capacity for such disasters and to the proposals by the Commission and the European Parliament on reinforcing the Community’s civil protection capacity and to propose the adoption of the legal instruments by the end of 2006, in line with the mandate given by the European Council of 15 and 16 June 2006.
MEPs are concerned at the growing number of disasters which, according to experts, may be attributed largely to climate change. The House calls, accordingly, on the Member States to do what is necessary to attain the Kyoto goals, and calls on the Commission to take initiatives to guarantee compliance with the Kyoto commitments and the follow-up to them. MEPs believe that the damage caused by recent events further emphasises that mitigation will be much less costly than the consequences of global warming.
Parliament asks the Commission for the mobilisation of the European Union Solidarity Fund to be applied with flexibility, facilitating its implementation in order to tackle the serious damage caused by fires, bearing in mind that the damage affects the way of life of the population, especially in the less prosperous regions that have to cope with the adverse effects on infrastructure, economic potential, employment, the natural and cultural heritage, the environment and tourism, which all have an adverse effect on economic and social cohesion.
MEPs call on the European Institutions to adopt, and on the Member States to implement as soon as possible, the ongoing procedures to establish a Community civil defence mechanism and concerning the assessment and management of floods.
MEPs call on the Commission to reintroduce aids to farmers for creating and maintaining firebreaks as part of the implementing rules for the new European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development (EAFRD).
The House regrets that Russia neglected cooperation with its neighbouring countries during its recent forest fires. Finally, Parliament calls for the Commission to raise this issue in the framework of the EU-Russia Partnership and Cooperation Agreement.
20060901IPR10227 Joint motion for a resolution on forest fires and floods
-//EP//TEXT MOTION P6-RC-2006-0460 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
