Middlesbrough fans demand justice for Rome debacle
Petitions
United Kingdom
2006-09-14 - 09:04
Middlesbrough fans seek justice in the European Parliament
Two Middlesbrough fans demanded redress today (13 September) at the European Parliament Committee on Petitions for alleged brutality by the Italian police. The event occurred during the lead-up to the UEFA cup tie on 15 March 2006 between AS Roma and Middlesbrough. Despite the European Commission stating they were unable to act to support the petitioners, MEPs promised further action calling for an investigation by the Italian football authorities and other European Parliament Committees.
Mr Peter Green and Mr David McLuckie who are two of the 945 signatories to the petition and who were in Rome for the match outlined their concerns of maltreatment to MEPs in the committee. The day before the match, on 14 March 2006, Mr Green says that he and his family were subject to a totally unprovoked attack by Italian nationals in the Campo dei Fiori in the centre of Rome. Mr Green stated that he and his two sons were ambushed by a group of Italian Ultra thugs and one of the boys was stabbed. Mr Green wants to know why the Italian police failed to take a statement from his son and investigate the stabbing. He is also battling to claim compensation for injuries to his son.
Middlesbrough fans also say that they were held against their will for a two hours after the match, which they say, erodes their rights to freedom of movement as enshrined in the EU Treaties.
Dave McLuckie who is the chairman of Cleveland Police Authority and fellow 'Boro fan Peter Green travelled from Teeside at the invitation of Labour MEP Stephen Hughes who is fighting in the European Parliament for an apology from the Roman authorities. Mr McLuckie said: "The Italian police engendered a 'ring of fear' atmosphere. Personally, I was held for over 6 hours against my will."
Stephen Hughes the Labour MEP for the North East of England MEP said: "The least the Middlesbrough fans deserve is an apology from the Italian authorities. The first hand stories that I've heard from Boro fans are frightening. European football glory is the stuff of dreams. We can't stand aside and let dreams turn into living nightmares. There has been a total lack of response from the Rome authorities and those injured have not been able to seek criminal injury compensation as Italy has not transposed the appropriate legislation. We will pursue this further with European Parliament committees that deal with police and judicial co-operation."
Fiona Hall Liberal Democrat MEP for the North East said: " I am very pleased to hear that the Middlesbrough football petition was heard before the petitions committee today. After writing to the UK Foreign Office on this issue, I received a disappointing response from the Foreign Secretary in April. He appeared to be passing the buck over the incident. It is not good enough just to say that fans can submit complaints through their local police station. The Middlesbrough fans’ petition has collected 945 signatures. The Petitions Committee has rightly listened to what the fans are saying."
Martin Callanan Conservative MEP for the North East said: "I completely support the petition, the Middlesbrough fans were treated outrageously. We will be working to find a legal mechanism at the EU level to get them some justice."
European Commission response: seek redress through the Italian authorities first
The European Commission representative (who must state whether EU law had been infringed) said their preliminary conclusion was that the Commission could not intervene as it was first for the Italian authorities to carry out investigations. "We do not have a blank cheque to investigate, we can only do so, where EU law is concerned, we do not think that the right to free movement has been infringed," he said. Nevertheless, he indicated that one possible route to justice may be the European Court of Human Rights based in Strasbourg but only after the Italian authorities had concluded any investigations.
The fight goes on - petition remains open
Despite the lukewarm response from the European Commission, MEPs in the Petitions Committee promised to keep the petition open and to pursue the matter further. The Chairman of the Petitions Committee, Mr Marcin LIBICKI (UEN, Poland) said that the committee would call on the Italian football federation to investigate. The MEPs also promised to call on the expertise of the European Parliament Civil Liberties and Legal Affairs Committees who deal with cross-border police co-operation.
20060912IPR10573 The 3 MEPs for the North East of England European Parliament Petitions Committee
EN
1
PHOTO
20060913PHT10605.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/members/public/geoSearch/search.do?country=GB&zone=North+East&language=EN
EN
3
LINK
/activities/expert/committees/presentation.do?committee=1251&language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
