Finnish, Bulgarian leaders visit Parliament as international issues dominate
Institutions
2006-09-07 - 15:55
Finnish President Tarja Halonen
Tuesday saw two high profile visitors to the Parliament, Finnish President Tarja Halonen who used her address to Parliament on Tuesday to stress the international challenges and opportunities the EU faces while Bulgarian PM Sergei Stanishev met Parliament's President Borrell and the leaders of the political groups. In introductory remarks Mr Borrell thanked President Tarja Halonen for her efforts to highlight the social side of globalisation.
Warm welcome for Finnish President Tarja Halonen
Mrs Halonen quickly moved to international issues. On the international situation she warned that "the international security threats we are facing are increasingly non-military", and that threats such as environmental degradation and natural disasters were becoming increasingly threatening.
On the EU's growing international and crises management role she said that "the EU's crisis management policy rests on the combination of military and civilian action. A coherent EU is a strong actor, as the Lebanon situation has shown". She was referring to the 7000 personnel from EU countries that have been committed to the UN operation in Lebanon.
On the EU's relations with Russia she highlighted areas where cooperation was vital - trade-energy-the environment. She also noted that " The Russian leadership has repeatedly declared that Russia is irreversibly linked with Europe". She said she looked forward to the November EU-Russia summit.
Bulgarian PM Sergei Stanishev
As the near the final stages in their bid to join the EU. Bulgaria's Prime Minister met Parliament's President Borrell and the leaders of all the political groups in the Parliament (the Conference of Presidents). He stressed that his country has intensively worked towards EU accession, notably by implementing a specific action plan to comply with the membership criteria.
Mr Stanishev noted that the transition in his country has been painful, but that the wish to join the EU in good shape has pushed them forward. He saw Bulgaria's recent co-operation agreements with its neighbours as the country's asset in view of improving regional co-operation in South East Europe.
In late September the European Commission (as "guardian of the treaties") will present its view on whether Bulgaria and Romania have met the criteria for EU accession. This will be put before MEPs during the next Plenary session (25-28 September).
Romanian Prime Minister Mr. Calin Popescu will address the EP Conference of Presidents during the second Strasbourg session in September.
20060906STO10384 Full address by President Halonen EP resolution on the accession of Bulgaria and Romania, June 2006
EN
1
PHOTO
20060906PHT10374.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060901IPR10243 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2006-0262 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
