A very early start for foreign language learning / Towards a European Qualifications Framework
Education
2006-09-26 - 15:28
Parliament adopted two non-binding reports on the theme of education. The first from Christopher BEAZLEY (EPP-ED, UK) on the European dimension of school teaching materials. The second report relates to developing a European qualifications framework for mutual recognition of qualifications.
A very early start for foreign language learning
Parliament adopted the own-initiative report tabled by Christopher BEAZLEY (EPP-ED, UK) on the European dimension of school teaching materials. It was particularly stressed that Member States should include at least two foreign languages from a very early age in their school programmes to maintain sufficient interest and motivation in becoming proficient in other languages, which would underpin mutual understanding and empathy across Europe. The report was adopted with 470 votes in favour, 55 against and 24 abstentions.
In a non-binding report, the House also stresses the importance of school curricula providing support measures for the European dimension. All education systems in the EU should ensure that, by the end of their secondary education, their pupils have the knowledge and competences they need to prepare them for their role as EU citizens. The "European dimension" has two aspects: firstly, access to information about the EU, its institutions, methods and practices, and, secondly, the development of linguistic skills, with learning the languages of neighbouring peoples being especially important.
Parliament is also recommending an exchange of best practice between all Member States with regard to language teaching and the inclusion of European content in education. Members suggest the promotion of teacher training courses to provide the necessary understanding of European issues so teachers can may complement their teaching of national and local issues with European ones.
Towards a European Qualifications Framework
How to compare a qualifications achieved in one Member State to ones of another Member State? For professional qualifications, a European directive has existed since last year. Concerning other qualifications - for example after vocational training - the Commission launched a consultation procedure with the aim of creating a European Qualifications Framework (EQF). The report was adopted with 535 votes in favour, 18 against and 10 abstentions.
The House gave its input into the ongoing discussions by adopting a report on the subject. The Commission will adopt a formal proposal by the end of 2006. The Parliament will be dealing with this proposal in the future in the framework of the co-decision procedure.
The aim of the EQF is to create a European framework which will enable qualifications systems at the national and sectoral levels to relate to each other. This reference structure will be used on a voluntary basis and will facilitate the transfer and recognition of qualifications held by individual citizens. The core would be a set of common reference points referring to learning outcomes located in a structure of 8 levels.
In general, MEPs welcome the Commission initiative to modernise and improve the European education and training systems with a view to laying down a common reference framework for European certification systems.
Parliament points out that the EQF must serve primarily to classify certification procedures based on the outcome of vocational training. Therefore MEPs call for simple, workable descriptions to be used (taking greater account of vocational training and further training systems) and the number of levels reduced.
MEPs take the view that the EQF is also relevant to the labour market. They welcome the fact that, as a result of the Lisbon Strategy, greater attention is being devoted to lifelong learning in the workplace and hence to the recognition of qualifications acquired at work.
MEPs also take the view that particular attention should be paid to methods and systems of evaluating learning outcomes achieved by non-formal or informal methods, as the development of skills in the context of lifelong learning takes pace in a wide range of everyday work situations.
Every country should have its own national or regional qualifications framework ensuring compatibility with the EQF. Members agree that the EQF should initially be implemented on a voluntary basis and not involve legal obligations. Nevertheless, they think it must serve to promote transparency and equivalence as regard certificates issued at national and sectoral level.
20060922IPR10879 Creation of a European Qualifications Framework The European dimension of school teaching materials
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5303142
EN
2
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5313042
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
