Tuesday in Plenary: Liberia's President, air quality, EU budget, Romania-Bulgaria's EU-hopes
Institutions
2006-09-27 - 17:24
Liberia's President in Strasbourg
Liberia, Romania and Bulgaria came to Strasbourg on Tuesday when MEPs heard from Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, President of Liberia, and the European Commission gave the green light to the EU-hopes of the two Balkan states. Tuesday also saw MEPs vote to approve reports on improving air quality, the urban environment, promoting student's mobility and lifelong learning. MEPs also approved a report that grants their President the "discharge" for implementation of the budget for the 2004 financial year.
Ellen Johnson Sirleaf: "Liberia is not a poor country"
Parliament's President Josep Borrell introduced Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, President of Liberia and the first woman elected President of an African country. He described her "as a symbol of democracy, women's rights and the fight against corruption and impunity..."
In her address to MEPs, Mrs Sirleaf stressed the need to introduce policy changes and reforms to avoid the country sliding back into civil war.
"The Liberian people's dreams are not complicated. They just want...to live their lives in peace, get a good education, and be able to provide for their families", said Mrs Sirleaf. She said that "Liberia is not a poor country, but a country that has been poorly managed". Mrs Sirleaf expressed gratitude for the assistance Liberia had received from the EU and its members, and said she hoped an economic partnership accord with the EU could soon be agreed. (See a full report of her speech by clicking on the link below).
Improving air quality
Recent surveys suggest that air pollution contributes indirectly to over 360,000 premature deaths in Europe every year. The most affected regions are big cities and industrial areas. To tackle this serious social health problem, in 2005 the Commission launched the strategy based on scientific research to reduce the air contamination death toll by 40% by 2020.
In a report on the issue drafted by German Liberal Mr Holger Krahmer, MEPs requested stricter limits for small particles that cause pollution and opted for more "adjustable" criteria to fit local and national capabilities. This is in part because many countries suffer from cross-border pollution so conditions can vary considerably. These amendments were adopted in Parliament's first reading of the report. The biggest health threat, as identified in the report, are posed by the so called micro-particles "PM25", known more commonly as "atmospheric dust". Its concentration levels have not yet been regulated by EU legislation.
In addition to this report, Dutch Socialist Ms Dorette Corbey presented an own-initiative report on EU air-pollution strategy which calls for a cut in nitrogen oxides level as well as a focus on pollution sources (farming, transport). Following the debate on Monday MEPs adopted both documents with a majority of over 500 votes each.
Mobility for students, education for adults
MEPs also adopted on Tuesday two reports aiming at improving education and training across the EU. The first one by German Green MEP Ms Helga Trüpel, intends to raise the number of the EU citizens who benefit from the lifelong learning. Some of the most valuable skills underlined by the rapporteur are communication in foreign languages and computer literacy.
Another report by the Austrian Socialist Christa Prets called on the educational authorities of EU members to introduce a "European Quality Charter for Mobility" in education. An increasing number of those studying abroad contribute to the employment market and a stronger "European identity".
EP Budget: 2004 "discharge"
MEPs have granted its President the discharge for the implementation of the budget for the financial year 2004 with the adoption of a report German Christian Democrat MEP Markus Ferber. The discharge-procedure relates to the approval of the accounts of EU institutions by the European Parliament. Concerning the European Parliament the discharge is given to the President of the Parliament.
On the controversy linked to the proposed purchase of the European Parliament's buildings in Strasbourg, MEPs conclude it "could be" reasonable to seek to purchase the Winston Churchill, Salvador Madariaga and IPE3 buildings which Parliament currently rents from Strasbourg City council.
Improving the urban environment
MEPs have voted to adopt a report that backs the establishment of "Sustainable Urban Management Plans" (SUMP) for towns above 100,000 people. Some of its proposals are to encourage non-motorised transport - walking and cycling - and environmentally friendly transport using bio-fuel and hybrid technology. An urban management plan will also include waste management plans, noise maps and action plans, local air pollution plans and local environmental plans. It is based on a Commission paper on a "Thematic Strategy on the Urban Environment" (TSUE). The report was drafted by Hungarian MEP Gyula Hegyi and backed by Parliament's Environment committee
EU hopefuls Romanian and Bulgarian given cautious green light by Commission
Romanian and Bulgaria will able to join the European Union in January 2007 despite concerns over some issues - that was the message the European Commission delivered in Strasbourg before MEPs on Wednesday.
The concerns the Commission identified include the workings of the legal system, the fight against corruption and organised crime and whether both countries will be able to mange EU financial aid. The Commission has issued "benchmarks" of progress that Bucharest and Sofia must meet by March 2007. The EU-aspirations of both countries has been strongly supported by Parliament and by leaders of its Political Groups. While welcoming the accession of the two countries, the President of the European Commission, Jose Manuel Barroso, said that he didn't think "it would be wise to proceed with any enlargements before we have resolved the constitutional issue in Europe".
In April 2005 MEPs passed a resolution giving the Parliament's legally-binding "assent" to their membership of the Union providing reforms were made. MEPs will vote on the Commission's report before the end of the year.
Today in Plenary
MEPS will vote on a report Turkey's progress towards EU accession and a report on public services The Prime Minister of Lebanon will meet leaders of the Political Groups. You can follow all the debates and votes here on the website on "EP Live"
20060927STO11032 President of Liberia: Press Info / More Info Air quality: Press Info / More Info Education: Press Info / More Info 2004 budget / purchase of buildings: Press Info / More Info Urban Environment: Press Info / More Info Bulgaria-Romania’s EU aspirations: Press Info / More Info EP Live
EN
1
PHOTO
20060927PHT11036.jpg
EN
7
LINK
http://europa.eu/rapid/pressReleasesAction.do?reference=IP/06/1257&format=HTML&aged=0&language=EN&guiLanguage=en
EN
8
LINK
/eplive/public/freetext_page_webstreaming/default/default_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060926IPR10990 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060922IPR10875 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060922IPR10878 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060922IPR10877 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060922IPR10876 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
