MPs to debate freedom, justice and security in EU - are we moving forward?
Justice and home affairs
2006-10-03 - 13:10
Judicial cooperation under the spotlight of Parliamentarians and experts
MEPs, MPs and experts from across Europe will gather in the European parliament over the next two days for a joint Parliamentary meeting on the EU's area of "Freedom, Security and Justice". This policy was initiated at the Tampere summit in 1999. Data exchange and protection, the future of Europol, migration and the management of the EU's external borders are just three of the issues on the agenda. The second day of debates on 3 October can be watched via the Parliament's live broadcast service.
Experts from Europol, the EU's new border agency "Frontex" and the international organisation for migration as well as the EU's anti-terrorism coordinator will be present. Other topics on the agenda include the state of EU judicial cooperation and the fight against terrorism - with special attention being paid to respect for fundamental human rights.
Tampere to The Hague - moving forward?
The European summit at Tampere in Finland in 1999 was the first devoted to such issues. They were then termed "Justice and Home Affairs" although the title "freedom, security and justice" is preferred.
What do they involve? At Tampere the following issues were among those discussed: integration and asylum policies across the EU (with the aim of creating a common asylum policy); the fight against cross-border crime and the development of a European judicial cooperation.
Five years later meeting in The Hague, the enlarged EU of 25 members agreed to adopt the Tampere agenda and reiterated their desire to set up a common integration and asylum policy for the EU. However, some countries - notably Denmark, the UK and Ireland - decide to "opt -out" of some areas of the policies.
What practical steps have been taken?
Three important steps have been taken - criminal legislation across the EU has been gradually brought into greater harmony so that criminals can no longer use differences in criminal system to cheat justice. Secondly - the "mutual recognition principle" has been developed - so that a decision taken by judicial authorities in one county shall be recognised and executed in another. Finally - cooperation between judiciaries has been accelerated with the creation of the European Judicial Network in 1998.
Obviously in such a wide field and where migration and the fight against crime and terrorism are involved, there are strong opinions about what is the next best step. The interparliamentary meeting hosted at the European Parliamentary should hopefully steer a clear future path.
20061002STO11221 Programme of the Joint Parliamentary Meeting Parliament´'s Civil Liberties Committee
EN
1
PHOTO
20061002PHT11281.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/hearings/20061002/libe/programme_en.pdf
EN
3
LINK
/activities/expert/committees/presentation.do?committee=1248&language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
