Post-Briefing - 25-28 September 2006 - Strasbourg
2006-10-05 - 09:36
EP critical of slowdown in Turkey's reform process
President of Liberia addresses Parliament
EP sets out its views on immigration
MEPs urge Sudanese to accept UN peacekeeping force
EP adopts report on economic and trade relations with India
Education - Very early start for foreign language learning and Towards a European Qualifications Framework
Tackle root causes of Middle East violence, says Lebanese PM
Cleaner air in Europe and more ambitious targets for greater flexibility
2004 discharge: sharp criticism but support for purchase of Strasbourg buildings
Sakharov Prize 2006 nominees
Protection of the euro against counterfeiting
President Borrell announces extraordinary plenary to take place on Monday, 18 December in Brussels
Congratulations to Estonian MEP, Toomas ILVES on his recent election as Estonia's next President
NB. All texts adopted during this plenary can be accessed via the link given at the end of this publication. 20060925BRI10986
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Opening the second September plenary in Strasbourg
2006-10-05 - 09:36
Opening the second Strasbourg plenary in September, President Josep Borrell announced that an extraordinary plenary would be held in December to debate the conclusions of the Finnish Presidency. President Borrell also congratulated Toomas Hendrik ILVES (PES, EE) on his election as President of Estonia. Extraordinary session on the conclusions of the Finnish Presidency
President Josep BORRELL announced that Parliament will hold an extraordinary session on Monday 18 December to discuss the conclusions of the forthcoming European Council to take place on 14-15 December, as well as the conclusions of the Finnish Presidency.
Borrell congratulates Estonian MEP Toomas Ilves on his election as the next President of Estonia
President Josep BORRELL congratulated Toomas Hendrik ILVES (PES, EE) on his election as Estonia's next President. Mr Ilves was elected on 23 September 2006.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External relations
Ellen Johnson Sirleaf: building a new Liberia
2006-10-05 - 09:36
Addressing MEPs in plenary on Tuesday, the President of Liberia, Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, said that Liberians were committed to moving from the crisis of the past to the opportunity of the present, building "a new Liberia from the ashes of an old turbulent past to a future of hope and promise." President Josep Borrell said it was an honour to welcome the first woman elected as president of an African country. She had, he said, previously been the first woman budget minister of her country in 1979. Unfortunately the following year, there had been a coup, which marked the beginning of 25 years of violence, including a 14 year civil war, systematic pillaging of resources and huge violations of human rights. "The long war could not have been more tragic: there were 250 000 victims among a population of three million, almost 10 per cent. A million people had to leave their homes, with some returning only now. There was a huge campaign of rape of women. Three quarters of the population was living on less that one dollar a day, and unemployment reached 85 per cent. Basically there wasn't an economy as we understand the term in the west. It must have been difficult for anyone to take reigns."
Mr Borrell added that Parliament was very pleased with the role of the community of West African States in ending the conflict. EU election observers, led by Max van den Berg (PES, NL) had reported that despite some problems, the presidential election had met international standards. "We welcome you as symbol of democracy, women's rights and fight against corruption and impunity (...) In April, I was able to tell the plenary, how pleased I was with arrest and extradition of Charles Taylor. This was great progress against impunity for criminals around the world. After so much suffering, we must offer our support."
The arms were now silent, and the events were followed with less interest from the media, said Mr Borrell. Liberian society needed to move to reconciliation and economic development. "On that road you will have EU support for Liberia can continue to be symbol of freedom that was its origins."
President Johnson Sirleaf began her address by pointing out that her government had come to office only eight months ago, and they had accepted that responsibility fully aware of the magnitude of the challenges the country faced after fourteen years of civil war and destruction. The damage and negative consequences has, she said, been enormous, deepening the state of poverty. GDP had declined by 90 per cent since the 1980s, exports by 95 per cent. The country's external debt of USD 3.7 billion was the equivalent of 800 per cent of GDP or 3,000 per cent of export earnings.
"When we took office there was no electricity and no water. Schools and clinics had crumbled, and roads were impassable. Institutions of governance had completely collapsed and corruption was rampant. HIV rates had soared. Few children were in school, and many were dying of curable diseases. Today, well over three quarters of our people live below the poverty line of one dollar per day. An overwhelming majority of people, mainly the youth, are either unemployed or employed in the informal sector.
Yet Liberians, she said, were a resilient people, and they were counting on her and her administration to create the conditions to realise their dreams.
"Their dreams are not complicated. They just want the simple things that most people take for granted: to live their lives in peace, get a good education, and be able to provide for their families. These things are not too much for Liberians to dream about. But time is pressing. As you all know, the risks of regression to war in post-conflict societies is high when the government and the international community are not able to make strong efforts at key moments, and sustain them over time. Liberia today is at one of those key moments. Our efforts, joined by those of our partners, over the next few months, the next year, and beyond, will determine the future course of the nation. If we wait too long to introduce the policy changes and reforms that are needed, or if our international partners wait to long to ramp up [their] support, then we may lose the best change Liberia has had in a generation to end the conflict permanently and build the foundations for growth and prosperity. We can't let that happen."
The Liberian President said the dividend of peace needed to be quickly consolidated, and the economic and financial haemorrhaging halted. The core principles were democracy, accountability, free enterprise, good governance, respect for human rights and equitable distribution of natural resources. Poverty reduction was the heart of the strategy, based on four "pillars" of reconstruction and development: enhancing security and peace in Liberia, revitalising the economy, improving democratic governance and revitalising the social and physical infrastructure. Restructuring the previously corrupt and dysfunctional security forces was underway, there was a strong economic focus on agriculture and natural resource industries, a strong anti-corruption framework was being developed, and education was being put at the heart of government efforts to improve the infrastructure. "We recognise," she said," that no nation can develop under conditions of a 70 per cent illiteracy rate." Health services and roads also needed rehabilitation. "In one of our most important achievements, in July we were able to tune on electricity and water to parts of Monrovia for the first time in fifteen years."
"Our mission is to make the Liberian government work again and be more responsive in delivering quality services to the Liberian people. The associated challenges are so daunting and the needs and expectations of our people so massive, that the government of Liberia cannot satisfactorily respond by itself. There is a critical need for forging and building strong strategic partnerships." Mrs Johnson Sirleaf expressed gratitude for the assistance Liberia had received from the EU and its Member States, and said she hoped an Economic Partnership Agreement with the EU could soon be agreed.
"We are off to a good start. For that we are grateful to the Liberian people, and to the international community including the EU and the European Commission, which is a key partner in this regard. But it is just a start." Planning for a Partnership conference was underway, along with development of a medium term poverty reduction and growth strategy. "But it is critical that in the next few months Liberians begin to see steady, tangible progress. I would like to ask all of our partners to work closely with us in the next few weeks so that we can make sure that the many activities that need to be implemented during the upcoming dry season are ready to go on time. We cannot afford to waste any time and in many projects we need to speed the process of disbursement and implementation. We specifically ask for your support of this objective through the European Commission."
The Liberian President said she wanted to ensure there was no gap in support as emergency programmes came to an end and longer-term programmes got started. It was essential to ensure the efforts of the government and its international partners were synchronised and harmonised. "We need to work together with both strong planning, and rapid and effective implementation (...) We will take advantage of this critical moment in Liberia's history to put the conflict to rest and speed the process of reconstruction and development."
"We are glad that our nation has been blessed. Liberia is not a poor country but a country that has been poorly managed. We are committed to change this; to pursue those goals that will move us from the crisis of the past to the opportunity of the present. We are committed, as a people, to build a new Liberia from the ashes of an old turbulent past to a future of hope and promise. We are committed to strategic partnerships based upon mutuality of respect and benefits."
President Borrell concluded the formal sitting by telling Mrs Johnson Sirleaf: "Your presence here and the words you have expressed will I am sure help Europe to take on board the problems you are facing and commit further to the development of Africa."
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External relations
Tackle root causes of Middle East violence, says Lebanese Prime Minister
2006-10-05 - 09:36
Addressing MEPs at an open meeting of the Conference of Presidents on Wednesday, 27 September, the Lebanese Prime Minister Fouad Siniora said that it was time to tackle the root causes of the conflicts in the Middle East, rather than just the symptoms. Europe had a unique role to play in finding a lasting peace, he said. The Prime Minister gave his account of the causes, conduct and consequences of this summer's war, which led to a lively debate with Members both offering support and challenging his views.
Welcoming the Lebanese leader to Parliament, President Josep Borrell said MEPs were keen to hear about what happened over summer and what may happen in future including presence of European troops in peace keeping force. He noted that Parliament had played a role, being one of the first bodies to call for a cease fire, and for a peace keeping force with strong European component. He spoke of the attacks on civilians by both sides in the conflict, something which he said happened too often in the Middle East.
Mr Siniora said that on 12 July, "fulfilling its threat to set Lebanon back twenty years, Israel started the latest of its invasions of our country, killing over 1100 civilians, a third of whom were children; wounding over 4000; displacing one million people, or a quarter of our population, many with no homes to return to; destroying thousands of homes, and many hospitals, schools, factories, roads and most of our bridges; severely damaging airports, power stations, fuel depots, and warehouses; enforcing a cruel siege on the entire country thereby creating shortages of fuel, medical supplies, and hampering essential humanitarian relief supplies; burdening future generations with more pain, suffering and debt; and causing a serious environmental disaster in the eastern Mediterranean. In all of this, Israel has persistently and wilfully violated international law and international humanitarian law, including the Geneva Conventions. In short, ladies and gentlemen, Lebanon, which a few months ago was full of hope and promise, has been turned into a place of destruction, displacement, dispossession, desolation, and death.
"There are those who would have us believe that a border incident, and by that I mean the abduction by Hezbollah of two Israeli soldiers from behind the Blue Line, was the cause of all this. The Lebanese government has made it clear from the outset that it had no prior knowledge of, and actually, disavowed such actions. Nevertheless, the state of Israel wasted no time in launching a massive and disproportionate response against Lebanon and the Lebanese people. It was the same state of Israel that gives itself the right to abduct Lebanese civilians, and detain, they say, not soldiers, but elected members of the Palestinian parliament, including the speaker, as well as ministers in the Palestinian government. Unfortunately, we have heard only timid objection by the international community to those actions, officially sanctioned by the Israeli government, compared to the abduction of the two Israeli soldiers which the Lebanese government has clearly and immediately disavowed."
Israel's "systematic campaign of destruction"
The Lebanese Prime Minister spoke of Israel carrying out a "systematic campaign of destruction of Lebanon." He stressed that while Lebanon had acted immediately to comply with the UN resolution, Israel had still not completed its withdrawal from Lebanon. He spoke of the thousands of bomblets left after cluster bombing, which would "continue to maim and kill unsuspecting civilians for many years."
"In order for the current cessation of hostilities to be sustained, Israel must withdraw without any further delay from the positions it still occupies within Lebanon and must stop its violations of Lebanese territory. There also need to be concrete steps toward putting an end to the Israeli occupation of the Shebaa Farms, as an important element in establishing security along our southern border and in restoring the Armistice agreement between Lebanon and Israel, until such time that the Arab countries and Israel are able to reach a just and comprehensive peace settlement." He suggested the Shabaa Farms could be put into UN custody as an interim arrangement.
"The direct damage from this last invasion is now running into the billions of dollars, while the long term direct and indirect costs to the economy, including lost revenues in tourism, agriculture and industry are expected to be billions more. Where we were anticipating a growth rate of around 6% this year, we are now on the verge of a deep recession with tens of thousands of jobs having been lost and with all the consequences that entails; where we had a future full of promise, we must now pick up the pieces of our devastated country."
"Military solutions are morally unacceptable"
Looking to the future, he said, "Military solutions are morally unacceptable. They are not real solutions, as recent events in Lebanon and Iraq have demonstrated. Partial and unilateral initiatives have all but failed. It is time for the international community to seek with determination a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the Middle East. The last meeting of the Security Council held on the margin of the UN General Assembly does not meet our expectations and remains short of addressing the magnitude and core issues of the problem in the Middle East. A comprehensive political solution can only be implemented when Israel recognizes the right of the people of Palestine to a viable and independent state, and the right of return of refugees, pursuant to relevant UN resolutions, and withdraws from all the Arab lands it occupies in Lebanon, Gaza, Jerusalem, the West Bank and in the Syrian Golan Heights in accordance with Resolution 242. The Arab countries have, together, offered a hand of peace, a just, comprehensive peace, through the initiative of, then Crown Prince, Abdallah at the 2002 Arab Summit in Beirut. Unfortunately, Israel is yet to respond to this initiative."
Europe had a responsibility and an interest in seeing the region become more democratic and prosperous. Stereotyping Muslims as inherently violent, irrational and hostile to the West would only feed the sense of hostility and anger. "This, in turn, provides fertile ground for extremist and violent minds to engage – in the name of religion – in activities against innocent people that contradict the very basic tenets of all religions."
"I assure you that the vast majority of Muslims around the world do not want to be separated or isolated from the rest of the world. The vast majority of Muslims reject violence. They do not want to intimidate or be intimidated. The Noble Koran teaches unequivocally that killing an innocent human being is tantamount to killing all mankind. It is a crime against humanity."
Europe's "unique role"
"The wider region, from Afghanistan to Iraq, Sudan, Palestine and Lebanon is ablaze with conflicts and saturated with armies. Hundreds die needlessly every day. The region has been - and remains - an example of instability. Europe can play a unique role in this volatile and strategic part of the world and we look forward to seeing this role strengthened, aware that this commitment to universal values and the right to peace and prosperity are at the heart of the European approach to world problems. In addition, none can ignore the fact that those escaping oppression, desperation, and poverty usually end up at your doorsteps, bringing with them a multitude of problems. If global security is indivisible, so is the security of our shared neighbourhood."
He spoke of the need to address all the issues of the region, and also to "build bridges of mutual respect and understanding across cultures and religions," which would help in "the harnessing of the enormous potential of our peoples for the mutual benefit of our interdependent societies."
"I know that many of you, and many of your leaders, are aware of the need to step back and take new and bold initiatives that help address our region's issues at their roots. I have spoken to many of them about this in recent months. I believe the time has come for concrete steps to be taken, and we are ready to work together towards those shared goals."
Mr Siniora thanked European countries for their engagement in the region, whether through political support, troops serving in UNIFIL or financial backing.
Political group leaders react
Regretting the "tragic events" which had affected Lebanon, Hans-Gert Poettering (DE) underlined his group's support for Mr Siniora's efforts to create a sovereign Lebanon, a state, as he put it, independent of external influence. In working to achieve this aim, he told the Lebanese leader, "you face a tricky and dangerous task". The EPP-ED leader, alluding to the role of Hezbollah in Lebanese public affairs, expressed his "concern that in Lebanon you have something like a state within a state". Hezbollah's existence alongside the legitimate Lebanese army, he said, is "unacceptable". Taking note of Mr Siniora's references to Israeli disregard for UN resolutions, he added that it is not only these resolutions which must be respected, but all of them -- including those calling for the disarmament of Hezbollah. "Israel does have a clear right within secure borders", he affirmed. "We can never support any attack on the integrity of Israel". Peace, he added, involves efforts on both sides.
"We are all looking for peace", said Martin Shulz (DE), leader of the Socialist group. The way to secure it, he argued, and to secure the territorial integrity of Lebanon, is by way of multilateralism. "A great power," he noted, alluding to US policy in the Middle East, "has tried to be active in the region [...] on the basis of unilateralism". The result of such engagement, he said, has been "a spectacular failure". Finding reconciliation often comes at the end of great destruction, said Mr Shulz: "we must not allow this to recur". He then proposed the launch of a regional conference for the Middle East along the model of the Conference for Security and Cooperation in Europe (CSCE) -- this, as a way of bringing regional players into a comprehensive peace agreement.
"The legacy of war will be with you for some time to come", pronounced Graham Watson (ALDE, UK), citing, among other things, the existence of unexploded munitions and cluster bombs on Lebanese territory. Having expressed his sympathy with the plight of Lebanese civilians, Mr Watson -- addressing the Lebanese prime minister -- nonetheless argued that "few of us see the conflict in the way you have presented it today". Israel, he said, is "regularly attacked, as it was this summer, by Hezbollah [...]; its people are regularly abused in the press across the Arab world; it is threatened with obliteration by a head of government". Last month, added the ALDE leader, "Hezbollah said it would not disarm [...] even if Israel pulled out [from the Shebaa farms]". Echoing Mr Schulz, he emphasized the need of a regional security conference, accompanied by the launch of a Euro-Mediterranean development bank and a heightened role for the Euromed Assembly. An international force, he warned, is only "a sticking-plaster remedy" for the region.
Although we condemned the way Israel fought the war in Lebanon, and although there can be "no doubt" about the EP's solidarity with you -- Daniel Cohn Bendit (Greens/EFA, DE) told Mr Siniora -- "you were a little unilateral in your speech". As he put it, "we are ready to defend a sovereign Lebanese state"; such a state, however, cannot accept an armed force, such as Hezbollah, which acts independently of it. "Truth, reality is a difficult, complex thing," he added, which is why we need statesmen who can "overcome the discourse" that is expected of them. "I ask that you, as a great statesman, recognise the state of Israel", he said.
"We salute your wisdom and your courage", Francis Wurtz (FR), leader of the GUE/NGL group, told Mr Siniora, applauding the prime minister's efforts to produce a "material, political social reconstruction of [his] country". "How can Europe best help Lebanon politically at this point in time?" asked Mr Wurtz. "We must concentrate on the cornerstone of all policies, in this region as in all others: the respect for international law, which is the same for all people and for all nations". We must move away, he added, "from the strategy of George W. Bush, whose war on terrorism [...] may end up as a war on civilisation."
"Many things were left unsaid", said Cristiana Muscardini (UEN, IT), commenting on Mr Siniora's discourse, citing the need for diplomatic solutions to the Iranian nuclear program; the Iranian president's comments on eradication of Israel; and the situation in Somalia. "If you want peace," she argued, "it is impossible to have a unilateral peace".
Bastiaan Belder (IND/DEM, NL) cited press outlets, which, he said, reported that armed groups other than Hezbollah were implanted in Southern Lebanon -- which, as he put it, "lays the basis for new confrontations within [the country]". Is it true, he asked Mr Siniora, that groups like Fatah "still have bases in Lebanon"?
Gianni De Michelis (IT), a non-attached MEP, said we needed to ask what kind of political and diplomatic initiative was now needed. He wanted genuine multilateralism, "transcending the logic of the Quartet," and commended the model of the Helsinki process during the Cold War.
Siniora's response to debate
Responding to the debate, Mr Siniora said that during the past decades, most of the attempts made to deal with incidents, events or problems concentrated on symptoms not core causes of problem. That is why the problems stayed and deteriorated and "went in unexpected proportions."
He said the right way was to deal with root causes. "Once this is handled properly, we can direct attention to rebuilding societies and economies in the right manner. The Arab and Muslim world is at a crossroads. It can move to real problem solving and real peace recognising all states including Israel and helping all moderates against the cause of extremists [...] Or there is the other direction of further desperation and fanaticism. Desperate people often commit desperate acts"
He said he believed strongly that there could not be a state within a state: "We have to do our part of the duty but Lebanon must be helped. We must go on, through negotiation and dialogue with all groups including Hezbollah. All groups represented in government including Hezbollah have endorsed a seven point plan that states clearly that weapons are only for the state. Lebanon must be helped to make that important step. This is the key to take us to where state can prevail over all our territories. Some real effort is needed on the Shebaa farms. We need to trigger this important step to take us to where state has monopoly of forces all over Lebanon. It would be a step to real peace in region, and recognition of all, including for the state of Israel, and its continuation and prosperity."
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External relations
MEPs urge Sudanese to accept UN peacekeeping force
2006-10-05 - 09:36
In adopting a resolution on the situation in Darfur, the European Parliament urges the Government of Sudan to accept a United Nations peacekeeping force in Darfur, under Chapter VII of the UN Charter. MEPs underlines that Sudan has failed in its 'responsibility to protect' its own people and is therefore obliged to accept a UN force in line with UNSC resolution 1706. The House calls on the UN Security Council to bring pressure to bear on the Sudanese authorities to accept the deployment of the already authorised UN Mission to Darfur, with a clear Chapter VII mandate and enhanced capacities given to such a mission through UN Security Council Resolution 1706.
Parliament condemns the continuing violations of the ceasefire by all parties, and in particular the violence directed against the civilian population and the targeting of humanitarian assistance,
The House demands that the Sudanese authorities not only pose no obstacles to the deployment and activities of the UN Mission in Darfur, but also create the conditions necessary for the effective functioning of this mission. MEPs stress that any failings by the Sudanese authorities in this regard will be sanctioned.
MEPs calls on China and Russia to play a positive role at the UN in efforts to ensure that a UN peacekeeping force can be deployed and to put to good use their role in the region to facilitate the deployment of that mission and prevent any bloodshed.
The House calls, in this regard, on China to build on the joint statement made by China and the EU on 11 September in which 'leaders emphasised that transition from an AU to a UN operation would be conducive to the peace in Darfur'. MEPs urge the Chinese Government to act on this statement by using its influence with Sudan to persuade the Government of Sudan to accept a UN peacekeeping force. MEPs calls on the Arab League to cease its complicit approach to Sudan's continued intransigence over the need for a UN peacekeeping force.
Parliament calls on the EU to call for the urgent enforcement of the no-fly zone over Darfur established by UNSC Resolution 1591 and urges the international community to liaise with Chad to discuss enforcing the no fly-zone from eastern Chad.
MEPs call on the EU and other international actors to work specifically with the UN and the AU to ensure that peacekeeping forces in Darfur have the capability to react rapidly to ceasefire violations or provocations by any party. Parliament also calls on the EU, the US and other international actors to impose sanctions on any side, including the government, that violates the ceasefire or attacks civilians, peacekeepers or those involved in humanitarian operations and to take all necessary action to help end impunity by enforcing the Security Council sanctions regime. The House calls on the Government of Sudan and the international community to fully cooperate with the International Criminal Court in order to end impunity. Parliament also calls on all permanent members of the UN Security Council to assume their global responsibility and not to hinder any measures intended to foster peace, security and stability in the Darfur region of Sudan, but rather to support and promote all appropriate steps towards a sustainable resolution of the conflict.
The House calls upon all parties, in particular the Government of Sudan, to ensure the full, safe and unhindered access of relief personnel to all those in need in Darfur as well as the delivery of humanitarian assistance, in particular to internally displaced persons and refugees. Finally, MEPs call for a significant increase in the humanitarian aid provided by the international community to the nearly 3 million people who are totally dependent on international aid for food, shelter and medical care.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External relations
EP adopts report on economic and trade relations with India
2006-10-05 - 09:36
Parliament adopted an own-initiative report on EU's economic and trade relations with India. The report calls on the EU to support India's international trade potential as well as efforts to attract foreign direct investment (FDI) in particular by stepping up trade-related aid to address infrastructure and administrative bottlenecks. MEPs welcome both India and the EU's commitment to a successful and ambitious outcome of the Doha Development Agenda (DDA). Parliament calls to this end on India to use its position as leader of the G20 to reach, by the end of 2006, a balanced agreement favourable to development between the developed countries, the emerging economies and the developing countries. The report also notes that negotiations on the DDA are not incompatible with bilateral WTO+ negotiations. The report notes that an outcome of a concluded Doha Development Round will reduce the value of schemes such as the GSP to developing countries like India, by further reducing the margin of preference they enjoy at present. MEPs call on the EU to offer to enter into a free trade agreement with India, along the lines of its agreement with Chile, which provides for duty-free entry for the exports of both parties on a reciprocal basis, and calls on the High Level Trade Group to explore mutual opportunities in this regard.
US-India relations
Parliament notes that, whilst Indo-United States relations have been on an unprecedented high, taking in a civilian nuclear deal signed over a year ago, the current impasse on the DDA has soured relations between the two countries and trade relations have steadily deteriorated, with India blaming the United States for its refusal to cut agricultural subsidies before developing countries start opening their markets to non-agricultural products.
The House calls on the EU and India to lead the way in finding an expeditious and permanent solution on TRIPS and public health to facilitate access to essential medicines, within the Doha Development Round. MEPs welcome the steps taken by the Indian government regarding IP rules for medicines. The report encourages the Indian government to implement the law faster especially as regards exports of generic medicines.
EU-India co-operation
MEPs welcome the fact that the EU and India committed themselves to strengthening dialogue and engagement, including on human rights, as strategic partners at the sixth India-EU Summit on 7 September 2005, as reflected in the Joint Action Plan, which also includes development cooperation, giving importance to environmental sustainability and to social and economic cohesion. MEPs ask that an ongoing dialogue be maintained in the field of human rights within the strategic partnership. The report in this context, congratulates India's National Human Rights Commission on its independent and rigorous work on these matters.
The report stresses that meeting the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) and combating poverty should remain a central element of the EU-India Strategic Partnership. MEPs welcome the fact that the next EU-India summit on 13 October 2006 will address the issue of the MDGs. The House calls urgently for specific measures to be taken to ensure that minorities such as Dalits and Adivasis and other marginalised communities, tribes and castes, are able to close the wide gap with the rest of the population regarding the attainment of the MDGs.
India's economic and social situation
Parliament notes that international trade can be a powerful driver of economic growth and poverty reduction, but it is not a magic bullet, and trade reforms are complementary to development policies. The House considers that to lift people out of pockets of poverty, and continue to climb the ladder of economic development, India needs to focus critically on building a business environment that deepens integration with the world economy in a widening range of manufactures and services.
MEPs note that there is a worrying lack of familiarity with the Indian market in some sectors of the EU business community; calls on the EU to engage more systematically with senior members of the EU business community, especially from SMEs, to bring about a 'step-change' in their perceptions about India by highlighting the very significant business opportunities that exist there.
Development and Environment
Parliament acknowledges the important successes of the Government of India in the eradication of poverty, but notes that despite sustained economic growth, vast inequalities still persist, with about 30% of the Indian population still living below the poverty line. MEPs are particularly concerned about the situation of underprivileged sections of the population, in particular women, children, the disadvantaged and the rural population, e.g. Dalits and Adivasis (indigenous tribes and peoples). The Parliament calls on the Commission and the Council to work together with the Indian government to improve the situation of those groups and to examine future cooperation as to their contribution towards ending gender and caste discrimination.
MEPs emphasise that successive Indian governments have made considerable efforts to tackle the issue of caste discrimination. MEPs believe however that much more has to be done.
Parliament urges the EU to promote and implement measures to ensure the socio-economic development of minorities, who have largely been excluded from the new economy in India and are discriminated against in development programmes and disaster recovery through, inter alia, the promotion of equal opportunities in employment in private EU-based companies and investors, the encouragement of Dalit-inclusive development programmes and the use of indicators to measure Dalit inclusion in the new economy.
The House notes that India's current administration has more openly acknowledged the problems posed by HIV/AIDS. MEPs consider that the spread of HIV/AIDS has the potential to disrupt India's progress. MEPs also note that limited access to health-care and low levels of awareness are responsible for its growing incidence. The report welcomes the fact that it has increased its funding and programmes to address the problems posed by HIV/AIDS and calls on the EU to assist India to scale-up programmes for individuals and communities at high risk. The House accordingly welcomes the work of the National AIDS Control Organization (NACO) in its activities for raising awareness among the rural and urban populations.
MEPs call for a parliamentary summit to be held annually to coincide with or immediately precede the annual EU-India summit, which usually takes place without the official participation of the European Parliament. Finally, the report considers that such summits would make it possible to develop the links between parliamentary bodies, improve understanding of our differences and bring the democratic systems of both sides closer together.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Enlargement
European Parliament critical of slowdown in Turkey's reform process
2006-10-05 - 09:36
In adopting a report on Turkey's progress towards accession, MEPs were critical of the slowdown in the reform process. Relations with Cyprus and Armenia, as well as restrictions on freedom of expression and religion, figured prominently in the report adopted by 429 votes in favour to 71 against with 125 abstentions. MEPs nevertheless welcomed some recent steps by the Turkish government in the fields of combating torture, fighting corruption and extending women's rights. The report reiterates the Parliament's position that negotiations with Turkey are an "open-ended process, and [do] not lead a priori and automatically to accession while recalling that "the EU's capacity to absorb Turkey while maintaining the momentum of integration is an important consideration in the general interest of both the EU and Turkey."
MEPs called on the government in Ankara to recognize the Republic of Cyprus, withdraw its forces from the island and lift its embargo on Cypriot vessels and aircraft. The report reminds Turkey that a lack of progress in implementing the Ankara protocol "will have serious implications for the negotiation process, and could even bring it to a halt." It also calls on Turkey to refrain from "tension-prone military activities."
Significantly, the EP rejected a provision that would have otherwise called the acknowledgement of the Armenian genocide a "precondition" for Turkey's European Union accession. MEPs nevertheless stress that, although the recognition of the Armenian genocide as such is formally not one of the Copenhagen criteria, it is indispensable for a country on the road to membership to come to terms with and recognise its past. The House calls in this respect on the Turkish authorities to facilitate the work of researchers, intellectuals and academics working on this question, ensuring them the access to the historical archives and providing them with all the relevant documents. MEPs urge Turkey to take the necessary steps, without any preconditions, to establish diplomatic and good neighbourly relations with Armenia, to withdraw the economic blockade and to open the land border at an early date, in accordance with the resolutions adopted by Parliament between 1987 and 2005, thereby fulfilling the Accession Partnership priorities and the requirements of the Negotiation Framework on 'peaceful settlement on border disputes' which are both mandatory for EU accession.
The House, at the same time, called for the abolition of the "xenophobic and racist" Talaat Pasha committee. MEPs urged Turkish authorities to "fulfil their commitments regarding freedom of religion," since they noted an "absence of progress" in this area since the last EP report.
Parliament condemns PKK terrorist violence
The House welcomed "the opening of broadcasting in Kurdish" while nevertheless noting the continued intimidation of civil society representatives in the South East of the country. The report "strongly condemns the resurgence of terrorist violence on the part of the PKK" and "calls on the PKK to declare and respect an immediate ceasefire." It also pleads for "a democratic solution to the Kurdish issue following Prime Minister Erdogan's encouraging statement last year.".
Despite the recent acquittal of the novelist Elif Shafak, the EP remained troubled by the remaining barriers to freedom of expression in Turkey. It called for the abolition or amendment of those provisions of the Penal Code which threaten European free speech norms -- such as Articles 216, 277, 285, 301 (which foresees punishment for "denigrating Turkishness"), 305 and 318. The Parliament also expressed its "serious concern" about the "non-respect for women's rights" and the high role of the military in Turkish public life.
The European Commission announced last week that the publication of its next annual report on Turkey's progress towards accession will be delayed by two weeks, until 8 November.
Debate - 26 September 2006
Ahead of the vote on the report by Camiel EURLINGS (EPP-ED, NL) on Turkey's progress towards accession, MEPs debated the issue and expressed a wide range of views, many being critical of the slowdown of the reform process in Turkey. MEPs pointed out that Turkey still had a long path to tread before accession.
Opening the debate, rapporteur Camiel EURLINGS (EPP-ED, NL) described his report as "fair but tough" and said its basic conclusion was that the EP regretted the "slowdown in reforms" in Turkey, although he did compliment the Turkish government on its 9th reform package.
Freedom of expression was the first problem area Mr Eurlings highlghted, saying that Article 301 of the Penal Code [on "insulting Turkishness"] must be changed or abolished. This was important not just for the EU but for Turkish people. Freedom of religion was another issue. Confiscated property must be restituted to monasteries and churches and they must be allowed to start training clergy once more.
Turning to the situation in south-east Turkey, the rapporteur made a point of strongly condemning PKK violence but called on Turkey to try to find a political solution. As to Cyprus, Turkey must fulfil its commitments and implement the Ankara Protocol before the end of 2006 which had sought to find a way of "normalising relations" with Cyprus.
On the sensitive subject of the Armenian genocide, Mr Eurlings stressed that he wanted to preserve his own wording in paragraph 50 of the resolution, saying that recognition of the events was not a criterion for accession, although Turkey should seek to "come to terms with its past" by allowing inquiries into the events.
Minister for European Affairs Paula LEHTOMÄKI, speaking for the Council Presidency, said: "Every debate provides a good opportunity to increase awareness of Turkey's accession process, to engage the citizens of the EU Member States and of Turkey in this process, and to support the Turkish government in its accession path. I can assure you that the Presidency will take due note of the views of the European Parliament.
The Presidency shares the European Parliament's concerns regarding Turkey's reform process. Turkey needs to give new impetus to the pace of the political reform and vigorously pursue the reform process. Full and effective implementation of the reforms is of utmost importance for Turkey to ensure the irreversibility and sustainability of the changes. Concrete results are required.
We also share your views on Turkey's limited progress in such crucial fields as fundamental freedoms and human rights. Even if Turkey has made significant progress compared to the situation five years ago, further tangible reforms are necessary especially in the areas of freedom of expression, freedom of religion, cultural rights, women's rights, and combat against torture and ill-treatment. In the revised Accession Partnership, most of these issues are defined to be among the short-term priorities that Turkey needs to meet without delay.
At present, the Presidency looks forward to the adoption of the ninth legislative package with a view to being able to address some of the outstanding issues. We reiterate that the new laws need to be fully in line with the EU standards.
In the area of freedom of expression, in particular, the Council expects immediate action to avoid legal action being brought against people who have expressed non-violent opinions and thus violated certain provisions of the Turkish Penal Code. As for freedom of religion, we expect that Turkey fully and without delay implement the legislation that provides for the rights of non-Muslim religious minorities in compliance with the European standards.
Like the Parliament, we are equally concerned about the tense situation in south-east Turkey. The Presidency has condemned the recent bomb attacks in several locations in Turkey as irrational acts of terrorism. Terrorist activities can never be justified. This is a complex entity of issues that we closely monitor as a part of the ongoing reform process. Turkey needs to swiftly develop a comprehensive approach to help reduce regional disparities with a view to enhancing the economic, social and cultural opportunities of all Turkish citizens, including those of Kurdish origin.
In addition to the Copenhagen political criteria, Turkey's progress in meeting the accession criteria is measured in relation to the requirements clearly set out in the Negotiating Framework - including the implementation of the Additional Protocol to the Ankara Agreement, which is an essential element of the advancement of the negotiations. Turkey must apply the Protocol fully in its relations with all EU Member States and remove all obstacles to the free movement of goods, including restrictions on means of transport. The opening of negotiations on the relevant chapters depends on Turkey's implementation of its contractual obligations concluded with the EU Member States. Failure to implement these obligations in full will affect the overall progress in the negotiations.
We will make sure that the progress made on the key issues, set out in the Declaration of the EC and its Member States on 21 September 2005, will continue to be monitored this year.
Compliance with the Union's standards and membership criteria requires hard work and continuous efforts and determination. Our message is clear and consistent. We attach particular importance to Turkey's accession process, and I can assure you that the Presidency will do its best in order to facilitate further progress in the negotiations.
The Union will continue to support Turkey in its efforts, but progress will depend on Turkey's performance. The accession process will proceed provided that Turkey respects its commitments to the carrying out of the reforms and satisfies the existing obligations. "
Enlargement Commissioner Olli REHN agreed that the momentum for reform had slowed. Progress had been made but the negotiations were "an open process" with no automatic guarantees. "The integration of Turkey would be of mutual benefit", he said, adding "the EU needs a prosperous and stable Turkey".
However, he highlighted freedom of expression as a problem, especially Article 301 of the Penal Code, which he said "violates European standards". He went on "I cannot imagine a Member State of the EU which does not respect the fundamental principle of freedom of expression".
On freedom of religion, he supported Mr Eurlings position on church property rights and the current restrictions on the training of clergy. Turning to south-east Turkey he, like Mr Eurlings, condemned the PKK but called for a government policy not purely based on security considerations. Regarding Cyprus, the Ankara Protocol must indeed be implemented, he said, though an end to the economic isolation of northern Cyprus could not be linked to this.
In conclusion, he told the House, "it is in our mutual interest that Turkey pursues its transformation". It could serve as a bridge between Europe and Islam, thus helping Europe to cope with "the greatest challenge of our time". Ultimately, however, it was up to Turkey to take reform further. Indeed the Copenhagen criteria should perhaps be called the Ankara criteria, as "they are there for Turkish citizens, not to please the EU".
Political group speakers
Speaking on behalf of the EPP-ED group, German MEP Elmar BROK stressed the issues of human rights, minority rights, freedom of religion and of expression. These, he said, were "preconditions" for EU membership. We must clearly "spell out the facts": Turkey must fulfil the criteria. So far it had not even implemented the Ankara Protocol. He also emphasised that the financial aspects of the negotiations must be dealt with and that the EU had "no financial leeway" under the Financial Perspective.
For the Socialists, Jan Marinus WIERSMA (NL) argued that the EU "needs Turkey as a partner". The negotiation process was the best way to build better relations with the country and there must be no ambiguity: the aim of negotiations was to achieve Turkish membership. He supported rapporteur Camiel Eurlings on the Armenian genocide: Turkey should "recognise" what happened but this could not be a sine qua non for membership as it was "not part of the Copenhagen criteria".
Andrew DUFF (ALDE, UK) on behalf of his group, stressed that EP's role was "to promote parliamentary democracy in Turkey". This meant encouraging Turkey's modernisation not putting up "spurious blocks" to the process. Turkey's candidature was a "defining moment for the EU". If there were a "train crash" in Cyprus, there would be two trains involved: one carrying "Turkey's efforts to create a viable reform of European Islam, where the prophet meets the Enlightenment", the other carrying Europe's efforts to develop a strong common foreign and defence policy, to which Turkey could make "an extraordinary contribution".
On behalf of his group, Joost LAGENDIJK (Greens/EFA, NL) said there was a big problem with one point of the Eurlings report in its present form: the paragraphs in which, following amendments instigated by lobby groups, recognition of the Armenian genocide by Turkey was described as a precondition for Turkey to join. He backed Mr Eurlings' effort to reinstate his original wording on this point. More generally, he stressed the importance of being "critical but fair" towards Turkey. The EP must "support people in Turkey who are fighting for the same things as us".
For the GUE/NGL group, Vittorio AGNOLETTO (IT) said that his group favoured Turkish membership of the EU. Nevertheless, there had to be a political and diplomatic resolution to the Kurdish question. The Turkish government had labelled the whole Kurdish people as terrorists. He urged the Turkish government to talk to the PKK and he also condemned the 80 writers and journalists being held under Article 301 of the Turkish penal code.
For the UEN group, Konrad SZYMAŃSKI (PL) said that he welcomed the critical report. Turkey still had a long way to go before it could join the EU he said, namely Turkey must respect the rights of the Christian minority. He also compared Ukraine to Turkey saying the former had a much better record on human rights and prospects for membership.
Bastiaan BELDER (NL), for the IND/DEM group, also welcomed the report but stated that the freedom of religion could not be exercised in Turkey. He criticised the so-called "deep-state" for entering all facets of society.
Andreas MÖLZER (AT), a non-attached MEP, said that progress on reform had been slow in Turkey. The EU had extended the deadline for the recognition of Cyprus, but Turkey had still not done this. The political reality was that Turkey was not ready to join because of Cyprus, the non-recognition of the Armenian genocide and the Kurdish question.
British and Irish Speakers
Seán Ó NEACHTAIN (UEN, IE) said: "May I say at the outset, that I am a member of the European Parliament high level contact group that is dealing with forging closer relations with the Turkish community in Northern Cyprus. I am clearly aware of the sense of isolation that many Turkish Cypriots feel, in light of the rejection of the Annan plan. In fact, I believe that the European Union, together with the United Nations, should continue to work in building peace and reconciliation on the island of Cyprus.
But, Turkey too has serious obligations. For example, I do believe that Turkey must open it's ports and airports to Cypriot ships and plans. This is an obligation that Turkey will have to honour, in accordance, with the accession negotiations dealing with the Customs Union chapter. I also feel that Turkey is going to have to look at repealing clause 301 of it's penal code. It is clear that significant efforts are still needed in the field of human rights and fundamental freedoms within Turkey."
Gerard BATTEN (IND/DEM, UK) questioned why Turkey wanted to join the EU in the first place. May be he said, they wanted to join "the other parasite nations" living off the British and German taxpayers. Turkey, he said, should think about the impact of accession on itself; it would mean, he said, losing control of its own destiny.
Charles TANNOCK (EPP-ED, GB) said that his party was in favour of Turkish membership of the EU. However, the EU had to consider its absorption capacity and potential impact on the structural funds. Mr Tannock also highlighted the risks of unrestricted free-movement of Turkish workers into the EU. Some studies, he said, had shown that Turrkey was one of the most anti-American and anti-Israeli countries. In particular, Mr Tannock criticised Turkey's support for theocratic Iran. Mr Tannock also pointed out the problems relating to the recognition of the Armenian genocide and Cyprus. He said the negotiations with Turkey would be "lengthy".
Simon COVENEY (EPP-ED, IE) stated that he had spent the previous week in Turkey with the Human Rights subcommittee. He welcomed the draft report as "tough but fair". On the Armenian issue, he said, that it should not be a new pre-condition for accession. Mr Coveney said that he supported the principal of Turkish membership, nevertheless he was particularly concerned about the freedom of expression including Article 301 of the Penal Code and resolving the Kurdish question.
Glenis WILLMOTT (PES, UK), like several other speakers, argued that "the European Parliament needs to be frank" with Turkey about the "serious problems" relating to freedom of expression, reform of the security services and implementation of human rights legislation. However, criticism must be "balanced, fair and honest". The prospect of EU membership "has empowered modernisers and human rights defenders in Turkey". And it would be "wrong to establish new preconditions for membership that were not applied to other members". In conclusion, she said "an EU with Turkey will entrench multiculturalism" and help understanding between different religions.
Response to the debate - Council
Minister LEHTOMÂKI, replying for the Council, said that the debate had been very thorough and highlighted the many challenges for both Turkey and the EU. Turkey, was undoubtedly an important strategic country. Enlargement would be carried out on the principal of equal treatment and merit. It was important for Turkey to ratify and implement the Ankara agreement which would allow trade with Northern Cyprus and the access of Greek Cypriot ships into Turkish ports. There also had to be a solution found at the UN level.
Response to the debate - Commi ssion
Standing in for his colleague Olli Rehn, Development Commissioner Louis Michel said the debate had set out the main issues clearly and the Commission would take it into account in its report on Turkey due for publication on 8 November. The Commission's report would be rigorous, objective and based on a wide range of data, including Parliament's views.
He stressed that in areas such as Iran, Iraq, the Middle East, the dialogue between civilisations and the energy crisis, "Turkey is a key player and an indispensable ally" of Europe.
It would, however, have to meet all the obligations - no-one would be waving a magic wand. The Commission would be pushing the process forward but it was important to point out that "Turkey does not have to be evaluated today". Negotiations were very much "an evolutionary process" and it was unfair just to take a snapshot of the current state of affairs.
On the Armenian genocide, Mr Michel emphasised that this had never been a precondition and to impose it as such now would amount to "moving the goalposts". What mattered was "freedom of speech" and a process of "internal awareness raising and conciliation".
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Education
A very early start for foreign language learning / Towards a European Qualifications Framework
2006-10-05 - 09:36
Parliament adopted two non-binding reports on the theme of education. The first from Christopher BEAZLEY (EPP-ED, UK) on the European dimension of school teaching materials. The second report relates to developing a European qualifications framework for mutual recognition of qualifications. A very early start for foreign language learning
Parliament adopted the own-initiative report tabled by Christopher BEAZLEY (EPP-ED, UK) on the European dimension of school teaching materials. It was particularly stressed that Member States should include at least two foreign languages from a very early age in their school programmes to maintain sufficient interest and motivation in becoming proficient in other languages, which would underpin mutual understanding and empathy across Europe. The report was adopted with 470 votes in favour, 55 against and 24 abstentions.
In a non-binding report, the House also stresses the importance of school curricula providing support measures for the European dimension. All education systems in the EU should ensure that, by the end of their secondary education, their pupils have the knowledge and competences they need to prepare them for their role as EU citizens. The "European dimension" has two aspects: firstly, access to information about the EU, its institutions, methods and practices, and, secondly, the development of linguistic skills, with learning the languages of neighbouring peoples being especially important.
Parliament is also recommending an exchange of best practice between all Member States with regard to language teaching and the inclusion of European content in education. Members suggest the promotion of teacher training courses to provide the necessary understanding of European issues so teachers can may complement their teaching of national and local issues with European ones.
Towards a European Qualifications Framework
How to compare a qualifications achieved in one Member State to ones of another Member State? For professional qualifications, a European directive has existed since last year. Concerning other qualifications - for example after vocational training - the Commission launched a consultation procedure with the aim of creating a European Qualifications Framework (EQF). The report was adopted with 535 votes in favour, 18 against and 10 abstentions.
The House gave its input into the ongoing discussions by adopting a report on the subject. The Commission will adopt a formal proposal by the end of 2006. The Parliament will be dealing with this proposal in the future in the framework of the co-decision procedure.
The aim of the EQF is to create a European framework which will enable qualifications systems at the national and sectoral levels to relate to each other. This reference structure will be used on a voluntary basis and will facilitate the transfer and recognition of qualifications held by individual citizens. The core would be a set of common reference points referring to learning outcomes located in a structure of 8 levels.
In general, MEPs welcome the Commission initiative to modernise and improve the European education and training systems with a view to laying down a common reference framework for European certification systems.
Parliament points out that the EQF must serve primarily to classify certification procedures based on the outcome of vocational training. Therefore MEPs call for simple, workable descriptions to be used (taking greater account of vocational training and further training systems) and the number of levels reduced.
MEPs take the view that the EQF is also relevant to the labour market. They welcome the fact that, as a result of the Lisbon Strategy, greater attention is being devoted to lifelong learning in the workplace and hence to the recognition of qualifications acquired at work.
MEPs also take the view that particular attention should be paid to methods and systems of evaluating learning outcomes achieved by non-formal or informal methods, as the development of skills in the context of lifelong learning takes pace in a wide range of everyday work situations.
Every country should have its own national or regional qualifications framework ensuring compatibility with the EQF. Members agree that the EQF should initially be implemented on a voluntary basis and not involve legal obligations. Nevertheless, they think it must serve to promote transparency and equivalence as regard certificates issued at national and sectoral level.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Education
More lifelong learning for adults / Quality charter for student mobility
2006-10-05 - 09:36
MEPs adopted two legislative reports in the field of education. The first report relates to lifelong learning where MEPs welcome the creation of a European frame of reference for key competences offering EU citizens a tool to adapt to an evolving labour market in a knowledge based society. The second report relates to the creation of a quality charter for student mobility. Both reports were adopted in first reading after agreement with Council. More lifelong learning for adults
Parliament adopted a report with an overwhelming majority Helga TRÜPEL's (Greens/EFA, DE) on lifelong learning for all EU citizens. Although this concept of lifelong learning is gaining ground, too few adults were participating. Consequently, national strategies should be urgently implemented in all Member States, MEPs said. Parliament, Commission and Council have a common view on the importance of lifelong learning and by adopting a range of compromise amendments expressing this, a second reading in co-decision can be avoided.
MEPs welcome the creation of a European frame of reference for key competences offering EU citizens a tool to adapt to an evolving labour market in a knowledge based society. The main aims of this proposed Reference Framework are to identify the key competences necessary for personal fulfilment, active citizenship, social cohesion and employability. Member States' work should be supported on ensuring that by the end of initial education and training young people have developed the key competences to a level that equips them for adult life. Adults should be able to develop and update throughout their lives.
Communication not only in the mother tongue, but also in foreign languages mathematical competences, science and technology as well as digital competences (am 66) were considered as being of high importance, as were social and civic competences.
Parliament also highlighted issues such as knowledge of contemporary events (am 71) and a sense of initiative and entrepreneurship. Finally, cultural knowledge and expression were essential as a solid understanding of one's own culture and a sense of identity could be the basis for respect and open attitude to diversity of cultural expression.
Quality charter for student mobility
Parliament agrees, with the European Commission and with the Community's Education Ministers, that is it time to introduce a European Quality Charter for Mobility in Education. In adopting the report by Christa PRETS (PES, AT) Members said that, with a million of young people having lived in another Member State as part of their students, student mobility not only helps to promote an active European citizenship, but also was very important in making an innovative and competitive knowledge-based society.
Following a joint agreement and thus avoiding a second reading, the three EU institutions are now recommending the Member states to adopt and to use the European charter and to encourage its use by their National Agencies. Several compromise amendments were adopted on more technical issues of the Charter such as on language skills adequate logistical support as well as on the portability of government grants and loans from to country of origin to the host country.
Given the fact that EP, Commission and Council could reach agreement on the Charter, a second reading in co-decision can now be avoided.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Environment
Cleaner air in Europe: more ambitious targets but greater flexibility
2006-10-05 - 09:36
In adopting a codecision report (first reading) by Holger KRAHMER (ALDE, DE) by 571 votes in favour to 43 again and 18 abstentions on the directive on the quality of ambient air, Parliament call for more ambitious targets than those set out by the Commission for cutting maximum concentrations of pollutants, in particular PM2.5. At the same time, Parliament calls for more flexibility in achieving the targets, to allow Member States, areas and cities which have problems meeting the criteria more time to adjust. However, there will be safeguards to ensure that Member States take the measures needed to reduce pollution. According to Mr Krahmer, the EP position is a balanced compromise between strict health protection and the flexibility needed at national level, notably for regions suffering from pollution coming from neighbouring countries.
Technical details
• Parliament wants to reduce maximum concentration levels of the largest particles - known as PM10 - to 33 µg/m3 on average per year from 2010, as compared to the Commission's proposal to keep the limit at 40µg/m3. However, for the daily limits for these same particles - where the Commission says a figure of 50µg/m3 should not be exceeded more than 35 times per year - MEPs want greater flexibility (a maximum of 55 days per year) for Member States unable to meet the standards because of special geographical or climatic conditions or significant cross-boundary pollutions .
• For fine particles (PM2.5), which do the most damage to human lungs, MEPs believe it is too soon to set limit values, given the current state of scientific knowledge. Instead they suggest initially setting a target figure, which is less binding. However, it is lower than that proposed by the Commission (20µg/m3 from 2010 instead of 25µg/m3) and would become binding when the directive is revised in 2015 (and would still be 20µg/m3, whereas the Commission would not lower the 25µg/m3 at that stage).
• The report also calls for more flexibility over allowing (five-years according to the Commission) extensions to the deadline in areas or cities which fail to meet the criteria. According to the MEPs, the Member States in question would be able have a derogation of 4 year period possibly extendible for a further 2 years, for PM2.5 and PM10 only, provided they submit a plan showing why they cannot meet the ceilings despite measures taken nationally and locally and how they plan to resolve the problem in future.
• The House also wants greater flexibility over the goal of reducing the population's exposure to this type of pollution by 20% by 2020, by setting differing percentage reductions depending on the recorded concentration levels.
MEPs also demand the adding of new articles mentioning the measures to be taken by the Member States to reduce atmospheric pollution notably the inclusion of norms for incinerators, heavy goods vehicles (Euro VI norms), the installation of domestic heating systems and measures to be co-ordinated at the European level to encourage ship-owners to reduce their pollution.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Environment
Thematic strategy on the Urban Environment
2006-10-05 - 09:36
Around 80% of the European Union's population live in cities but their needs and interests are often neglected in the EU's funds, projects and strategies. In an own-initiative report by Gyula HEGYI (PES, HU), Parliament welcomes a Commission paper on a Thematic Strategy on the Urban Environment (TSUE) but argues that it does not go far enough. The report was adopted 448 votes in favour, 49 against and 110 abstentions. The TSUE would boost the overall environmental performance of cities in Europe by cutting bureaucracy, improving the implementation of environmental policy and encouraging long-term environmental planning at local level.
Parliament strongly believes that a Sustainable Urban Management Plan (SUMP) and a Sustainable Urban Transport Plan (SUTP) should be required by Community law for all urban areas with over 100,000 inhabitants. Clear deadlines and binding targets at local and European level would be needed, as voluntary measures have so far proven ineffective.
The House says SUMPs should include waste management plans, noise maps and action plans, local air pollution plans and local environmental plans. SUTPs should promote non-motorised transport modes such as cycling and walking, promote public transport and tackle growing individual car use, through parking restrictions and congestion charges.
The report urges more use of environment-friendly modes of transport and technologies, such as bio-fuels and hybrid car technologies. MEPs call on the Member States, in cooperation with local authorities, to make efforts to achieve a shift in inner-city passenger kilometre of at least 5% to sustainable transport methods, such as public transportation and cycling, within the period of 2002-2012.
Congestion charge
MEPs recall that air pollution is a major cause of health problems in the EU. The committee stresses, therefore, that cities with high air pollution should consider introducing congestion charges and establishing low emission zones.
Strategy on air pollution
Parliament adopted an own-initiative report by Dorette CORBEY (PES, NL) on the Community thematic strategy for air pollution with 563 votes in favour, 19 against and 47 abstentions. It calls for more ambitious targets for reducing concentration levels of nitrogen oxides (Nox), volatile organic compounds and fine particles (PM2.5).
MEPs also want to see more focus on the sources of pollution, including agriculture and shipping. As with the directive, this report calls for stricter limit values while envisaging longer deadlines for Member States which have taken all possible steps but still have difficulty meeting the limits.
The goal of the thematic strategy unveiled by the Commission in September 2005 is to reduce by around 40% by 2020 - compared to 2000 - the number of premature deaths caused by ailments linked to air pollution. According to rapporteur Dorette Corbey, some 48,000 premature deaths are attributable to fine particles in the EU and 20,000 to ozone pollution. A total of 30 million Europeans suffer from asthma.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Budgetary control
2004 discharge: sharp criticism but support for purchase of Strasbourg buildings
2006-10-05 - 09:36
in adopting the report by Markus FERBER (EPP-ED, DE) by 535 votes in favour to 45 against and 51 abstentions, MEPs granted the EP President discharge for the implementation of the budget for the financial year 2004. Parliament closely scrutinised the issue of the Winston Churchill and Salvador de Madariaga buildings in Strasbourg and concluded it "could be" reasonable to seek to purchase them. This second draft report by Mr Ferber on the 2004 discharge, "Section I", devotes several paragraphs to Parliament's property policy, in particular the case of the Winston Churchill (WIC) and Salvador de Madariaga (SDM) buildings. These two properties, which are let to the EP by Strasbourg City Council, became the focus of a controversy last March when it emerged that Strasbourg Council was to receive payment by the owner, SCI Erasme, under the terms of the sale of the premises agreed with the EP.
The purchase of the WIC and SDM was suspended by the EP and the Budgetary Control Committee set up an informal working party to advise the rapporteur on the allegations concerning the existing rental agreements and the possible purchase by Parliament of the two buildings.
No irregularities found
The draft report's very lengthy paragraph 11 constitutes a "list of grievances" against those responsible for this matter.
The report says "there are no clear indications that there have been unlawful actions or irregularities in the process of concluding and applying the leases and additional agreements, although there are nevertheless doubts on whether the principle of 'sound financial management' enshrined in the Financial Regulation has been fully respected".
The report also stresses that "Parliament was neither informed that its lease payments were not being passed on in full to SCI Erasme, nor was it ever informed about this matter by the City of Strasbourg itself". In addition, "only the City of Strasbourg knew of the existence of two different contractual relationships between the three parties involved and only the City of Strasbourg had been aware of the difference between the two amounts since 1981".
" Discourteous" behaviour but no illegal profit
As to whether the profit made by Strasbourg city council in this affair was "illegal", the report states "there are no legal provisions prohibiting a state or local or regional authority from making a profit". However, it adds that the City of Strasbourg's approach was "discourteous", to say the very least, "since it is contrary to rules on hospitality towards international institutions". Parliament says it "deeply regrets the lack of good faith demonstrated by both the City of Strasbourg and the private investor, SCI Erasme in their relationship with Parliament". And, according to the draft report, Parliament "strongly regrets that its requests for all relevant documentation from SCI Erasme, the private investor and owner of the buildings, were not acceded to".
Rents to be reviewed
Lastly, Parliament report points out that there is no absolutely reliable basis for setting an appropriate rent for the WIC and SDM buildings, that it is difficult to establish a "fair price" for the rent and hence to assess whether Parliament paid a truly fair rent over the years.
The House says it plans to continue examining Parliament's property policy during the next discharge procedure. The EP administration is asked to "take the necessary measures for a regular review of long-standing contractual obligations towards third parties, e.g. leases or service contracts".
This second report on the 2004 discharge will be put to the vote in Strasbourg on 26 September, following which the Budgets Committee will deliver its opinion on the purchase of the WIC, SDM - and now the IPE3 - buildings.
Voluntary pension scheme
MEPs takes the view that the relationship between Parliament and the pension fund should be placed on a contractual footing by the end of this year. The committee calls on the Secretary-General to forward to the Committee on Budgetary Control, in December 2006, a report on the progress achieved.
Parliament believes, furthermore, that Members' contributions to the voluntary pension scheme should be paid directly from personal income rather than through the parliamentary allowance system.
The House notes, however, that in respect of the current contribution system in its Opinion No 5/99, the Court of Auditors concluded that "from the Fund's and the members' point of view, the system has worked effectively. Additionally it has enabled Parliament to calculate its own payment obligations correctly since, according to the rules, Parliament has to pay the double of the amount effectively paid by the members". MEPs note that the Court saw no problems in maintaining the system provided that it was better defined and its operation set down in a formal document.
MEPs also note with concern that the deduction of contributions to the pension scheme from the general expenditure allowance leaves Members exposed to allegations that public funds may be put towards the cost of private pension contributions, and therefore call on the Parliament's Bureau to propose before 31 March 2007 measures to ensure that such payments are made directly by pension scheme members through direct debit orders.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Human rights
Sakharov Prize 2006 nominees: "All those fighting for hostages in Colombia", Milinkevich and Tueni
2006-10-05 - 09:36
At a joint meeting on Monday evening, 25 September, of the Foreign Affairs and Development committees, MEPs selected the shortlist of three candidates for the 2006 Sakharov Prize, which is awarded every year by the European Parliament to individuals or organisations who have stood up for human rights or fought against intolerance. The three candidates are, in alphabetical order:
- A joint nomination: All those fighting for the hostages kidnapped in Colombia, represented by Ingrid Betancourt and the Pais Libre Foundation;
- Alexander Milinkevich, leader of the opposition in Belarus and an ex-presidential candidate who was jailed for 15 days for taking part in an unauthorised rally in Minsk;
- Ghassan Tueni, a Lebanese journalist and diplomat, who has been nominated for the prize to commemorate the sacrifices of several prominent Lebanese figures who were assassinated: Rafiq Hariri, Basil Fuleihane, Samir Kassir, Georges Haoui and Gebrane Tueni.
The European Parliament has awarded the Sakharov Prize every year since 1988 in memory of Andrei Sakharov (1921-1989), the Russian physicist and inventor of the hydrogen bomb, who in the 1970s set up a committee for the defence of human rights and political victims. His efforts were honoured in 1975 when he received the Nobel Peace Prize.
The next step will be the selection of this year's Sakharov Prize winner by the Conference of Presidents in October. The prize will then be presented at the December plenary session by Parliament's President Josep Borrell.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Euro
Protection of the euro against counterfeiting (Pericles programme)
2006-10-05 - 09:36
MEPs adopted two draft Council decisions on Pericles, the programme to protect the euro against counterfeiting. The decision would prolong Pericles to 2013 and bring the non-euro zone Member States into the programme. The second report on the extension to States which have not adopted the euro was adopted with 607 votes in favour, 15 against and 17 abstentions. Pericles was set up on 17 December 2001. Its aim is to support measures by Member States as well as existing programmes to combat counterfeiting of the euro. These include seminars, meetings, workshops and conferences as well as exchanges of technical, scientific and operational expertise.
Pericles has fully achieved its goals: the counterfeiting rate has been minimal. It has even been possible to pinpoint key non-EU countries where counterfeit notes have been produced, such as Colombia. This international projection of the programme has led to the creation in various countries of national anti-counterfeiting offices.
The two Council decisions will allow Pericles to be extended to the EU Member States which have not adopted the euro and also prolong its life to 31 December 2013, thus aligning it with the period of the financial perspective. The annual budget of €1m remains unchanged. Thus total funding to the end of 2013 will be €7m.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Regional policy
MEPs approve strategic guidelines for cohesion
2006-10-05 - 09:36
The House granted its assent to the strategic guidelines on cohesion. On 18 May 2006, the Parliament adopted an own-initiative report on the strategic guidelines calling that future cohesion policy must help to meet the challenges posed by the most recent enlargement of the EU by helping to reduce regional disparities and fostering a society based on full employment, equal opportunities, inclusion, and social cohesion. The Community Strategic Guidelines contain the principles and priorities of cohesion policy and suggest ways the European regions can take full advantage of the € 308 billion that has been made available for national and regional aid programmes over the next seven years. National authorities will use the guidelines as the basis for drafting their national strategic priorities and planning for 2007-2013, the so called National Strategic Reference Frameworks (NSRFs). According to the guidelines and in line with the renewed Lisbon strategy, programmes co-financed through the cohesion policy should seek to target resources on the following three priorities:
improving the attractiveness of Member States, regions and cities by improving accessibility, ensuring adequate quality and level of services, and preserving their environmental potential;
encouraging innovation, entrepreneurship and the growth of the knowledge economy by research and innovation capacities, including new information and communication technologies; and
creating more and better jobs by attracting more people into employment entrepreneurial activity, improving adaptability of workers and enterprises and increasing investment in human capital.
The Guidelines seek to provide a balance between the twin objectives of the growth and jobs agenda and territorial cohesion. Thus, it is recognised that there can be no question of a “one size fits all” approach to the new programmes.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Social policy
MEPs give green light to PROGRESS programme on employment and social cohesion
2006-10-05 - 09:36
Parliament gave the green light to the Council Common Position concerning the PROGRESS programme. PROGRESS is a new Community Programme relating to employment and social cohesion The programme will enter into force, as foreseen, on 1.1.2007. The programme will be running for seven years (until 2013) and has a budget of €743,25m (at current prices) for the 2007-2013 period. The budget was agreed by the three institutions in the context of the inter-institutional agreement on the Financial Perspectives for the years 2007-2013.
PROGRESS brings together, simplifies and rationalises a number of action programmes, which are due to expire (on combating discrimination, gender equality, cooperation to combat social exclusion and incentives to boost employment) and various budget lines in relation to working conditions into one common programme. The programme will be divided in 5 sections corresponding to the 5 main fields of activities: employment, social protection and inclusion, working conditions, anti-discrimination and diversity and gender equality.
The common position incorporates a large majority of the EP amendments into the text of, either in full or using different wording.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Justice and home affairs
Privacy rights need to be respected - even in police cooperation
2006-10-05 - 09:36
The European Parliament adopted a report endorsing a Commission proposal to extend data protection rules to the transfer of information in police and judicial cooperation. This is the competence of Member States and falls out of the scope of existing community laws to protect data so far. MEPs adopted more than 60 non-binding amendments to limit the use and access to personal data to the essential cases and when there is a real threat to public security. Although the vote on the consultation report drafted by Martine ROURE (PES, FR) was scheduled for the plenary session in June - MEPs decided to postpone it, hoping the current Finnish presidency will be more willing to take into account Parliament's demands.
The Commission proposal responds to a longstanding claim from Parliament, who since the creation of the third pillar has been calling for standards on data protection in the context of judicial and police cooperation which are comparable to the standards in force in Community law. The issue is particularly relevant now that the European Court of Justice has decided to annul existing agreements between the EU and US government on the transfer of Passenger Name Records. MEPs want to push for a quick adoption of this draft decision by the Council, which would affect future agreements with the United States.
Strict criteria to collect and access data
Data collection and access to national governments or competent authorities must be limited "to specific purposes", only "if strictly necessary", and carried out with the "principles of proportionality and necessity" and for the purpose of "preventing a threat to public security or to a person", say MEPs. This personal data made available to a given Member State might be further processed by another only with the consent of the authority which made available the information in the first place.
Sensitive data such us biometrics or DNA information will follow additional specific safeguards to ensure they are accurate and that they can be challenged by the subject of such data. MEPs also demand a different treatment for personal data depending on the status of the person concerned: information related to "non-suspects" will be treated "only for the specific purpose they were collected, for a limited period of time and with adequate limitations on access to them and on their transmission".
Transfers to third countries
One of the main concerns for MEPs is the potential access to personal data that authorities from third countries could ask in the name of fight against terror and organised crime. In this sense, Parliament adopted an amendment forbidding such transfer to competent authorities outside the EU except if the transfer "is provided by a law clearly obliging or authorising it" and if the Member States can ensure that the level of protection afforded by the third country is adequate. This assessment would be based on concrete criteria listed in the text. Only exceptionally, this adequacy decision can be omitted if it is to prevent an imminent serious danger threatening public security.
Finally, Parliament adopted other amendments to give the citizen the right to deny the accuracy of some personal information and mark it on the database, as well as to impose criminal sanctions to authorities in case of intentional offence or gross negligence.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Justice and home affairs
European Parliament sets out its views on immigration
2006-10-05 - 09:36
Just a few days after the Justice and Home Affairs Council met in Tampere, MEPs adopted a resolution drafted by the PES, ALDE, Greens and EUL/NGL groups aiming to draft some basic lines on how the European Union should handle immigration. Adopted by 295 votes in favour, 271 against and 14 abstentions, the text adopted regrets "the failure of the Council (...) to define a common immigration policy, instead maintaining unanimity and the consultation procedure for all matters regarding legal migration" and stresses the need for the integration of migrants into the labour market. Any comprehensive approach to immigration cannot ignore the "push factors" that lead people to leave their country, MEPs said.
MEPs "believe that the sharing of responsibilities and financial burdens between Member States must be an integral part of EU immigration policy" and call on the Commission to propose, as soon as possible, the creation of an emergency fund to finance "expert support teams" for reception at borders and tackle humanitarian crises in the Member States.
Regarding the fight against illegal immigration and management of borders, MEPs "recognise the need to adopt an equitable EU return directive" and stress that "mass regularisation of illegal immigrants is not a solution in the long term". Finally, members urge Member States to step up cooperation with FRONTEX.
Before the adoption of this joint resolution --by a small number of votes-- the Chamber voted down a different resolution tabled by the EPP-ED group (234 votes in favour, 316 against and 26 abstentions). Their draft text was more critical of the process of mass regularisation, it called for "a robust return policy" and agreed on the need of helping border Member States financially.
Debate
In a wide-ranging annual debate, Parliament debated the progress made in the area of freedom security and justice and immigration. MEPs touched on many issues including the growing number of illegal immigrants arriving on the EU's southern shores. Parliament also stressed the importance of moving away from unanimity in the Council on immigration and establishing co-decision powers in the near future.
Jean-Marie CAVADA (ALDE, FR), chair of the Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs and author of the oral question on which the debate was based, referred to the Council's failure to agree last week to implement the passerelle clause (Article 42 of the Treaty) on justice and home affairs.
So far, Mr Cavada pointed out, the passerelle clause has never been used but "MEPs now believe the time has come", for three reasons: "to reduce the democratic deficit, to strengthen the rule of law and to make decision-making more effective". An example of the first point was the question of supplying Passenger Name Records to the US authorities, which was being dealt with no democratic accountability at all.
In fact, given these three reasons, it was hard to see how one could justify putting off the use of the passerelle. It was nevertheless important to reassure national parliaments about their role and he hoped the EP would be able to do this at a joint meeting with these parliaments on 3 and 4 October.
President-in-office of the EU Council
Finnish Minister of the Interior, Kari RAJAMÄKI representing the Council, said: "As to the area of freedom, the Council reaffirms that the protection of fundamental rights is a priority in the context of establishing an area of freedom, security and justice at the European level. All the Member States are Contracting Parties to the Convention on Human Rights, and safeguarding those principles is a constant concern in the Council’s work, even in the context of sensitive matters such as the fight against terrorism. Such values are present in all actions, both in internal action and in relations with third countries. Particular attention is being paid to issues relating to the setting up of a Fundamental Rights Agency. Examination of the proposal for a Regulation establishing a European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights is well under way, and the work is now at an important stage. The Presidency of the Council stresses that on 15 and 16 June 2006, the European Council asked for the necessary steps to be taken to ensure that the Fundamental Rights Agency is set up by 1 January 2007. Finland is making a determined effort to achieve this during its Presidency.
As to the area of justice, in developing the area of justice, effective judicial protection of all individuals must form a key element. It is with this in mind that the Treaty has already put in place the appropriate mechanisms to allow for legal redress for instance when there is doubt as to interpretation of the aspects relating to Title IV of the Treaty or the validity or interpretation of acts adopted by the Community institutions.
Regarding the area of security, the citizens of Europe justifiably expect the European Union, while guaranteeing respect for fundamental rights and freedoms, to adopt a more effective common approach to combating terrorism and organized crime, and their prevention.
Added value of internal security in the enlarged EU has been looked for with the help of closer cooperation between law enforcement authorities. As far as the Treaty of Prüm is concerned, the Presidency can announce that Finland will take steps to join this Treaty in the near future. At least eight Member States will soon have joined this Treaty and will be able to establish enhanced cooperation among themselves under Article 43 of the Treaty on European Union. As the holder of the Presidency, Finland promotes the introduction of the Treaty of Prüm into EU legislation.
The Council is continuing the discussions on the Framework Decision on procedural rights on the basis of an initiative from the Commission. At its last meeting in June 2006, the Council agreed to continue working on the basis of a Presidency compromise which, compared with the common proposal, limited the number and scope of rights covered and focused on general standards. In addition, certain Member States are in favour of a legally non-binding resolution instead of a legally binding Framework Decision. The Council also agreed that future work should include work on practical measures to enhance mutual confidence among the Member States. The discussions touch on criminal procedural law, which differs considerably between the Member States. During its six-month Presidency, Finland aims to conclude, to a great extent, the first reading of the proposal.
On racism and xenophobia, the Council has been informed that the Member States which had maintained a general reservation on the draft instrument have now lifted that reservation. The Council expects therefore that negotiations could be resumed as soon as possible.
On immigration policy, during the Finnish Presidency, the Council has aimed to engage in broad-based debate on immigration issues, both at the July Council and at the informal ministerial meeting in Tampere last week. This debate is of course occurring against the background of recent events in the Canary Islands and the Mediterranean, which demonstrate the need for commitment of all Member States. It is essential that Member States, along with EU institutions — the European Parliament, the Commission, FRONTEX and other competent bodies — act in a coordinated manner.
The EU needs to intensify its efforts to provide practical support for the Member States that bear the greatest burden due to the arrival of large numbers of illegal immigrants. The Presidency initiative on extended European solidarity, presented at the meeting in Tampere, is related to this. The initiative involves creating, in return for a significant financial contribution from the EU, a procedure for ensuring that Member States conform to the ground rules and take responsibility for illegal immigrants and asylum seekers entering their territory. The system would include inspection mechanisms for ensuring in a transparent way that Member States follow jointly agreed EU rules, and would also include the use of biometric identification as a basis for registration, and the creating of the required information systems or the improving of existing ones. The Presidency initiative will be further debated on the basis of the positive discussions at the informal meeting in Tampere.
Another key development is the Framework Programme on Solidarity and Management of Migration Flows for the period 2007-2013 and the four funds — the European Refugee Fund, the External Borders Fund, the European Return Fund and the European Fund for the Integration of Third-country Nationals — that will be established under the Programme. The Council is continuing to work towards a first-reading agreement with the European Parliament on these important instruments.
The Presidency acknowledges that the proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on common standards and procedures in Member States for returning illegally staying third-country nationals is highly important in the general framework of a Common Return Policy but is also aware of the issues that have to be resolved in order to reach a compromise in a timely manner. In cooperation with the European Parliament and the Commission, the Presidency has already decided to intensify discussions with a view to concluding consideration of the proposal.
In the field of asylum, a debate on how to develop the existing EU asylum rules is expected to be launched. The Commission is due to submit a Green Paper on the future common European asylum system, and the Finnish Presidency wants to prepare that debate. This debate was also on the agenda in Tampere last week. It is the aim of the Presidency to ensure that the existing minimum standards are turned into genuine common rules, including both asylum and subsidiary protection. Practical cooperation between Member States concerning asylum should also be reinforced, and on this item a Commission proposal is expected.
The Council also expects that the Commission will shortly submit a legislative proposal concerning the extension of long-term resident status to refugees and persons enjoying subsidiary protection status. The Council advocates greater openness and transparency in the Union and improvements in the way it accounts for its actions. This is the context in which the European Council on 15 and 16 June took measures to make such acts more transparent The Commission is now expected to issue a Green Paper on transparency. The Finnish Presidency stresses the importance of transparency, and it intends to actively take forward the debate on transparency on the basis of the Green Paper.
Finally, regarding the fight against terrorism and secret detention facilities and concerning the secret detention facilities mentioned by President Bush in a speech on 6 September 2006, I would like to assure the Parliament that the Council is aware of the possible implications of the issue. During the General Affairs and External Relations Council of 15 September 2006, the Ministers reiterated their commitment to combating terrorism effectively, using all legal means and instruments available. Terrorism is itself a threat to a system of values based on the rule of law. Human rights and humanitarian standards must be maintained in combating terrorism. Terrorists must not be allowed to succeed or to violate our fundamental rights and values. The Ministers noted the intent of the United States administration to treat all detainees in accordance with the provisions of the Geneva Convention and assured that the International Committee of the Red Cross would be given access to visit prisoners. At the July Council, I considered it essential to draw up a report on secret CIA flights carrying detainees in order to create a more confidential and effective basis for cooperation in security issues. The Ministers noted that they would continue their dialogue with the United States, focusing on safeguarding human rights in the fight against terrorism."
European Commissioner for Justice, Freedom and Security
Commissioner Franco FRATTINI was pleased with the work being done by the Finnish Presidency. He also stressed the importance of implementation of the Hague programme.
On the subject of combating terrorism effectively, he said this would require a range of measures but the balance between security and individual rights must be preserved.
On immigration, the Commission was in favour of a comprehensive approach covering justice and home affairs issues, regional policy, external relations, and legal and illegal immigration. With illegal immigration currently coming chiefly from Africa, the EU's southern Member States must be given help when needed, in the name of Community solidarity. The budget of Frontex, the EU's Warsaw-based external security agency, should be increased.
At the Tampere meeting of the Council last week, said Mr Frattini, he had proposed a range of short-term measures including the creation of an operational command centre in the Mediterranean, a European surveillance system to link up national systems and the provision of equipment to Member States which need assistance.
He stressed repeatedly the need for "European solidarity" and the "sharing of burdens" on illegal immigration. He also spoke of the need to "tackle the root causes" by integrating migration into external and development policy. However, the Commission would support Member States who wished to return illegal migrants, while nevertheless respecting human dignity.
It must not be forgotten, however, that Europe needed some immigrants, especially highly-skilled ones, and he referred to the idea of a European Green Card. At the same time, Europe must avoid draining talent from poorer countries and ensure that more effort was made to integrate immigrants.
Lastly, he stressed the benefits of using the passerelle, which he said would mean an EU policy which was more efficient and had greater democratic accountability. Above all, the public wanted "more Europe" in this area. Surely, he concluded, "we can't accept that civil society goes faster than our policies".
Political group speakers
Speaking for the EPP-ED group, Ewa KLAMT (DE) stressed the need for greater involvement of the Member States and said a European policy was not a panacea: there were national, regional and local specificities. She also argued that if Member States decided on large-scale amnesties of illegal immigrants, they should not be surprised to find they then received further influxes of immigrants and they should not then turn to the EU for help.
Martin SCHULTZ (DE), for the Socialists, deplored the lack of progress on JHA issues, saying it had been hoped that many of these areas would come under codecision by 2004. He understood the Member States were reluctant to surrender sovereignty but they must weigh up the pros and cons of having a common policy.
On behalf of the Liberals, Graham WATSON (UK) also voiced disappointment at the lack of progress on JHA. Looking back to the last Finnish presidency, he described the period "from Tampere to Tampere" as "seven lean years". He saluted the Finnish presidency and Mr Frattini for "trying to coax and cajole the Member States forward" and pointed out that, unless we have the passerelle clause, "we can have no credible policy on justice and home affairs". In fact, like the Commissioner, he believed politicians were lagging "behind public opinion", as the public wanted more European cooperation on JHA.
Monica FRASSONI (Greens/EFA, IT) said that her group had always been in favour of co-decision rights for the European Parliament in the field of immigration policy. Ms Frassoni questioned Commissioner Frattini's use of the word "solidarity" when the EU was turning people back. She stressed that Europe needed immigrants, and not only low-skulled immigrants, stating that immigrant university professors and electricians, among others, could not find work in Europe as their qualifications were not recognised. Ms Frassoni also questioned the agreements with third countries on the return of illegal immigrants, stating that France, Spain and Italy, had been negotiating "in secret" to avoid any human rights guarantees.
Giusto CATANIA (GUE/NGL, IT) said that the recent Tampere summit had been a failure. Europe had to stop mixing the fight against terrorism and immigration. The EU, he said, should also stop using the term "invasion" as only 15 per cent of immigrants came across the sea from northern Africa. He did not understand what Frontex (EU external borders agency) was doing to stop lives being lost. He called on the Commission to erect a monument to those people who had died trying to reach the EU.
Romano Maria LA RUSSA (UEN, IT) said that the EU needed a common immigration policy and was pleased at the recent progress made by EU leaders, welcoming in particular the unfreezing of funds for developing countries. All EU Member States, he said, were challenged by immigration and not just those in the South. He said that Frontex's budget and staffing should be increased.
Johannes BLOKLAND (IND/DEM, NL) said that the recent Tampere summit had shown that Europe was at "sixes and sevens" on immigration. A solution was needed at EU level, individual Member States could not address the situation alone. Europe needed to secure its external borders. He also criticised Spain for the recent "unilateral" amnesty for immigrants. He also wanted to know in which countries the CIA "secret prisons" had been established.
Jean-Marie LE PEN (NI, FR) criticised Spain and Italy for their decision to "legalise" immigrants. He said that the current Schengen system was particularly dangerous and should be abrogated as it allowed immigrants to travel to different Member States to try to claim social security. France, he said, should not give up its veto on immigration policy. France needed to protect its borders and if immigration could not be stopped at source, it would destabilise and ultimately sink Europe. Europe, should, he said, follow the recent Swiss model on immigration.
British and Irish speakers
Nigel FARAGE (IND/DEM, UK) said that it was absolutely essential for a nation to have control of its borders. The UK, he pointed out, was fortunate enough to be island and therefore control was easier. Immigration should not, he said, be dealt with at EU level. Too often the debate had focussed on immigration from third countries rather than intra-EU immigration. With the accession of Romania and Bulgaria, this could lead to a huge migratory flow within the EU he said. He questioned why President Barroso wanted the new Romanian Commissioner to be responsible for immigration. The EU institutions were ignoring public opinion on the issue of immigration.
Timothy KIRKHOPE (EPP-ED, UK) said that many of the issues and the personalities had remained the same, although what he called "pragmatic inactivity" should not always be regarded as a bad thing. He stressed that Member States had very different legal traditions and the UK's civil law system developed over some 800 years had very successful, the UK had no tradition of the Napoleonic code. The so-called Cassis de Dijon case had been instrumental and an indication that mutual recognition was the key principal in the internal market and not "blanket harmonisation." This, he said, should also be the case for co-operation in the field of criminal and civil law.
Sarah LUDFORD (ALDE, UK) said that it was a red-herring to believe that the EU could not manage an effective immigration policy without the Constitution. The German government had to take responsibility for blocking a common EU policy. Many Member States, she said, had still not implemented the five-year old anti-terrorism laws and four-year old race-hate laws. Baroness Ludford also criticised Member State governments for not being able to come up with a formal response to the admission of secret CIA prisons. The EU had been ineffective and it was a betrayal of nearly half a billion people.
Council response to the debate
Finnish interior minister, Mr Rajamäki said that it was important for the EU to support the "host" countries where immigrants came from as well as taking into account the "human cost" of illegal immigration. Member States had to shoulder the responsibility together. A system had to be created to deal with both legal and illegal immigrants and greater support should be given to the Frontex agency.
Commission response to the debate
Winding up the debate, Commissioner Frattini said the fact that the UK, Germany and Denmark had foiled terrorist attacks this summer underlined the need for cooperation between Member States on terrorism, which he described as "the prime threat to our democracy".
Turning to immigration - which he stressed was a separate issue from terrorism - he said this should be seen as "a challenge not a threat". It was, however, linked to development policy and he reminded the House that the Commission had proposed injecting €17 billion into the European Development Fund to boost the economies of the immigrants' countries of origin.
The EU's sea borders, particularly the Mediterranean, needed to be protected but this did not mean having a "European armada". It was an approach aimed at "saving lives, not waging war on immigrants".
The EU would have to take action further afield and he mentioned Libya, which had asked for help in monitoring its 2000 kilometre desert frontier. He also referred in this connection to the upcoming conference between the African Union and the EU, to be held in Tripoli.
On the question of solidarity, a principle mentioned by numerous speakers in the debate, Mr Frattini said this had various dimensions: first of all with the victims of human trafficking, then with the countries of north Africa, i.e. the transit countries, and then between the EU's own Member States.
However, legality was also important. If people were going to arrive illegally in Europe, there must be "penalties, a price to pay". They must expect to be returned to their home countries.
Lastly, the institutional dimension must not be overlooked. Some speakers had said the Member States must set aside national pride on these issues. In Mr Frattini's view, it was "easier to defend national pride" with "common and courageous EU policies".
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Economic and monetary affairs
MEPs want legal certainty on public services
2006-10-05 - 09:36
Parliament is calling for action from the Commission to clarify the interaction between EU internal market and competition rules and the provision of public services. On Wednesday, MEPs adopted a report by 491 votes in favour to 128 against and 31 abstentions asking for guidelines, principles and legal initiatives in the field of services of general interest. The report, drawn up by Bernhard RAPKAY (PES, DE), represents a consensus reached between the largest political groups in response to a White Paper from the Commission. Since individual rulings of the Court of Justice and existing guidelines from the Commission have left doubt for those involved in providing public services on the extent to which EU competition and internal market law applies to different sectors, MEPs want the Commission to clear this up. They also want a clearer distinction to be made between the concepts of ‘services of general interest’ and ‘services of general economic interest’, though they point out that too tight a definition at EU level would conflict with Member States freedom to decide what to define as a public service.
The report opposes the idea of using this exercise to withdraw wholesale broad areas of services of general interest from competition and internal market rules. It emphasises the success of sector-specific EU regulations enacted so far, and recommends this be expanded, calling notably for a directive on social and health care services.
MEPs emphasise that it should be for the competent public authority to decide whether to supply services ‘in house’ or contract them out, via a tendering process. They note that local authorities, under certain conditions, should be able to provide services via joint inter-communal organisations without going through a tendering process.
More legal clarification is needed, says the report, when it comes to procedures for accessing existing networks needed for provision of services, defining the price for supply of services, securing competition and opportunities for new entrepreneurs, out-of-court settlements between service providers and users and referral to competition authorities.
Parliament therefore invites the Commission to propose appropriate legal initiatives to deal with all these issues.
During Tuesday's debate on the subject, Commission President José Manuel BARROSO said the Commission would publish a Communication outlining its plans in this area before the end of the year.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Research and innovation
Galileo programme - MEPs welcome progress but call for creative solutions
2006-10-05 - 09:36
In adopting a joint resolution on the Galileo programme, MEPs call on the Commission to assess what modifications in legal and procedural regulations could be made in order to ensure the continuous progress of the project. The House points out that this does not imply reducing the competences and responsibilities of institutions, but may mean the application of solutions that are more creative and more appropriate to the objectives of the programme.
MEPs acknowledge the new updated timetable and calls on the Commission to comply with it and to enforce compliance; together with the approval of the concession contract, asks to be informed about the additional costs resulting from the delay. MEPs call, furthermore, on the Commission to inform Parliament about any significant future alterations, but in a timely fashion, not with a delay of years.
The House welcomes the progress made in negotiations with the concessionaries. MEPs call on the parties concerned in the European space industry participating in the consortium to strive to reach agreement in a constructive manner, so that this common European project can play its part in fulfilling the Lisbon goals as soon as possible.
Parliament calls on the GNSS Supervisory Authority to deliver semi-annual progress reports to Parliament, with special regard to progress in tasks to be imposed upon the GNSS Supervisory Authority by directive from 1 January 2007. MEPs also call on the GNSS Supervisory Authority to invite the expert nominated by the European Parliament in continuous observer status.
Parliament calls on the Commission, considering the Community character of the project, to ensure that Parliament is informed before the signing of any contract of institutional participation by third countries. Finally, the House calls on the Council to ensure that no further delay in this project occurs.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Research and innovation
Support for nanosciences if managed ethically
2006-10-05 - 09:36
In adopting a report, MEPs welcomes an action plan by the European Commission for a safe, integrated and responsible strategy for nanosciences and nanotechnologies for the period 2005-2009. MEPs believe nanotechnologies can help address needs such as public health, energy and transport, and contribute to the EU's competitiveness and sustainable development goals. In an own-initiative report by Miloslav RANSDORF (GUE/NGL, CZ), they therefore stress the need to increase publicly funded investment in R&D, saying that world-class R&D infrastructure is needed for the EU to remain competitive in nanosciences. The EU must also clarify the legal and business environment for these technologies and create a nanoscience patent monitoring system governed by the European Patent Office.
In addition, say MEPs, an ethical approach is essential to win public trust. They therefore welcome planned reviews of issues such as non-therapeutic human enhancement and the links between nanosciences and nanotechnologies and individual privacy, but they urge that these reviews be made public. They also call for ethical committees to be set up to help ensure the public is properly informed and to create a climate of trust based on awareness of the risks and the benefits of nanotechnologies.
Nanotechnology is the manipulation or self-assembly of individual atoms, molecules, or molecular clusters into structures to create materials and devices with new or vastly different properties. Materials from carbon nanotubes are 100 time stronger than steel, but 6 times lighter; silver nanoparticles on the surfaces of refrigerators, air conditioners and laundry machines act as antibacterial and antifungal agents. Other nanoscience-based products are anti-graffiti paints, long lasting batteries and self-cleaning textiles. Nanotechnologists are also investigating ways of discovering and administering new medicines and devising new security techniques for crime prevention.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Agriculture
Quality and certification of organic farming
2006-10-05 - 09:36
The EP adopted a consultation report by Friedrich-Wilhelm Graefe zu Baringdorf (Greens/EFA, DE) on a Commission proposal to amend the regulation on organic production and indications. The changes are a transitional measure until the new Regulation comes into force, and they concentrate on tightening rules for the recognition of imported organic products. The Parliament has suggested several changes to the Commission proposal, seeking to toughen the rules for third country imports. The report calls for the country of origin to be clearly identifiable by consumers and maintains that the EU "recognition of third countries [...] must be reciprocal: the third country concerned must also grant EU organic products access to its market."
The House also supported the creation of a "public Community EU-import databank, coordinated by the European Food Safety Authority." It asked that third-country control bodies issue certificates according to characteristics defined by the Commission, that these control bodies be accredited in the Community and that they be subject to on-the-spot checks by national authorities.
2nd Euro-Mediterranean Conference on Agriculture :
The European Parliament and the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, with the assistance of the International Federation of Agricultural Producers, organised the 2nd Euro-Mediterranean Conference on Agriculture. The event was held in Strasbourg, from 2pm on Thursday, 28 until 6.30pm on Friday, 29 September.
You will find more information on the conference's website listed at the end of this article. 2nd Euro-Mediterranean Conference on Agriculture
EN
1
LINK
/conferences/20060928/agri/default.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Fisheries
EP recommends keeping present regulations on shark fins, speaks out for a three-year TAC plan for plaice and sole, and seeks to improve situation in sector
2006-10-05 - 09:36
Parliament adopted three reports on fisheries issues. The first one asks the Commission to maintain the present ratio of shark fins to bodies on board vessels, the second argues for a 3-year TAC system for plaice and sole, and the third suggests ways to improve the precarious situation of the fishing industry. The own-initiative report by Rosa Miguélez Ramos (PES, ES) had originally called for raising the fin-to-live weight ratio allowed for shark catches on board vessels to 6.5%. But an amendment (passed by 360-182-17) instead asked to freeze the current 5% ratio until a comprehensive review of scientific studies of shark fin to carcass ratios could be concluded by the Commission. The report was adopted with 483 votes in favour 58 against and 21 abstentions.
Albert Jan Maat's (EPP-ED, NL) consultation report on a management plan for plaice and sole in the North Sea calls for the definition of "the Total Allowable Catches (TAC) for a period of three years" instead of an annual limit. It also seeks to alter the basis for changes to the TAC. The EP wants a clearly defined precautionary level (230 000 tons for plaice, 35 000 tons for sole) to be established, and the TAC to be set such that after the three-year period, the stocks return to this level. The report makes mention of the negative impact of beam trawl fishing on plaice and sole stocks in the North Sea, and asks the Commission to draft an action plan for researching ways to minimize their discards.
Finally, the House adopted an own-initiative report by Pedro Guerreiro (EUL/NGL, PT) on improving the economic situation in the fishing industry. The report "deplores a policy which [...] seeks to promote the scrapping of vessels and the permanent cessation of activities." It "stresses the need to adopt immediate concrete measures to reduce the high instability of fuel prices for the industry." In the longer term, it advocates tax credits, aid for fleet renewal and modernisation, and a programme for supporting small-scale inshore and artisanal fishing.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Text adopted by Parliament
2006-10-05 - 09:36
All texts adopted during the plenary 25-28 September can be accessed via the link given below. .
Text adopted - 25-28 September 2006
EN
1
LINK
/activities/public.do?language=en
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-024-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Draft agenda - 11-12 October - Brussels
2006-10-05 - 09:36
The draft agenda for the next part session to be held in Brussels on 11-12 October can now be accessed via the links given below. . Draft Agenda - 11 October 2006 - Brussels Draft Agenda - 12 October 2006 - Brussels
-//EP//TEXT AGENDA 20061011 SIT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT AGENDA 20061012 SIT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-024-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-FULL DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-FULL DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 ITEM-024-EN DOC XML V0//EN
