Boosting ties between EU and Mercosur
External/international trade
2006-10-12 - 14:23
Parliament adopted an own-initiative report on economic and trade relations between the EU and Mercosur. The report looks at the plans for an interregional association agreement launched at the first summit of heads of state or government of the EU and Mercosur in Rio de Janeiro (June 1999).
The House believes both continents have an interest in seeing Mercosur open up to Asia, South Africa and the countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council. MEPs also urge the Mercosur countries to create their own parliament, composed of representatives of different national parliaments. Parliament also wants to create a Mercosur - European Parliament inter-parliamentary delegation to further boost ties and the establishment of a Euro-Latin American Parliamentary Assembly comprising Members of the European Parliament and of the Latin American integration parliaments.
The House reaffirms the need for the EU to conclude, as soon as possible, a full, ambitious and balanced Association Agreement with Mercosur, based on three pillars: a political and institutional chapter reinforcing democratic dialogue and political cooperation, a cooperation chapter promoting sustainable economic and social development, and a trade chapter establishing an advanced free-trade area with a broad agenda including, as well as reciprocal liberalisation of trade in goods and services, investment, public procurement, the protection of intellectual property rights, cooperation regarding competition and trade protection instruments, trade facilitation, and a binding dispute settlement mechanism.
As to the Doha round, Parliament regrets the fact that, despite Parliament's recommendations that negotiation of the agreement with Member State should be decoupled from the WTO's Doha Round, the delays in the negotiations with Mercosur have led to their temporary de facto subordination to the development and finalisation of the Doha Round. Parliament believes that the two processes, rather than being mutually exclusive, are complementary.
MEPs stress the importance of core labour standards and decent jobs for the development of Mercosur; states therefore that the agreement must include a specific agenda on decent work tailor-made for Mercosur Member States and a commitment by the EU to offer all necessary assistance in achieving that agenda.
Finally, the House considers that in addition to the repressive aspect concerning the fight against drugs, the agreement should insist on delivering aid to farmers to help them start new alternative production.
20061011IPR11557 EU economic and trade relations with Mercosur EP delegation for relations with Mercosur
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5312912
EN
2
LINK
/delegations/noneurope/id/dmer/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
