Opening of the Brussels plenary session - EP pays tribute to murdered Russian journalist
Institutions
2006-10-11 - 17:49
Opening the session, President Josep Borrell referred to two pieces of sad news. The first was the death of former Spanish MEP Antoni Gutiérrez Díaz, a one-time vice-president of Parliament and chair of the Regional Committee. "Politics has lost one of its best representatives", said Mr Borrell. The House observed a minute's silence in memory of Mr Gutiérrez Díaz.
The second event was the murder of the Russian journalist Anna Politkovskaya . The EP should pay its respects to this journalist for her great bravery, said Mr Borrell, and send its condolences to her family. The President asked the House to observe a minute's silence in memory of Anna Politkovskaya and other journalists imprisoned unjustly or murdered around the world.
He also pointed out that Cecilia Malmström (ALDE, SE) had been appointed European Affairs Minister in the Swedish government and would therefore vacate her seat in the European Parliament.
Changes to the agenda
To enable the House to debate the case, the title of the debate on the Lahti summit would be amended to "Council and Commission statements on the informal Lahti summit and the consequences for Russia of the murder of the journalist Anna Politkovskaya."
The House also decided that a resolution on the topic of the murder of the Russian journalist would be voted on during the plenary session in Strasbourg (23-26 October 2006)
Highlights for the Brussels plenary
The October Brussels plenary session starts off with a one-hour debate on the recent nuclear test carried out by North Korea. The Commission and Council will make statements. High representative for the CFSP Javier Solana will take part in the debate.
The debate on preparations for the forthcoming informal meeting of Heads of State and government to be held on 20 October in Lahti, Finland will therefore start at 4pm. Commission President José Manuel Barroso will take part in the debate. The informal meeting will focus on energy, illegal immigration and innovation policy.
At 5.30pm, the House will debate the PNR (Passenger Name Records) Agreement with the US. Commissioner Franco Frattini will open the debate. The interim Agreement, which will be submitted for approval by the EU Council as soon as possible, provides legal certainty by replacing the Agreement of May 2004 between the European Community and the US, following the Court of Justice of the European Communities judgment of 30 May 2006.
MEPs then turn their attention to the issue of footwear imports from China. On the basis of oral questions to the Council and Commission, MEPs will have the opportunity to debate the merits of this week's Council decision to levy import duties on shoes from China and Vietnam.
Of particular interest is an own-initiative report on the protection and welfare of animals 2006-2010. The Agriculture Committee believes that "consumers should be informed and prepared to pay higher prices for products originating from farms with higher animal welfare standards and that these products should be appropriately labelled". The Agriculture Committee also "calls upon the European Community to bring an end to dog, bull and cock fighting through national or community legislation as appropriate, and by ensuring that those involved receive no state or national subsidy relating to their activities."
On Thursday 12 October 2006, the session starts with a joint debate on the EU Fundamental Rights Agency. The Civil Liberties Committee is insisting that the remit of the future EU Agency for Fundamental Rights be extended to third pillar issues such as policing, justice, immigration and counter-terrorism. It also wants not only EU Member States and candidate countries but also those with association agreements to come within the agency's scope.
The European Parliament will also vote on a resolution on the future of EU patents following the debate held in Strasbourg on 28 September.
Six separate reports which simply codify existing EU legislation by Diana WALLIS (ALDE, UK), on behalf of the Legal Affairs Committee, will be put to the vote. MEPs will also vote on two reports from Claude MORAES (PES, UK) for the Civil Liberties Committee relating to Europol's Staff Regulations and salaries. The House will also vote on a report by Giles CHICHESTER (EPP-ED, UK), Chairman of the Industry Committee, on the management structures of Europe's satellite navigation system.
20061010IPR11532 Briefing - 11-12 October 2006 - Brussels plenary Corrigendum to the Brussels plenary agenda
EN
2
LINK
/sce/data/fast_access/doc//250/09%20septembre_BRU_CORR_EN.pdf
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061003BRI11313 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
