Foreign Affairs Committee favours a more robust security and defence policy
External relations
2006-10-05 - 18:12
"The EU is on the way to developing into a Defence and Security Union," says a report adopted by the Foreign Affairs Committee on Thursday. It argues for a more active European Security and Defence Policy, extending the Union's competencies in the field.
In the own-initiative report on the implementation of the European Security Strategy (ESS), drafted by the Chairman of the Subcommittee on Security and Defence, Karl von Wogau (EPP-ED, DE), the committee recognised the "excellent analysis of the threats to the modern world" of the ESS, but emphasised "the need to monitor its implementation on a regular basis, in order to be able to react to geopolitical developments." The report argues for including the "increasing worldwide competition for sources of water and energy, as well as natural disasters and the security of the Union's external borders" in the future development of the ESS, which it says necessitates a revision in 2008 at the latest.
Towards a Security and Defence Union
Although the report "emphasises that, in the event of an attack by the armed forces of a third country on the territory of the Union, NATO remains the guarantor of collective defence," it "points out that the EU is on the way to developing into a Defence and Security Union, as well." In this field, the report calls for the European Security and Defence Policy capabilities of the Union to be strengthened by the setting up of a common defence market, a common system of intelligence and communications standards and a European civil protection force
In addition, the report "stresses the importance of the Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe," especially the sections that would set up a solidarity clause in case of catastrophes, and a clause on mutual assistance, in case of an attack on one of the Member States. It favours the Constitution's plans to create a post of European Foreign Minister, as well as supporting the creation of a Deputy Foreign Minister in charge of security and defence policy. The Committee voted to ask for a European budget that would cover the military field as well. Finally, it suggests the "setting up of a European standing naval force in the Mediterranean Sea in order to demonstrate European presence and enhance the EU's crisis management potential in this region."
Preventive and non-military actions
Members of the Committee also discussed preventive measures, emphasising that "the Union, in light of new threats, must be ready to act before crises break out and take early preventive action," although always in line with the United Nations Charter. They also stressed that "the EU's greatest contribution to preventing international terrorism will be its capacity to be effective in the building or rebuilding of democratic institutions, social and economic infrastructure, good governance and civil society, and successfully combating racism and xenophobia."
The report was adopted by a large majority (30-9) today, with GUE/NGL and the Greens/EFA voting against. Tobias Pflüger (GUE/NGL, DE) indicated that his group will submit a minority opinion to this report before it comes up for plenary vote in Strasbourg in November.
2006-10-05 Committee on Foreign Affairs In the Chair: Elmar Brok EPP-ED DE
Procedure: Own-initiative report
Plenary vote: November I, Strasbourg
20061002IPR11249 The European Security Strategy (ESS): Security and Defence Subcommittee (SEDE): The European Security and Defence Policy (ESDP):
EN
1
LINK
http://www.consilium.europa.eu/cms3_fo/showPage.ASP?id=266&lang=EN&mode=g
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/committees/presentation.do?committee=1301&language=EN
EN
3
LINK
http://www.consilium.europa.eu/cms3_fo/showPage.asp?id=261&lang=en
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
