September 2 Plenary session: Turkey, Lebanon, clean air, Sakharov
Institutions
2006-10-16 - 18:47
MEPs reconvened in Strasbourg for a second time in September to discuss a wide variety of issues. In foreign relations Parliament adopted a report that was critical of Turkey for slowing down the reform process, MEPs also heard from the Liberian President and the Lebanese Prime Minister. A resolution on the EU's relations with India was passed as was one urging the Sudanese government to accept a peacekeeping force in Darfur.
Cleaner air for Europeans and the education system were also discussed by MEPs. In addition to this leaders of Parliament's political groups drew up a shortlist of finalists for the 2006 Sakharov prize for freedom of thought. In financial matters the discharge of the 2004 budget was agreed and extra funding to tackle counterfeiting of the Euro was supported by MEPs.
20061003FCS11307
Monday in Plenary
Sakharov logo 2006 Josep Borrell, President of the European Parliament, used his opening remarks to announce an "extraordinary" session of Parliament in December to debate the outcome of the European Council (14-15 December) and the results of Finland's Presidency of the EU, which will conclude at the end of the year.
Strasbourg to Tallinn: President Borrell congratulated Toomas Ilves, an Estonian Socialist MEP on his election to the post of President of his country over the weekend. He will step down as an MEP and be replaced by another Estonian member. Sakharov nominees: Hostage campaigners, Belarus dissident, Lebanese journalist Separately, the committees for foreign affairs and development chose the three finalists for the 2006 Sakharov prize for freedom of thought. In alphabetical order they are: In Colombia - "all those fighting for the release of hostages"; Alexander Milinkevich, the leader of the political opposition in Belarus; and Ghassan Tueni: a Lebanese journalist and diplomat whose son Gebrane Tueni (a prominent newspaper editor) was assassinated last year. The nomination is in memorial for his son and other leading Lebanese figures who have been assassinated: Rafiq Hariri, Basil Lléhan, Samir Kassir and George Haoni. The leaders of Parliament's Political Groups will choose a winner in October. Opening of session Sakharov Prize Post Strasbourg briefing
Tuesday in Plenary
Ellen Johnson Sirleaf in the European Parliament Liberia, Romania and Bulgaria came to Strasbourg on Tuesday when MEPs heard from Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, President of Liberia, and the European Commission gave the green light to the EU-hopes of the two Balkan states. Tuesday also saw MEPs vote to approve reports on improving air quality, the urban environment, promoting student's mobility and lifelong learning. MEPs also approved a report that grants their President the "discharge" for implementation of the budget for the 2004 financial year.
Ellen Johnson Sirleaf: "Liberia is not a poor country"
Parliament's President Josep Borrell introduced Ellen Johnson Sirleaf, President of Liberia and the first woman elected President of an African country. He described her "as a symbol of democracy, women's rights and the fight against corruption and impunity..." In her address to MEPs, Mrs Sirleaf stressed the need to introduce policy changes and reforms to avoid the country sliding back into civil war. "The Liberian people's dreams are not complicated. They just want...to live their lives in peace, get a good education, and be able to provide for their families", said Mrs Sirleaf. She said that "Liberia is not a poor country, but a country that has been poorly managed". Mrs Sirleaf expressed gratitude for the assistance Liberia had received from the EU and its members, and said she hoped an economic partnership accord with the EU could soon be agreed. (See a full report of her speech by clicking on the link below). Improving air quality
Recent surveys suggest that air pollution contributes indirectly to over 360,000 premature deaths in Europe every year. The most affected regions are big cities and industrial areas. To tackle this serious social health problem, in 2005 the Commission launched the strategy based on scientific research to reduce the air contamination death toll by 40% by 2020. In a report on the issue drafted by German Liberal Mr Holger Krahmer, MEPs requested stricter limits for small particles that cause pollution and opted for more "adjustable" criteria to fit local and national capabilities. This is in part because many countries suffer from cross-border pollution so conditions can vary considerably. These amendments were adopted in Parliament's first reading of the report. The biggest health threat, as identified in the report, are posed by the so called micro-particles "PM25", known more commonly as "atmospheric dust". Its concentration levels have not yet been regulated by EU legislation. In addition to this report, Dutch Socialist Ms Dorette Corbey presented an own-initiative report on EU air-pollution strategy which calls for a cut in nitrogen oxides level as well as a focus on pollution sources (farming, transport). Following the debate on Monday MEPs adopted both documents with a majority of over 500 votes each. Mobility for students, education for adults
MEPs also adopted on Tuesday two reports aiming at improving education and training across the EU. The first one by German Green MEP Ms Helga Trüpel, intends to raise the number of the EU citizens who benefit from the lifelong learning. Some of the most valuable skills underlined by the rapporteur are communication in foreign languages and computer literacy. Another report by the Austrian Socialist Christa Prets called on the educational authorities of EU members to introduce a "European Quality Charter for Mobility" in education. An increasing number of those studying abroad contribute to the employment market and a stronger "European identity". EP Budget: 2004 "discharge"
MEPs have granted its President the discharge for the implementation of the budget for the financial year 2004 with the adoption of a report German Christian Democrat MEP Markus Ferber. The discharge-procedure relates to the approval of the accounts of EU institutions by the European Parliament. Concerning the European Parliament the discharge is given to the President of the Parliament. On the controversy linked to the proposed purchase of the European Parliament's buildings in Strasbourg, MEPs conclude it "could be" reasonable to seek to purchase the Winston Churchill, Salvador Madariaga and IPE3 buildings which Parliament currently rents from Strasbourg City council. Improving the urban environment
MEPs have voted to adopt a report that backs the establishment of "Sustainable Urban Management Plans" (SUMP) for towns above 100,000 people. Some of its proposals are to encourage non-motorised transport - walking and cycling - and environmentally friendly transport using bio-fuel and hybrid technology. An urban management plan will also include waste management plans, noise maps and action plans, local air pollution plans and local environmental plans. It is based on a Commission paper on a "Thematic Strategy on the Urban Environment" (TSUE). The report was drafted by Hungarian MEP Gyula Hegyi and backed by Parliament's Environment committee EU hopefuls Romanian and Bulgarian given cautious green light by Commission
Romanian and Bulgaria will able to join the European Union in January 2007 despite concerns over some issues - that was the message the European Commission delivered in Strasbourg before MEPs on Wednesday. The concerns the Commission identified include the workings of the legal system, the fight against corruption and organised crime and whether both countries will be able to mange EU financial aid. The Commission has issued "benchmarks" of progress that Bucharest and Sofia must meet by March 2007. The EU-aspirations of both countries has been strongly supported by Parliament and by leaders of its Political Groups. While welcoming the accession of the two countries, the President of the European Commission, Jose Manuel Barroso, said that he didn't think "it would be wise to proceed with any enlargements before we have resolved the constitutional issue in Europe". In April 2005 MEPs passed a resolution giving the Parliament's legally-binding "assent" to their membership of the Union providing reforms were made. MEPs will vote on the Commission's report before the end of the year.
President of Liberia Air quality Education Budget Urban environment
Wednesday in Plenary
Lebanese Prime Minister, Fouad Siniora - "Europe had a unique role" MEPs adopted a report on Turkey, criticising the apparent slowing down of reform and called for improved relations with Cyprus and Armenia. The EP endorsed a report that calls for the Commission to provide greater legal clarity in the way that the EU's public services are provided. MEPs also discussed the situation in Darfur and leaders of Parliament's Political Groups met with Lebanese Prime Minister Fouad Siniora.
Turkey: MEPs critical of slowdown in reform The report on Turkey drafted by Dutch Christian Democrat Camiel Eurlings dwells on two important principles: namely that negotiation on EU membership does not automatically lead to membership, and that the EU's capacity to "absorb" (be able to function properly) Turkey is a vital consideration. On specifics it called for Ankara to recognise Cyprus - an EU member - and lift its embargo on her shipping and aircraft. It also called for the Turkish government to do more to facilitate academic research and cultural understanding into the massacres of Armenians in 1915. Turkey refuses to accept that these amounted to "genocide." The Eurlings report as adopted however did not suggest acceptance of this as a precondition of EU membership. MEPs also called for changes to article 301 of the Turkish penal code which currently restricts freedom of expression. The report welcomed some recent initiatives by Turkey in combating torture, fighting corruption and improving the plight of women. For a full account of the debate see the link below. Prime Minister of Lebanon: hopes of reconstruction and peace During a meeting with leaders of Parliament's political groups Lebanese Prime Minister Fouad Siniora condemned Israel for what he called a "systematic campaign of destruction". He spoke of the civilian lives lost, infrastructure and an economy destroyed. He expressed his gratitude for the EU's solidarity and financial and military support. He said that "Europe can play a unique role" in the volatile region and called for the international community to tackle the "root causes" of the conflict. He also warned MEPs that problems in the Middle East impact on Europe. "No-one can ignore the fact that those escaping oppression, desperation, and poverty usually end up at your doorstep..." The leaders of political groups expressed their solidarity and wished his people success in rebuilding an independent and democratic Lebanon, while reminding him that all sides have to make concessions, work together and the rights of all peoples have to be respected. For a full report of this exchange see the link below. Present at the meeting was Parliament's President Josep Borrell who called for "sustainable peace" in the region during his recent visit to Beirut. During discussions President Borrell noted that Parliament was one of the first institutions to call for an immediate ceasefire during the war. Future of Public Services in Europe The report on public services approved by MEPs calls on the European Commission to clarify the position of the EU's internal market and competition rules in relation to these services. At its heart lies the question the extent to which some public services are open to competition. The report rejects withdrawing whole areas of services from competition and internal market rules and calls for guidelines, principles and legal initiatives from the Commission to achieve legal certainty. Drafted by German Social Democrat Bernhard Rapkay in response to a White Paper from the Commission - its adoption marks a compromise between the main political groups in Parliament. It states that it is for public authorities in EU countries to decide which public services should be supplied "in-house" or be contracted out. In response the Commission has said it will outline proposals before the end of the year. Situation in Darfur - statement by Commission and Council The grim situation in Darfur was outlined - over 300,000 dead and 2 million displaced with a further 3 million dependent on international aid and the May peace agreement is not being observed. The EU is already engaged in the region with humanitarian aid of €340 million and support to the mission of the African Union of €242 million. MEPs underlined the positive role of the African Union and its Africa Mission in Sudan (AMIS), but noted that it does not have resources to avert the crisis. According to Members, the possible involvement of the Arab League could be positive. Solutions proposed by MEPs included the deployment of UN forces and greater and firmer diplomatic and humanitarian efforts in the region. The enforcement of a no-fly zone was also raised as one way of stopping the bombing of civilians. A few MEPs even suggested considering the possibility of NATO humanitarian intervention because so much is at stake. MEPs passed a resolution today (Thursday) on Darfur condemning "the continuing violations of the ceasefire by all parties, and in particular the violence directed against the civilian population and the targeting of humanitarian assistance". It also called on the international community to do all it could to solve the crises. See link below. Turkey Public Services Lebanese PM Resolution Resolution
Thursday in Plenary
Illegal immigration - a common European approach needed On Thursday MEPs adopted a resolution on immigration calling for a common EU approach and long term solutions and asking for more say in the area of the EU's "Freedom, security and justice" policy. They also adopted a report concerning shark fin removal on vessels, calling for tighter regulation and monitoring of existing rules forbidding the catching of sharks for their fins.
Illegal immigration - a common European approach needed This summer alone, 30,000 illegal immigrants landed on the shores of the European Union countries. Many more are feared drowned in the attempt. This has brought the issue to the top of the political agenda and was debated by MEPs on Wednesday as part of the "freedom, justice security" debate. EU Justice ministers also met last week to discuss the issue. A resolution on the issue followed on Thursday with MEPs calling for cooperation between countries - a "sharing of responsibilities and financial burdens...must be an integral part of EU immigration policy". The resolution also adds that any solution to the problem of immigration must deal with the "push" factors like poverty that drive people towards Europe. On what to do with the immigrants who are already here, the resolution says that "mass regularisation" by providing work permits is not a long term solution and may encourage more migrants. MEPs recognised the need to adopt an equitable "EU return directive" guaranteeing return in dignity and safety of those who have no right to stay in Europe. During the earlier debate on Wednesday Finland's Minister of interior Kari Rajamäki (representing the Council) said: "The EU needs to intensify its efforts to provide practical support for the Member States that bear the greatest burden due to the arrival of large numbers of illegal immigrants." MEPs press for more Parliamentary influence in this area Whether Europe has the tools to deal with this issue was raised in the debate. From the floor MEPs stressed the importance of moving away from unanimity in the Council of Minister on legal immigration issues and establishing co-decision powers in the near future - giving more power to the Parliament. The Chair of Parliament's Civil Liberties Committee, French MEP Jean-Marie Cavada emphasised the necessity to implement the 'passerelle' clause. This would allow EU Ministers in the Council to take decisions by qualified majority, and not as at present by unanimity. This 'rearranging"' of the workings of the EU would allow the Parliament and the Court of Justice more power. Mr Cavada said that this would "reduce the democratic deficit, strengthen the rule of law and make decision-making more effective". Also adopted on Thursday: Report on Shark fins Shark fin soup - delicious but dangerous - to the shark. MEPs have supported a report that demands even tighter controls on the killing sharks for their fins. With some parts of the species facing extinction the need for action is great. The problem is that the fin is removed and the carcass thrown back into the sea. This practice has been legislated against in the EU since 2003 but the report called for greater monitoring of its implementation. Shark's fin soup is in great demand in China, where it is considered a delicacy, counted as one of the pu foods (foods that are meant to endow the eater with the qualities of the animal being eaten
Immigration Fisheries Texts adopted by Parliament Post- Strasbourg briefing
EN
1
PHOTO
20060926PHT10988.jpg
EN
5
PHOTO
20060927PHT11036.jpg
EN
11
PHOTO
20060928PHT11159.jpg
EN
17
PHOTO
20060929PHT11217.jpg
EN
20
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN#
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060922IPR10873 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060922IPR10918 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060926IPR10990 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060922IPR10875 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060922IPR10878 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060922IPR10877 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060922IPR10876 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060922IPR10896 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060922IPR10880 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060922IPR10920 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2006-0348 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060922IPR10900 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060922IPR10897 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060922IPR10903 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060925BRI10986 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
