GM crops - friend or foe for European agriculture?
Agriculture
2006-10-16 - 16:12
Biotechnology was discussed at a Public Hearing on 10 October
There are currently over 6 billion people on the planet, in the next 25 years this will grow by another 2 billion. How we feed ourselves while dealing with diminishing fresh water for agricultural irrigation and climate change was discussed at a public hearing on biotechnology in the parliament. Held on 10 October and hosted by Parliament's agriculture committee, it brought together MEPs, agricultural experts and scientists to discuss the "prospects and challenges" for agriculture in Europe.
Consumers unconvinced...
Europe - and European consumers - remain unconvinced by GMOs. In the last survey done across the EU a clear majority declared themselves against them. Some EU countries such as Austria, Poland and Germany have even established GMO-free zones. This resistance is based on fears that GMO crops can damage biodiversity and be a danger to human health. There is also a general mistrust of genetic engineering - "the majority of consumers have a hard time seeing any clear benefits associated with genetically engineered crops", Dr Ewen Mullins from the Irish Crops Research Institute told the hearing.
..but scientists are more enthusiastic...
However, GMOs have no shortage of supporters. Jussi Tammisola, an academic and leading advisor to the Finnish government on the issue, said that some opportunities GMO's could offer included "the creation of aromatic rice and wheat, edible vaccines for asthma or allergies and breeding corn that is resistant to pests and bio fuels". In the US, where GMOs are used more widely, some of the reported advantages include better yields and crops that are more resistant to changing weather and environmental conditions.
Getting information across is crucial. Irish MEP Mairead McGuinness for the European People's Party said scientists "have a duty to come out of their labs more frequently to explain their activities to ordinary citizens."
Witold Tomczak for the Independence and Democracy Group asked "what about GM contamination?" and added that "scientists have failed to show humility" in the matter.
Do GMOs contaminate other crops?
The risk of contamination of non-GMO crops is at the heart of the debate. Can and will GMO crops contaminate other crops and plants? The hearing heard that isolation, planting GMOs "minimum distances" from other crops and segregation are required to avoid contamination - although scientists disagree on what a "safe-distance" is. Also, segregation and "co-existence management" could be costly and make GM crops economically unviable. Leopold Girsch from the Austrian food safety agency said that "Austria is not going to authorise products with potential adverse health effects. Our overarching objective is consumer protection".
Summing up proceedings, Kyösti Virrankoski, a Finnish member of the Liberal ALDE group who is currently drafting a report on biotechnology for the agriculture committee, said that "the EP cannot bury its head in the sand. We already consume GM-products and we have to ensure the continuity of agriculture in Europe. GMOs are one tool in a toolbox - research is thus vital". His report is due to be debated and voted on in Parliament in early 2007.
20061012STO11625 Biotechnology: Prospects and challenges for agriculture in Europe AGRI Committee website Read more on co-existence
EN
1
PHOTO
20061012PHT11627.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/meetdocs/2004_2009/organes/agri/agri_20061010_1500.htm
EN
3
LINK
/activities/expert/committees/presentation.do?committee=1244&language=EN
EN
4
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/agriculture/coexistence/index_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
