EU budget - greater government control urged
Budgetary control
2006-10-13 - 15:48
Parliamentary hearing on budgetary control 9/10 October
Ensuring that the EU's €110 billion annual budget is spent legally and properly is an awesome responsibility. It falls to the European Commission but is not easy as around 80% of the budget is spent at a national and local level - and can be difficult to track. Most of the money is spent on farming and rural development (46%) and on aid to poorer regions (30%). Earlier this week MPs and MEPs came together to see ways in which control of the budget can be improved.
A complicated picture
As you may have read in your newspapers, the European Court of Auditors is regularly critical of certain parts of the EU's budget, but does this mean the money is not being spent properly? Not quite. Every year the Court is required to give a "Statement of Assurance" as to "the reliability of accounts and the legality...of underlying transactions". The "accounts" are regularly passed, but it is the "underlying transactions" - parts of the agriculture budget, structural funds, internal policies, including research and external actions - that the Court cannot say with absolute certainty that every Euro has been spent as it should.
Why is this? In part it is due to the complexity of the budget. Some problems include the fact EU funds often make up a small amount of the national budget - and therefore may not get sufficient attention. Also, in different countries different bodies are responsible for auditing and controlling the budget. Finally, due to the EU Treaties, the European Commission is responsible for the budget - but not for most of its implementation. In short, projects financed by the EU may not be implemented by EU bodies. The situation has got more complex since 10 new states joined the Union in 2004. It is complicated picture - and one that MPs and MEPs hope will improve.
The European Parliament's position
In 2003 the European Parliament adopted a position that EU governments should issue an annual statement saying that all spending is in order. However, this was rejected by EU finance ministers. MEPs came back with another proposal that countries should instead make separate declarations for separate parts of the budget (e.g. agriculture spending). This was again rejected. In May this year a deal was finally agreed that each EU state will produce "an annual assessment of their management and control systems and...an annual summary of audits and declarations" for the period 2007 until 2013. As Parliament is mandated to give the "budget discharge" (a sort of "all clear" on how the money is spent - see link below) - budgetary control is a crucial issue for MEPs.
At the Parliamentary meeting there was consensus on the need for greater control. The chair of Parliament's Budgetary Control Committee, Hungarian Socialist Szabolcs Fazakas, said the aim was “to increase mutual understanding of the role that budgetary control committees in national parliaments have in the control of the EU budget.”
Edward Leigh, Chairman of the Public Accounts Committee of the UK's House of Commons, said that “each Member State should take the initiative and produce a consolidated statement on EU expenditure which is audited according to internationally agreed standards.”
This was echoed by Greek MP Theodor Skrekas who agreed that national parliaments must ensure the “best use is made of EU funds - and there needs to be a legal framework for this”. Luxembourg MP Henri Gretchen promised to discuss the EP's earlier proposals with his colleagues and the national court of auditors - and to clarify the Luxembourg government’s position. He called on MPs from other countries to do the same.
20061011STO11555 Budget Control Committee Documents from the Joint Parliamentary Meeting European Court of Auditors: “Discharge” procedure explained (Word of the week article):
EN
1
PHOTO
20061010PHT11523.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/committees/presentation.do?committee=1236&language=EN
EN
3
LINK
/comparl/cont/site/auditions/joint_meeting/default_en.htm
EN
4
LINK
http://www.eca.europa.eu/
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060929STO11183 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
