Wednesday Plenary: N.Korea, Lahti summit, passenger data, shoe imports
Institutions
2006-10-12 - 16:53
Javier Solana. "North Korea is a threat to peace…"
Day 1 of plenary saw universal condemnation by MEPs of North Korea's nuclear test and fears it could lead to instability and an arms race. There was also condemnation of the murder of Russian journalist Anna Politkovskaya with EP President Borrell leading the tributes. MEPs debated energy, immigration and innovation - 3 issues on the agenda when EU leaders meet next week. A recent deal with the US on the transfer of air passenger data and curbs on Asian shoe imports got mixed reactions.
MEPs unite to condemn North Korean test
The recent nuclear test by North Korea has provoked international outrage and fears of a destabilising arms race in the region. Javier Solana, the EU's foreign policy representative, opened the debate describing the regime as a "threat to peace and security". He said that the UN Security Council "had to act as other countries will be watching".
The need for the EU to support the UN and for the international community to act as one was stressed by all speakers. José Ignacio Salafranca for the European People's Party urged the consideration of sanctions and urged leaders not to forget Iran in any multilateral response.
For the Socialist group Martin Schulz said we should distinguish between a "crazy dictatorship and the starvation of it people". He contrasted the dialogue of the Clinton years with the cutting of contact under President Bush. István Szent-Iványi for the Liberals said that North Korean threats and intimidation must not be allowed to succeed while Gérard Onesta for the Greens described the country as "the biggest asylum on the world".
Energy, innovation and illegal immigration top Lahti agenda
Next week EU leaders gather informally at Lahti in Finland. Europe's energy needs, ways of boosting innovation and illegal immigration are on the agenda. EU leaders will have dinner with President Putin and many MEPs urged EU leaders to raise the Politkovskaya murder with him.
As holders of the EU's Presidency, Finland are eager to highlight technology and innovation. Their minister for European affairs Paula Lehtomäki introduced the summit agenda and told MEPs that in innovation policy "words must become deeds". European Commission President Jose Manuel Barroso warned MEPs that Europe was falling increasing behind in research. He wants to push ahead with a proposed European Institute of Technology.
For the political groups the meeting with President Putin and Europe's dependence on Russian oil and gas are key issues. For the European People's Party, Françoise Grossetête condemned the murder of the Russian journalist. She struck a sceptical note and feared that innovation policy would not be realised and be cut with "the budget axe". Finally she said that legislation must offer opportunities not red tape. Martin Schultz for the Socialists said despite everything, "Russia is still an essential partner" and "we can't preach to Russia". Leader of the Liberals Graham Watson said Russia was now "tarnished" and Europe should prepare for a future without Russian oil and gas. Daniel Cohn-Bendit of the Greens made a reference to the planned dinner at Lahti and said it was nonsense to talk about bringing the perpetrators to justice "as you will be sitting down to dinner with him".
Agreement with the US on the transfer of air passenger data
Finland's Paula Lehtomäki and Franco Frattini, the EU's commissioner for justice, freedom and security, explained the deal on passenger data reached with the US last week. This replaces the agreement, which was annulled 1 October, and both stressed that legal clarity and certainty and a common European position was paramount. They stated that a good level of data protection had been obtained in the agreement that runs until July 2007.
While the speakers for the European People's Party and the Union for Europe of the Nations group welcomed the agreement and noted some improvements compared to the previous agreement, the main speakers of the other groups raised a number of critical questions as to the interpretation of the agreement, or dismissed outright the transfer of data under the agreement. The Socialist group noted that it was very important to close the legal void but that there were a number of concerns to be addressed in the long-term agreement. Several speakers stressed the need to involve both the EP and national parliaments in order to have democratic control over the negotiations of a future long-term agreement.
Measures against cheap shoes from China and Vietnam
Last week the Council confirmed and extended "anti-dumping" measures against Chinese and Vietnamese leather shoe imports introduced by the Commission in April. Spanish Socialist Enrique Baron Crespo welcomed the measures as a “balanced approach”, which is not about “open or closing doors” but about defending multilaterally agreed trade rules, but was critical of the absence of a minister to answer MEPs' questions. He was also unhappy that the Commission was not represented by Trade Commissioner Peter Mandelson.
While various speakers defended the measures as necessary to defend trade and the interests of European producers and workers against unfair practises, others - from across the political spectrum - criticised them as consumer unfriendly, a result of “horse trading” in the Council and poor management of globalisation.
20061012STO11623 North Korea Background on Air Passenger Data: Court of Justice press release annulling the previous agreement: EC/Council release on new agreement (EN & FR
EN
1
PHOTO
20061012PHT11640.jpg
EN
4
LINK
http://curia.europa.eu/en/actu/communiques/cp06/aff/cp060046en.pdf
EN
5
LINK
http://www.consilium.europa.eu/ueDocs/cms_Data/docs/pressData/en/er/91183.pdf
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061010IPR11533 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060901BKG10232 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
