Sakharov finalist No 1: Those who campaign for hostages in Colombia
Human rights
2006-10-13 - 09:38
Help for Colombia's hostages on the streets of Paris
Ahead of the awarding of the Sakharov prize for freedom of thought in December, Parliament's website is running profiles of the 3 finalists. Today we look at the nomination of "All those fighting for the release of kidnapped hostages in Colombia". As nominees, this group is represented by former Colombian Presidential candidate Ingrid Betancourt (herself a hostage), and the "País Libre" (free country) foundation which campaigns on behalf of those held hostage and their families.
Colombia is one of the most dangerous places in the world. Decades of violent conflict between government forces, leftist guerrillas and right-wing paramilitaries have left tens of thousands dead and thousands held hostage. It is estimated that there are currently 3000 people held hostage in Colombia, 80% of the world's total. Added to this is the carnage caused by Colombia being one of the world's largest producers of cocaine, a lucrative trade that has fuelled the violence and instability.
Ingrid Betancourt: campaigner for peace in Colombia
Ingrid Betancourt was someone who advocated a negotiated settlement to Colombia's problems. She stood as a Presidential candidate in the 2002 Presidential election on a platform of anti-drug trafficking, anti-corruption and the need to negotiate with the FARC guerrilla movement, (Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia) - something the government started in October. Mrs Betancourt was abducted on 23 February 2002, and is believed to be held by FARC.
She was a former Colombian MP, Senator and founder of the "Oxygen" political party whose aim was to secure an end to the conflict through dialogue. Her campaigns against drug-trafficking, corruption in public life and violence made her many enemies. She received numerous death threats and survived an assassination attempt.
"País Libre" foundation: supporter of hostages and their families
This independent Colombian foundation campaigns not only for the release of hostages, but also for the welfare of those whose loved ones may have been abducted. It also helps victims of extortion.
País Libre aims to raise awareness of the problem in Colombia and the wider world and provides support and advice to those who have been affected by kidnapping. They also campaign for changes on the law in Colombia. The foundation offers psychological advice and advises people how to negotiate with kidnappers who are demanding ransoms. The organization does not participate in negotiations, support families financially or denounce crimes to the authorities. All of its services are free to victims.
There are two other finalists for the 2006 Sakharov prize. They are:
Alexander Milinkevich - Belarus opposition leader, to be profiled on 17 October:
Ghassan Tueni - journalist and representative of leading figures assassinated in Lebanon - 24 October.
20061010STO11507 2006 Sakharov Prize - supporting Freedom of Thought around the world - Focus Official website of Ingrid Betancourt (French and Spanish) Foundation País Libre website (Spanish)
EN
1
PHOTO
20061004PHT11329.jpg
EN
3
LINK
http://www.ingridbetancourt.com/
EN
4
LINK
http://www.paislibre.org/html/sitio/index.php?view=vistas/es_ES/pagina_108.php
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060911FCS10501 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
