EP postpones final vote on new Fundamental Rights Agency
Fundamental rights
2006-10-12 - 13:58
The European Parliament decided to postpone the final vote on the reports by Kinga GÁL (EPP-ED, HU) and Magda KOSANE KOVACS (PES, HU) on the establishment of the EU Fundamental Rights Agency to signal that it insists the scope of the new body to be extended to intergovernmental cooperation in policing, justice, immigration and counter-terrorism issues.
MEPs adopted with a large majority amendments to the initial proposals of the European Commission but postponed the final vote on the legislative resolutions of the reports, deciding to refer both reports back to the Civil Liberties Committee for reconsideration. The rapporteurs proposed the final vote to be postponed in order to give more time to the European Commission in consultations with the Council to reach an eventual compromise.
The European Commission proposed that the agency should deal not only with first pillar issues but also third pillar ones such as police and justice cooperation which also includes measures on immigration and counter-terrorism. Several Member States are opposed to this but the MEPs strongly support the proposal of the European Commission.
The new agency is scheduled to take over the work of the existing European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia. Like the monitoring centre, the agency will be based in Vienna. Its tasks will include gathering information, giving advice to the EU and its Member States and issuing annual reports on fundamental rights issues. It will also engage in awareness raising. The Finnish presidency wants to have the agency up and running by 1 January 2007.
The European Parliament says that as well as fundamental rights issues in the Member States, the agency should also deal with problems in candidate countries and countries with which a Stabilisation and Association Agreement has been concluded.
MEPs want the involvement of the European Parliament with the new Agency to be strengthened by being consulted on the five year framework for the agency and on the candidates for the post of Director. They want not only the Council but also Parliament and the European Commission to be able to draw on the technical expertise of the Agency. They add that duplication of activities with the Council of Europe can be avoided through mechanisms to ensure complementarity and added value.
To ensure the good cooperation with the civil society the European Parliament supports the establishment of a Fundamental Rights Platform which will help the exchange of information and knowledge. They also add that the Agency should have a Scientific committee which will consist of eleven independent experts and will guarantee the scientific quality of the work. AM 31 Member States will have to nominate national liaison officers to guarantee good cooperation with the agency.
The European Parliament also wants the deadline for the independent external evaluation of the Agency to be 31 December 2011, rather than 31 December 2009 as originally proposed, and said that the evaluation should include "an assessment of the possible need to modify the Agency's tasks, scope, areas of activity or structure".
20061011IPR11558 European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights: pursuing actions on police and judicial co-operation in criminal matters, Treaty TEU Title VI
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5261032
EN
2
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5261042
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
