Mandelson defends strategy on bilateral trade deals
External/international trade
2006-10-11 - 18:13
Progressive trade opening can be the key strategy to increase the EU's competitiveness and growth, and to promote development around the world, Trade Commissioner Peter Mandelson told the International Trade Committee on Tuesday. Views differed among MEPs taking part in the discussion.
Mr Mandelson, presenting a Commission paper entitled “Global Europe: Competing in the World,” explained his new programme for bilateral free trade agreements (FTAs) with the EU's key economic partners. The aim was to create, “through negotiations, open and fair markets around the world, where EU companies can compete". He said it was possible to combine market opening with development: by mutually opening their markets the EU and its trading partners would equally benefit. The core argument of this strategy is "to reject protectionism at home and be active in creating open markets abroad". He explained that the EU will target those emerging economies already able to sustain competition.
Daniel Caspary (EPP-ED, DE), the rapporteur on the Commission's paper, stressed that new FTAs should not be carried out at the expense of other strategic relationships such as with China. The Commissioner agreed, noting that the Commission would publish a paper on EU-China relations on 24 October. Erika Mann (PES, DE) asked about EU-US commercial relations; the Commissioner acknowledged the difficulties in eliminating the remaining regulatory trade barriers between the two economic powers, since they reflected deeply rooted traditions.
Gianluca Susta (ALDE, IT), although agreeing with the substance of the Commission strategy, criticised the commitments towards greater social justice as "too generic". Strong criticism of the new trade approach came from Caroline Lucas (Greens-EFA, UK), who said Oxfam had described it as "a plan to export inequality". Helmut Markov (GUE-NGL, DE) was also disappointed. He said that for ten years the EU had been experiencing jobless growth, while national welfare systems were collapsing and the Commission paper did not address these issues.
Mr Mandelson rejected the idea that the Commission is neglecting the social dimension of trade, both internally and before its trading partners. He said that the best way to create more jobs within the EU is to ensure greater economic growth. On the other side, he believed that workers' rights and labour standards can be better protected though bilateral negotiations, since "the WTO is not really concerned with these issues". He added that environmental objectives could be achieved through FTA negotiations. Finally, he strongly stressed that the EU commitment towards the WTO and the resumption of the Doha round will not be hampered by the new bilateral approach.
2006-10-10 Committee on International Trade Chair Enrique Barón Crespo PES ES 20061011IPR11612 Follow this link for the Commission's website on its communication "Global Europe: Competing in the World"
EN
1
LINK
http://www.ec.europa.eu/trade/issues/sectoral/competitiveness/global_europe_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
