MEPs hear Barnier's plan for a European Civil Protection Force
Regional policy
2006-10-06 - 13:15
Michel Barnier outlined to MEPs on Thursday his proposals for "europe aid". This is his name for a European Civil Protection Force to be based in Brussels. The force would bring together existing national civil protection forces under one umbrella, in order to enhance the efficiency with which the EU can respond to catastrophes. Overall, MEPs reacted positively to the project.
Mr Barnier, who has previously been both EU Regional Affairs Commissioner and French Foreign Minister was asked by the Commission to report on how to update European mechanisms for civilian aid to deal with natural, industrial or terrorist catastrophes that are increasingly affecting the EU's regions and citizens.
Proposals for increasing the amount of European funds for crises date back to 1999, but only in 2002, when devastating floods affected several countries in Central Europe, that a €1 billion European Solidarity Fund was created. Since 1999, 37 natural catastrophes have affected Europe, 17 of them directly and the rest indirectly, such as the Tsunami in the Indian Ocean. But Mr Barnier also mentioned industrial catastrophes and reminded Members of the continued risks posed by nuclear centres in Russia.
Given this background, the report proposes to combine the Member State's national civil protection forces in order to be more efficient in solving humanitarian or environmental crises. Mr Barnier warned of the political consequences of a poorly managed response to a disaster, such as that seen in the USA after hurricane Katrina.
Action in crisis situations
The "europe aid" budget would be 10 per cent of the European Solidarity fund, but the bulk of its money would come from existing resources available to national civil protection agencies in the Member States. The main responsibility would remain at national level and the operational centre would only react in case of a cross-border crisis and after affected countries ask for help. A training centre in crisis-management and aid operations is also proposed.
Reactions to the initiative
Mr Barnier's proposals elicited some immediate criticism, such as for the idea of an operational centre from which human resources would be mobilised. He explained his aim was not to centralise the Civil Protection agencies in Brussels, but to combine the forces in order to be quicker and more efficient at saving lives. Lambert van Nistelrooij (EPP-ED, NL) said he would have liked more information on the cross-border and neighbourhood policy aspects of the project.
Overall, however, the "europe aid" idea was welcomed by MEPs. Ioannis Gklavakis (EPP-ED, EL) said that a global initiative coming from the EU was needed to fight against the increasing number of catastrophes, and asked for more resources to turn "europe aid" into reality. A Commission representative said action has already been taken, and that the Commission is willing to reinforce the Operational Centre it already has under its Directorate General for Environment.
2006-10-02 Committee on Regional Development Chair Gerardo Galeote EPP-ED ES Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety Chair Karl-Heinz Florenz EPP-ED DE Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development Vice-Chair Jean-Claude Fruteau PES FR
Joint public hearing on the European Civil Protection Force: europe aid
20061002IPR11289 For a European Civil Protection Force: europe aid - read the Barnier proposals via this link Public Hearing: For a European Civil Protection Force: europe aid
EN
1
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/commission_barroso/president/pdf/rapport_barnier_en.pdf
EN
2
LINK
/meetdocs/2004_2009/documents/dv/200/200610/20061005_hearing_barnieren.pdf
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
