MEPs debate Commission 2007 work programme
Institutions
2006-11-15 - 09:34
In a wide-ranging debate on the Commission's work programme for 2007, the Parliament gave it a mixed welcome. The House will vote on a resolution during the December plenary session in Strasbourg.
Broad policy guidelines
Commission President José Manuel BARROSO opened the debate with a reference to last week's power cuts in Europe. "When the lights went out last week, our interdependence was laid bare for all to see", he said. "The incident was illuminating", he said, and had rendered the debate about the need for more Europe "superfluous".
He then turned to the challenges facing Europe which require shared solutions, notably growth and jobs, climate change, energy security and international terrorism, saying "We can be proud of our response so far to this rapidly changing landscape".
The EU institutions had continued to work "to unleash the full potential of the single market", while also emphasising social solidarity with the Globalisation Adjustment Fund, a "useful shock absorber to the powerful motor of globalisation". Innovation was another priority and the European Institute of Technology was set to play a key role.
The EU had successfully steered Romania and Bulgaria towards EU membership - a further step in European unity. "Let there be no doubt: in centuries to come, historians will say that enlargement was the greatest instrument for peace, prosperity and stability of our generation", said the Commission president.
Turning to the coming year, Mr Barroso said 2007 would mark "a turning point" when a Europe of 27 would throw its weight behind "the delivery of solutions to our citizens' shared concerns".
The work programme contained a list of 21 strategic initiatives and a second list of priority initiatives. Under the heading of Better Regulation the Commission was now proposing an Impact Assessment Board, more simplification and a target to cut administrative burdens by 25% by 2012.
Key policy areas in next year's programme would include:
- energy, with the aim of building "an integrated EU energy policy" to safeguard security of supply as well as environmental objectives;
- climate change, including a revision of the EU Emissions Trading Scheme;
- measures to deal with the demographic squeeze by attracting more skilled economic migrants, partly by giving them a secure legal status;
- the single market¸ with a new emphasis on the defence industries and markets;
- security, with additional measures to combat terrorism, especially fighting terrorist propaganda and sharing expertise on, for example, explosives.
Mr Barroso added that "2007 will also mark a turning point in our search for an institutional settlement". Next spring's Berlin Declaration, to mark the 50th anniversary of the Treaty of Rome, should be "a short and sharp political declaration…making it clear where we want to go and what we want Europe to be for the next 50 years".
Concluding, the Commission president said "When this Commission took office, there was unfinished business to deal with". "These things have been dealt with, put behind us, or turned around". "Europe has proved its continuing vigour and relevance by reinventing itself for the 21st century. To show our commitment to concrete results and to work hard for a stronger European Union, this is a fitting birthday present - for Europe and all its citizens."
Political Group Speakers
Francoise GROSSETÊTE (FR), speaking for the EPP-ED group, said that the Commission's work programme represented simplification which was to be welcomed. She also welcomed the reduced number of priorities "there are now only 21 strategic priorities". On the other hand, there was no need for further EU agencies, the cost benefit of existing agencies should also be carried out. Mrs Grossetête also expressed the need for impact assessment studies. On the Commission's priorities, she stressed the importance of energy and the implementation of a European energy certificate "which some studies have shown could create one million jobs". She also welcomed the focus on climate change and the need for better communication.
Martin SCHULZ (DE), for the PES group, welcomed the Commission's 2007 work programme, but said it was a case of déjà vu as it was very similar to the 2006 version. Mr Schulz also welcomed the focus on climate change and the priority given to reduce roaming charges. The answer though was not unrelenting deregulation. Mr Schulz also questioned the weight of the multilingualism portfolio given to the Romanian Commissioner-designate. Mr Schulz would have preferred a wider portfolio to include the protection of minorities in the EU.
Silvana KOCH-MEHRIN (DE), for the ALDE group, said that the second half of one's life passes faster than the first, this would apply to the Commission and it would need to build up momentum and speed." The Commission's 2007 work programme did not achieve this. She welcomed, nevertheless, the priorities on reducing red-tape and bureaucracy and the desire to better communicate with citizens. Mrs Koch-Mehrin described the programme as "a jigsaw puzzle that did answer the key questions on the Constitutional Treaty and enlargement." The programme also did not mention development aid, despite the EU being the number one donor.
Pierre JONCKHEER (BE,), speaking for the Greens/EFA group, said that, given the current political circumstances, more unity was needed and if that required greater resources for the Commission, his group supported this. In particular, he welcomed the priority given to climate change, energy and transport and said that his group had set out ways to reduce energy use by 30 % by 2020. It was also necessary to prepare for Kyoto II.
For the GUE/NGL group, Gabriele ZIMMER (DE) said the Commission faced tough challenges, not least in helping to meet the Millennium Development Goals. Simple deregulation and letting market forces rule was not the solution. The Commission should introduce restrictions on the market in clearly identified areas.
For the UEN group, Irish Member Brian CROWLEY asked "When did it become a sin to be radical?" In a changing world, a faster response by Europe was needed. He also criticised the slow progress on the Lisbon Agenda, saying there was "still so much lacking" on this front, with much talk about innovation, research and development but little actually being done. There was even "regression" in some areas, such as taxation. He was opposed to any moves to harmonise taxation, believing instead that "tax competition is healthy". Lastly he hailed the common foreign and security policy as "one of the key successes of the EU", and referred in particular to Kosovo and Africa.
Danish MEP Jens-Peter BONDE , for the IND/DEM group, complained about what he saw as undemocratic procedures in the EU. The Commission, fortunately, did not "have voting rights" but the Court of Justice played too active a role, in his view. He would prefer the EU "not to be involved in some issues" and overall he favoured a "bottom-up approach rather than the centralised one" prevailing at present.
On behalf of the non-aligned Members, Belgian MEP Frank VANHECKE focused on wider issues. He complained that, while EU citizens in France and the Netherlands had "thrown out" the constitutional treaty, the Commission was saying the core of the treaty must be preserved. The public was also against accession negotiations with Turkey, he added. Lastly, he contested the idea of "economic immigration", saying it had been shown that it was not in fact economically beneficial.
Commission response to the debate
Responding to the debate, Commission president BARROSO stressed that one aim of the work programme was "better targeting". He denied that the "annuality principle" was being abandoned, saying that the 21 strategic objectives would give a good balance between flexibility and security, in other words the result would be better programming and continuity.
Regarding the portfolio earmarked for the Romanian Commissioner, he stressed that it would cover not just multilingualism but also "interculturalism" or the dialogue between cultures. It was thus a substantial policy area.
Turning to climate change, this issue he said was closely linked to energy policy. And there was now a convergence between concerns of environmentalists and those keen on greater competitiveness, a point embodied in the existence of the European Technology Institute.
Summing up, he said the aim must be "to prepare the EU for the globalisation era". We should "not regard it as the end of Europe but instead have the courage to reaffirm our values" because "with our own values of freedom and solidarity we can create a globalisation to suit us in the 21st century".
British Speakers
- Growth - employment - competitiveness
Jean LAMBERT (Greens/EFA, UK) was pleased to hear the President talking about dealing with unscrupulous employers, assuming by that that he means those who keep people in near slavery conditions, pay them extremely badly and exploit them. She Lambert looked forward to seeing more explicitly mentioned in the Commission's programme with regard to quality of jobs and elimination of poorly-paid employment.
Ms Lambert stated that she will be looking to see whether the proposals coming forward equally look at the effects of existing European legislation on the future of services.
Finally, she welcomed something picking up on the sustainable development strategy this year on the issue of targeted training for professions, in helping to meet climate change requirements. "If you cannot fit your solar panels and you cannot repair your energy systems, you are not going to meet your climate change targets."
Roger HELMER (NA, UK), non-attached Member. referred to the report of the French Conseil d'Analyse Group, a high-powered economic committee of the French Government chaired by Prime Minister Dominique de Villepin. That report, he stated, says 'economic integration has stagnated and no longer promotes growth'. It also says that the euro's creation has not produced the knock-on benefits expected. Mr Helmer hopes the Commission will note the estimate of Commission Vice-President Gunter Verheugen who says that the costs of excessive regulation in the single market amounts to €600bn a year. In a recent UK study of more than 1000 CEOs a clear majority felt that the EU was doing more harm than good and that Britain should renegotiate its relationship with Europe to something more like a free trade deal. The position is very clear, he said. "Europe's share of world trade is shrinking fast. Membership is costing far more than any benefits it offers. EU regulation and the EU social model are doing huge economic damage. The EU is making us poorer and less democratic and less free and we have had enough of it."
Stephen HUGHES (PES, UK) stated that he found this work programme very disappointing. While, he said, the communication again hails flexicurity as a means of realising opportunities offered by European labour markets, in reality, it has been shown to have no positive meaning for working people. For millions flexicurity is a weasel word, a code word for exploitation, insecurity and uncertainty. What is needed, Mr Hughes said, is an EU legislative framework to tackle unfair and exploitative employment and quasi-employment relationship. All workers in all regions deserve access to decent work to give them and their families the chance of a decent life. In the meantime, social Europe is at a standstill. The last piece of EU legislation in the social field was adopted over three years ago. The Commission's lack of ambition reflects both its own imbalanced policy perspective, better regulation means no legislation in the social field but also reflects the poor prospects for any proposal in the Employment Council. Employment Ministers need to begin to play a positive role and they could start by doing something positive on working time and temporary agency work. Lisbon promised more and better quality jobs. What have they done to deliver that promise for working people? Precious little. Finally, Mr Hughes' message to both Commission and Council is this:. "Let us stop the rhetoric and start to deliver."
Elizabeth LYNNE (ALDE, UK) said that demographic change is one of the greatest challenges for European competitiveness. Her party, she said, want to make it a priority to bring people into the job market that are excluded, elderly and disabled people included. That is why the 2000 Employment Directive should be fully implemented. But, she said, more must be done, especially as 2007 is the European Year for Equal Opportunities.
However, Ms Lynne welcomed the Commission's commitment to cut down on unnecessary legislation. That is the reason, she said, that she requested the Commission to reaffirm their intention to withdraw the temporary workers agency directive and also to consider separating the issues of calculating what is considered as working time where someone is on call from that of the individual opt out from the working time directive.
If, Ms Lynne stated, we are really going to achieve growth and competitiveness, legislation should only be brought forward in the employment field if it cannot successfully be done at local or national level. In the field of health and safety, only if scientific and medical evidence prove the need for it, as is the case for an amendment to the 2000 Biological Agents Directive, to protect workers from needle stick injuries and contracting hepatitis or HIV. She asked the Commission when are they going to bring forward that amendment to the Biological Agents Directive in line with the own-initiative report that was passed by the European Parliament?
- Cohesion - Preservation of natural resources
John BOWIS (EPP-ED, UK) stated that, in terms of better legislation, he looked forward to the development of impact assessments, both environmental and health – development in such a way that they are seen to be, and really are, containing an element of independent assessment. He suggested the need for an panel of independent experts – not a new building or agency, but people on whom we can call to help to ensure that the impact assessments are effective.
Mr Bowis stated that healthy people and indeed a healthy environment are prerequisites to healthy economic growth, competitiveness and jobs. More work is needed to improve health promotion, collaboration between health services, including not only that on patient mobility, patient safety and the new areas of mental health, but also continuing areas such as flu preparedness.
The environment goes hand-in-hand with growth and jobs. Eco-innovation is a major component to win the fight against global warming. I certainly call on the Commission to lead initiatives in the post-Kyoto process outside the European Union, developing the 'green diplomacy' concept.
Having recently been in Gaza and seen the devastation to people in the hospitals there, Mr Bowis urged that the new opportunities coming from the appointment of the new Prime Minister of the Palestinian Authority mean that the European Union should work closely with that authority and the Israelis to stop what is happening in Gaza and to promote real reconciliation and peace.
- Internal affairs
Malcolm HARBOUR (EPP-ED, UK) expressed his concern about the work programme and the priorities as presented.
Mr Harbour wanted to know how much resources the Commission is putting behind the implementation of its policies. We know that Commissioner's McCreevy' s estimates that on the single market we have 90% of the legislation already in place. Delivering what we have is fundamental. Where does it tell me what resources the Commission is putting behind it? Where does it tell me the resources the Commission is putting behind a transposition plan for the Services Directive which we will approve tomorrow, a fundamental piece of work. If the Commission does not put the resources behind it, it will not be delivered.
Mr Harbour stated that he would like to ask Commissioner for Institutional Relations and communication strategy, Margot Wallström for the next package we should have these grouped together. "I want the priority for the single market, I want the actions next to it, I want the delivery resources next to that and I want the Commission's simplification plan next to that. I want the percentage of the resources that the Commission puts behind those together. That would be a logical and clear document and a clear communication."
Finally, on the Services Directive: "I am delighted that Mr Schulz is here, because I notice from a press release he put out today that the Services Directive is an enormous success for the Socialist Group. It is an enormous success for this Parliament and all of us working together. I hope people will have the humility to accept that, but I notice that he has finally joined our liberal club because this release states that he supports the flexibility necessary to enterprise and the promise of new job creation. Welcome to the market liberalisation club, Mr Schulz."
Foreign Affairs
Andrew DUFF (ALDE, UK), stated that the Commission strategy for change across the policy spectrum must be framed inside a constitutional context. Policy reform will be given practical effect by its connection with the issues of the EU's competences, the instruments, the powers and procedures. As far as external affairs are concerned, for example, he said the Union needs its legal personality. Public opinion supports the EU as a global actor. We need success on completing the Doha Round for trade and development. We should be stalwart in persevering with enlargement, despite the problems that we experience at present, some of which at least are clearly foreseen and foreseeable.
The Commission and Parliament must be steadfast to support the deployment of so many European forces, not least at present in South Lebanon, as this exercise surely provides the greatest test for the development of our common foreign security and defence policy.
Referring to the importance of the Lisbon Agenda and commitment to the multilateral approach in trade policy and support to the WTO, Robert STURDY (EPP-ED, UK) deplored the suspension of the WTO round negotiations and seriously urged the Commission to come forward and fight for a reiteration of the feelings of getting the settlement on the Doha Round in 2007.
Mr Sturdy welcomed the EU communication on global Europe competing in the world but, however, stressed that bilateral, regional agreements should remain supplementary to the multilateral trade system. He questioned the Commission as to why progress has not been made with the USA on regulatory issues between the EU and the US by completing the transatlantic single market? We must, he said, make a commitment to that over the next decade. We cannot have a free trade agreement with the US since it would undermine multilateralism. Mr Sturdy expressed concern over the growing feeling of protectionism and trying to set goals that are outside the Lisbon Agenda. Increasingly Member States are using various methods to be protectionist.
Finally, he expressed serious concerns about EPAs, economic partnership negotiations, but supported the Commission in their proposal. It is imperative, he said that we move forward. "It is a real chance, and probably the last chance we are going to have, to really do something to help those poor countries." He hoped that an agreement would be reached in the coming year.
Vote will take place in December (Plenary 11-14 December)
20061113IPR12539 Commission Work Programme 2007
EN
1
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/atwork/programmes/index_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
