EP calls for a more robust European security and defence policy
Security and defence
2006-11-16 - 17:31
"The EU is on the way to developing into a Defence and Security Union," says a report adopted today by a large majority (414 in favour to 117 against with 12 abstentions). MEPs argue for a more active European Security and Defence Policy, extending the Union's competencies through a common defence market, a civil protection force, as well as a standing naval force in the Mediterranean.
In the own-initiative report on the implementation of the European Security Strategy (ESS), drafted by the Chairman of the Subcommittee on Security and Defence, Karl von Wogau (EPP-ED, DE) the EP recognises the "excellent analysis of the threats to the modern world" of the ESS, but considers "that the geopolitical challenges have evolved considerably since the adoption of the ESS in 2003, making its revision necessary in 2008, at the latest." MEPs also called for a regular 5-yearly review of the document, including a debate in the EP and national parliaments.
Towards a security and defence union
Although the report "emphasises that, in the event of an attack by the armed forces of a third country on the territory of the Union, NATO remains the guarantor of collective defence," it "points out that the EU is on the way to developing into a Defence and Security Union, as well." MEPs called on the Commission and Member States "to develop a system of integrated management of the Union's external borders." They also called for the European Security and Defence Policy (ESDP) capabilities of the Union to be strengthened by the setting up of a common defence market, a common system of intelligence and communications standards and a European civil protection force.
In addition, the report "stresses the importance of the Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe," especially the sections that would set up a solidarity clause in case of catastrophes, and a clause on mutual assistance, in case of an attack on one of the Member States. It favours the Constitution's plans to create a post of European Foreign Minister, as well as supporting the creation of a Deputy Foreign Minister in charge of security and defence policy. Finally, it suggests the "setting up of a European standing naval force, including a coastguard service, active in the Mediterranean Sea in order to demonstrate European presence and enhance the EU's crisis management potential in this region."
Preventive and non-military actions
The Parliament also focused on preventive measures, emphasising that "the Union, in light of new threats, must be ready to act before crises break out and take early preventive action," although always in line with the United Nations Charter. Members stressed that "one of the greatest contributions of the European Union to preventing international terrorism will be its capacity to be effective in the building or rebuilding of democratic institutions, social and economic infrastructure, good governance and civil society, and successfully combating racism and xenophobia."
European defence market
MEPs considered that "the EU should promote measures to harmonise equipment and armaments," and to develop a joint system of telecommunications to increase the effectiveness of multinational operations. Members also looked forward to the Commission's interpretative communication on the application of Article 296 (which allows governments to derogate from internal market rules for reasons of national security) and called for the Code of Conduct on Arms Exports to be given the force of law.
20061113IPR12545 The implementation of the European Security Strategy in the context of the ESDP
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5312862
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
