WTO: Pascal Lamy pessimistic about survival of Doha Round
External/international trade
2006-10-18 - 12:22
WTO director-general Pascal Lamy gave his view of this summer's suspension of the Doha Round multilateral trade talks when he addressed the EP Trade Committee on Tuesday. During the meeting, MEPs voiced disappointment at the resurgence of bilateralism. They also called for the WTO to have a parliamentary dimension, to take greater account of development and to negotiate separately on each sector.
"The possibility that negotiations will fail is now being taken seriously by many countries" , said Mr Lamy. The differing views on agriculture held by Australia, Brazil, the United States, India, Japan and the EU (the G6) had prompted him on 23 July to "suggest to WTO members that the official negotiation process be suspended".
Mr Lamy went on to deplore the new proliferation of bilateral deals, which he said had become very much "the fashion" lately. "They do not cover all trade and they achieve nothing as regards discipline on farm subsidies, fisheries aid and anti-dumping issues - which are of huge importance to developing countries", he said. He was supported by Jean-Louis Bourlanges (ALDE, FR), who attacked the "bilateral turn" taken by Trade Commissioner Peter Mandelson, and by Erica Mann (PES, DE), who deplored the undermining of the multilateral negotiating system.
Commenting on the many appeals from all sides for a resumption of negotiations, Mr Lamy argued that "these political signals do not represent a change in negotiating positions, especially when they are addressed to others. But they may be forerunners of a new state of mind". Javier Moreno Sanchez (PES, ES) and Jean-Pierre Audy (EPP-ED, FR) reiterated Parliament's demand for the WTO to be given a genuine parliamentary dimension.
According to Mr Lamy, two future decisions by the USA will affect the resumption of negotiations: the renewal or reform of the US Farm Bill, which was adopted in 2002 for five years, and the extension or otherwise of the negotiating mandate given by Congress to the Trade Promotion Authority, the body in charge of trade negotiations. Robert Sturdy (EPP-ED, UK) was concerned at the prospect that the Farm Bill might be renewed and stressed the need to preserve the development dimension of the Doha Round.
Seán Ó Neachtain (UEN, IE) and Harlem Désir (PES, FR) questioned the "single undertaking" concept, which involves simultaneous negotiation on all sectors. They wanted agriculture and development removed from the WTO framework. Mr Lamy warned them against opening what he believed was a Pandora's box, saying any questioning of the present negotiating mandate would force the parties to halt the current negotiations and sit all WTO member states round the table to devise a new mandate.
2006-10-17 Committee on International Trade Chair Enrique Barón Crespo PES ES 20061016IPR11679
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
