Conference of Presidents gives positive assessment of hearings and seeks clarification of Mr Orban's portfolio
Institutions
2006-11-28 - 18:47
The Conference of Presidents has given a positive assessment of the hearings of the Commissioners-designate, while asking for clarification of Mr Orban's portfolio. Parliament's political group leaders held an exchange of views on Tuesday on the conclusions of the hearings. They confirmed that the votes on the approval of the two new Commissioners are scheduled for Tuesday 12 December, on the basis of a motion for a resolution to be tabled by the political groups.
The Conference had been informed by the relevant committees that:
Mrs Kuneva fully meets the personal requirements of integrity, independence and competence. She has the requisite professional experience. During her hearing, she demonstrated a strong commitment to consumer protection on behalf of EU citizens, a high level of competence on technical issues and a political conviction to implement and communicate the benefits of EU consumer policy.
Mr Orban showed highly developed political skills, as well as great ability, capacity and ambition to learn and acquire expert knowledge into his portfolio. He seems particularly qualified to handle such a difficult portfolio with true professionalism.
However on the portfolio itself, the mandate of the Commissioner-designate remains unclear. Concerns have been raised about the relative vagueness of the portfolio and explanations given by President Barroso did not clarify sufficiently the division of labour between Mr Figel, Mr Orban and the President himself.
In this regard, President Borrell will send a letter to President Barroso to ask for a clarification in writing of Mr Orban's field of activity.
20061128IPR00700 from the Culture and Education Committee to President Borrell following the hearing from the Internal Market and Consumer Protection Committee to President Borrell following the hearing
EN
1
MULTIMEDIA
20061129MLT00702.pdf
EN
2
MULTIMEDIA
20061129MLT00704.pdf
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
