Future of Europe: from reflection to action - Inter-parliamentary conference 4-5 December an interview with Michael Connarty MP
Institutions
United Kingdom
2006-11-29 - 12:00
Michael Connarty MP new Chairman of the EU Scrutiny Committee
Looking forward to the Inter-Parliamentary conference on the Future of Europe: from reflection to action, Michael Connarty MP recently elected Chairman of the EU Scrutiny Committee of the House of Commons and one of the UK delegation answers some important questions.
You have just taken over the Chairmanship of the EU Scrutiny Committee, how do you see your role and the role of the Committee evolving over the next few years?
It is still early days. However, in recent years we have been making steady progress under the previous Chairmanship of Jimmy Hood MP. We are trying to drill down deeper into information received in order to engage more with government positions on major EU issues and ensure Parliament knows how the changes in Europe will affect UK legislation. This has entailed an increasing use of interrogative correspondence, debates in Standing Committees and evidence sessions from Ministers. I would anticipate we will make further advances in the structures that allow the merits of each issue to be examined more fully in dialogue with responsible Ministers. I hope also to see more debates on the floor of the House or the use of some other mechanism for debates on key policy areas that would engage more members of the Commons and hopefully increase discussion of European issues by Parliamentarians. The present quarterly meetings between MEPs, the EU Scrutiny Committee and Lords European Committee can and must be built on as they are some of the most fruitful discussions for the participants I have been involved in over the past eight years of my membership of the Scrutiny Committee.
You are taking part in the Joint Parliamentary Meeting on the Future of Europe in Brussels on 4/5 December for the first time. There are three issues for discussion in Brussels: future financing, energy policy and the EU role in conflict prevention. These are all very significant in their different ways. Which group are you going to take part in and why?
If we are allowed to send a full delegation to Brussels, all three issues will be covered by the Speaker's nominees from various relevant UK Parliament Committees. I have an interest in all three but in part because I have an economics background I will be taking part in the future financing debate. I have already taken part in seminars on this difficult subject organised by the European Commission and I am acutely aware that it cannot be resolved without a fundamental change in the CAP and a resolution of the system of abatement (the rebate). Some progress has been made for the 2006 -13 financial perspective but everyone knows it is only a stepping stone to the firmer position we must reach if we are to sustain the EU's economic project further into the twenty-first century.
How important to your role as Chairman of the Scrutiny Committee is this opportunity for discussing issues with colleagues from other Member States and from the European Parliament?
I watched in admiration the way Jimmy Hood built up substantial personal credibility and friendships among Parliamentarians throughout Europe. This included early contact with the ten Accession countries before 2004 and really positive efforts in building the role of COSAC. I will give equal importance to the need to build a personal and positive working relationship with our colleagues in the European Parliament and will seek to find a mechanism for involving them in the formal debates and discussions at UK Parliamentary level. I believe this will bring about a greater understanding of the possibility of better legislation at all levels of government within Europe. I would hope it would also give UK Parliamentarians a sense of identity in the European Parliament's debates and similarly recognition and understanding of MEPs and their role among UK Parliamentarians. I also hope to see more formal contact between the UK EU Scrutiny Committee and Lords European Committee and the European Committees of the devolved Parliaments and Assemblies and hope that would be extended to include MEPs in any dialogue we can establish.
When you return to London will these issues and the outcome of the meeting be discussed more widely by the UK Parliament?
We are genuinely searching with the members of the EU Scrutiny Committee to find mechanisms which will put the major European issues before MPs.
I am listening to members of all parties on the Committee, particularly since I had the pleasure of being nominated and supported for the Chairmanship by all parties. We may and do disagree on some of the fundamentals in relation to the role of the European project and the effect it should or should not have on UK legislation and governance but all the members share an ambition to make the European dimension better understood and more engaging for UK Parliamentarians. If we can find a mechanism and a forum in which large issues such as future financing, energy policy and the EU role in conflict prevention can be discussed then I believe it will position the UK debate in the correct context that is as a central democratic Chamber in the European democratic environment.
Future of Europe: from reflection to action
On 4 and 5 December in the European Parliament in Brussels, for the second time, national and European parliamentarians will debate the "future of Europe." The first meeting held on 8 and 9 May helped to the re-launch, at national level, of the debate on the future of Europe. This second meeting aims to raise the level of the debate and address concrete questions.
Parliamentarians from the EU Member States, accession countries and candidate countries will all be present in Brussels. The objective of the meeting is to increase the participation of Parliaments in the elaboration of political and institutional strategies enabling the EU to further develop and to increase it efficiency. As the first meeting re-launched the debate at national level, on this occasion, with a new title: "from reflection to action", the meeting is about taking "a step forward". As was the case with previous meetings of this type, the general goal is to contribute to the strengthening of the EU parliamentary dimension.
The programme starts with an introductory plenary session, the national parliamentarians and European Parliamentarians will then separate into three working groups on the following subjects: "The financing of the EU," "Towards a European policy on energy," and "The role of the EU in conflict prevention."
The national parliamentary delegations are made of 6 members, candidate countries have 2 members. The European Parliament's delegation will be made up of 60 MEPs. The meeting, co-organised by the European Parliament and the national Parliament of Finland - the country holding the Council EU Presidency, will be co-presided by Josep Borrell Fontelles and President of the Finnish Parliament - Paavo Lipponen.
The European Commission President, Jose Manuel Barroso, and the President of the Council, Prime Minister Matti Vanhanen will intervene at the beginning of the meeting on Tuesday 5 December which will be followed by a debate with parliamentarians.
Parliamentarians attending from the UK and Ireland are listed below:
UK
Mr. Michael CONNARTY, House of Commons
Mr. Peter LUFF, House of Commons
LORD (Julian) GRENFELL, House of Lords
LORD (John) ROPER, House of Lords
LORD (Simon) HASKEL, House of Lords
IRELAND
Senator James BANNON Senate
20061127IPR00341 Website of inter-parliamentary conference 4-5 December 2006 First inter-parliamentary conference 8-9 May 2006
EN
1
PHOTO
20061130PHT00850.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.futureofeurope.europarl.europa.eu/future/cms/lang/en/
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060502IPR07790 EN NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
