European Ombudsman's 2005 annual report
Petitions
2006-11-16 - 15:21
In adopting an own-initiative report on the Ombudsman's 2005 annual report, Parliament declares its satisfaction with the public profile of the Ombudsman, welcomes the generally constructive cooperation between the Ombudsman and the institutions and endorsed him in his role of "external control mechanism and, in addition, as a valuable source of ongoing improvement to European administration".
MEPs express their appreciation of the Ombudsman's good cooperation with Parliament's Committee on Petitions, but stress the need for "a clear definition and demarcation" of his role vis-à-vis that committee and urge him to "continue to remain within his terms of reference" when seeking to assist citizens. They acknowledge, however, that when the Ombudsman and the Petitions Committee investigate overlapping issues, "they can achieve useful synergy through close cooperation".
The House particularly welcomes the Ombudsman's special report on the openness of meetings of the Council when acting in its legislative capacity, and calls on the Council to act on the Ombudsman's - and Parliament's - recommendations and to ensure in future that all the meetings in which it acts in its legislative capacity are open and accessible to the public. As part of the efforts to boost transparency, the report also calls on future Council presidencies to do their best to provide Internet pages in all the official languages of the EU. Other proposals included establishing the entry portal http://europa.eu as the uniform entry page for all EU institutions to make life simpler for citizens and avoid unnecessary confusion from sites existing in parallel.
The report welcomes the introduction of new internal procedures at the Commission when it comes to answering inquiries from the Ombudsman, whereby individual Commissioners assume sponsorship for a specific case. It calls on the Commission to introduce this kind of procedure for the processing of petitions as well. The House also welcomes the European Network of Ombudsmen and called for a further strengthening of exchanges of best practice.
Lastly, noting that nearly 70% of complaints still fall outside the European Ombudsman's terms of reference, the European Parliament says that there is a need for a better communication strategy to ensure that the public was given more information about what the Ombudsman can and cannot do. It encourages the Ombudsman to "continue to place great emphasis himself on events involving citizens and, hence, potential complainants since clearly the demarcation of responsibilities and decision-making processes between the European, national and regional levels are still too hard to grasp for many citizens and businesses".
20061113IPR12550 Report on the Ombudsman's 2005 annual report European Ombudsman's homepage
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5347832
EN
2
LINK
http://www.ombudsman.europa.eu/home/en/default.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
