McCreevy tells Equitable Life inquiry: Commission cannot be "the supervisor of the supervisors"
Petitions
2006-11-23 - 19:30
The European Parliament's inquiry into the crisis at the Equitable Life Assurance Society heard evidence on Thursday from the CEO of Equitable Life, a financial journalist from the Glasgow Herald and from Internal Market Commissioner Charlie McCreevy, who told MEPs his institution could not be "the supervisor of the supervisors" in ensuring EU legislation was correctly enacted by Member States.
Commissioner McCreevy's appearance at the hearing highlighted the fact that the committee's remit is to look into the EU aspects of the Equitable Life affair. Mr McCreevy first spoke about the Commission's role in ensuring that EU law is correctly transposed into national law. Such supervision was "a difficult task" because of the resources needed. "If we get a complaint we investigate" but "the prime responsibility lies with Member States". He stressed that the Commission believed the UK had properly transposed the Third Life Insurance Directive.
Replying to a question by committee chair Mairead McGuinness (EPP-ED, IE), the Commissioner said that one difficulty was that each country would enact an EU directive in its own way, sometimes with add-ons (a practice known as "gold-plating"), which then made it difficult to trace the EU legislation itself. The solution could be "maximum harmonisation", i.e. to use EU regulations instead of directives, but many Member States would resist this approach.
Mr McCreevy repeatedly distinguished between EU and national responsibilities. Mis-selling of policies, for example, would be a matter for each Member State, since it would be a question of fraud and "fraud has always been an offence", aside from insurance legislation.
Lastly, referring to the ultimate aim of the committee of inquiry, which is to draw lessons, especially for future EU law, Mr McCreevy said several times he looked forward to receiving recommendations from the European Parliament, notably on the Solvency II and financial services legislation.
Detailed questions were asked by rapporteur Diana Wallis (ALDE, UK), Robert Atkins (EPP-ED, UK), John Purvis (EPP-ED, UK), Proinsias De Rossa (PES, IE) and Sarah Bowles (ALDE, UK), some needing written replies, which the Commissioner promised to provide.
Equitable CEO defends his company
Earlier, in his second appearance before the committee, the Chief Executive Officer of the Equitable Life Assurance Society, Charles Thomson, stressed that the new directors appointed in 2001 had had to "pick up the pieces". Of the previous board, Mr Thomson said there was "little evidence that what they did was done with malice or greed", although "they may have been incompetent". Later, however, referring to Equitable Life's difficulties, he said "while accidents could happen he "had some difficulty believing this was entirely accidental". He also told MEPs that some of the information provided to them by previous witnesses "was not entirely accurate", such as the claim that Equitable Life had been able "to unfairly influence" the UK financial services regulators.
Collusion between regulators and insurer?
In a hard-hitting submission, Simon Bain, a journalist from the Glasgow Herald, told the hearing of his investigation into the sale by Equitable Life of "managed pensions", a story which he argued revealed "a lack of integrity or care and much self-interested skill" by Equitable Life. Holders of guaranteed pension plans had been persuaded to convert their policies to a different product. Equitable Life had gained by switching its clients away from the guaranteed plans which were posing a threat to its finances and by even charging its clients commissions for these "new sales".
Aside from the company's behaviour, Mr Bain criticised the lack of supervision by the financial authorities which "allowed the insurer to create for itself a regulation-free zone" in which there was "a culture of orchestrated mis-selling". He added that "the regulators failed to pick up signals from Equitable's conduct of business which should have alerted them to the black holes in its accounts. They then colluded with the stricken insurer to minimise financial and reputational damage, to the society and the government."
A full transcript of the hearing will be available in due course on the committee's webpage (see below).
2006-11-23 Committee of Inquiry into the crisis of the Equitable Life Assurance Society Chair Mairead McGuinness EPP-ED IE
20061120IPR00068 Web page of the Equitable Life Committee of Inquiry
EN
1
LINK
/comparl/tempcom/equi/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
