Iraq and the EU - more engagement needed
External relations
2006-11-27 - 09:00
l to r: G. van Orden MEP and Iraqi Deputy PM
With US and international policy in Iraq undergoing a rethink - and with appalling violence continuing, Iraq's Deputy Prime Minister, Barham Salih, came to brief MEPs in the Foreign Affairs Committee on the situation in Iraq last week. He said that the "situation is not as bad as international media indicate". Iraq has an "elected Parliament and a committed government" which seeks more engagement from the European Union, more debt relief and greater investment.
Mr Salih gave this assessment of the violence "whether we define it as a civil war or not is irrelevant...the level of violence is not sustainable." He also made the point that mass graves in Saddam Hussein's time went unreported by Western media. MEPs were supportive of the new government and the elections that have taken place - but felt his assessment optimistic - see link below.
The EU has already opened negotiations on a trade agreement and has indicated that it would support Iraq's application to join the World Trade Organisation. Mr Salih also met the NATO Secretary General who reiterated that all NATO members are contributing to the training effort either in or outside Iraq, through financial contributions or donations of equipment.
Parliament resolution on "engagement" with Iraq
In July last year a resolution stressed the importance of "promoting national reconciliation". It went on to say that it was essential for "Iraqis to exercise full authority and control over the country's natural resources" - thereby ensuring the revenue from oil reaches the people.
At a European level it called for all European taxpayers money donated to Iraq to be accounted for - and for Parliament to create an ad-hoc delegation for Iraq.
European involvement "on the ground" is already considerable . Nine EU countries have soldiers or military personnel serving in Iraq as part of "MF-I" – Multinational Force Iraq. The countries involved are Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Slovakia and the UK. Two future EU members - Bulgaria and Romania -are also represented .
Human rights and the fight against terrorism
In May this year Parliament published its annual report on human rights around the world. For Iraq it noted "concern about serious human rights abuses...including in Iraqi prisons". It welcomed the EU's support for the new government but wanted more engagement in bringing about stability".
In February MEPs will vote on a report on the fight against international terrorism. It says that "the most serious threat to Europe...is posed by violent radical groups claiming to defend Islam, such as the criminal Al-Qaeda network and groups affiliated to it". A key proposal is to increase cooperation with the US. It also wants EU countries to make the International Criminal Court "more realistic" (presumably so the US will cooperate) and for terrorism to be included in its jurisdiction.
MEPs call for curbs on arms trade
On 23 November Parliament's Foreign Affairs Committee called for tougher implementation of the EU's Code of conduct on Arms exports. It also wants wider international support for an Arms Trade Treaty. MEPs want the code of conduct extended to private security companies. This could be crucial as an estimated 20,000 private security guards are believed to be currently working in Iraq.
In conclusion, there is no easy path to take in Iraq. Last week a UN Report put the civilian death toll for October at 3,700. Given this, it is clear that the international community must work together to support democratic and peaceful forces in Iraq.
20061124STO00300 Iraqi deputy PM meets MEPs Annual Report on Human Rights in the World 2005 EU/Iraq - A framework for engagement 6 July 2005 - Strasbourg Parliament's Foreign Affairs Committee
EN
1
PHOTO
20061124PHT00298.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/search/ta/perform.do?query=Iraq&language=EN#
EN
5
LINK
/activities/expert/committees/presentation.do;jsessionid=F7E9F7B840CCD1BECF8C03AC26A253A0.node1?committee=1232&language=EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061120IPR00045 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2005-0288 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
