Situation of disabled people in the enlarged EU
Social policy
2006-11-30 - 13:13
Parliament adopted an own-initiative report by Elizabeth LYNNE (ALDE, UK) on the situation of disabled people in the enlarged EU. In adopting the report by a large majority, Members underline that accessibility to public transport and information and communication technologies is vital for disabled people. They call furthermore for a better integration of disabled people in mainstream education and into the job market and for a European charter on quality of support for disabled people.
MEPs welcome the gradual trend towards eliminating the many forms of discrimination that disabled people encounter when using air, land or sea transport. They note that EU legislation already exists concerning the rights of disabled persons and persons with reduced mobility when travelling by air and encourage the Commission is to expand the same legislative rights to disabled persons in relation to all modes of transport.
Members welcome efforts by Commission to improve accessibility to information and communication technologies since it may contribute effectively to reducing high unemployment among people with disabilities. They note however that 80% of public websites, including those of the European institutions, are generally not accessible to people with disabilities Parliament calls on the European institutions and Member States to take specific action aimed at ensuring that all public institutions' web sites are accessible to disabled people. Furthermore they recall that documentation produced by the European institutions should always be made accessible on demand in accessible formats .
To encourage the integration of disabled people, from an early age, in mainstream education wherever possible whilst still acknowledging in some cases that special schools are necessary, the Commission should work together with Member States. The Commission should furthermore undertake research into the possibility of establishing a right to mainstream education for disabled children and their families who choose it.
MEPs want to launch information campaigns to raise awareness amongst employers of their duties and responsibilities and to ensure that they view the engagement of a disabled person without any kind of prejudice, in particular, as regards misconceptions concerning the financial cost of employment and the candidates' capabilities. The Member States should explore more intensively ways of offering jobs to people with disabilities.
Members welcome moving away from the institutionalisation of disabled people but note that deinstitutionalisation requires a sufficient level of community-based quality services favouring independent living the right to personal assistance and full participation in society within Member States.
They call on the Commission to press for a European charter on quality of support for disabled people with a view to ensuring a high level of integration and participation whatever the method of support .
Finally, the Commission is asked to publish every two years a progress report on the policies and good practice pursued on behalf of the disabled in the individual Member States of the EU in the various sectors concerned.
20061129IPR00715 Situation of people with disabilities in the enlarged European Union: the European Action Plan 2006-2007
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5341232
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
