European Parliament says EU must reform before enlarging further
Enlargement
2006-12-13 - 15:10
Parliament says the European Union needs to develop its institutional, financial and policy structure before any further enlargement can take place. This comes in a report on the institutional reforms required to improve the EU's capacity to integrate new Member States.
The report by Alexander STUBB (EPP-ED, FI), adopted by 398 votes in favour, 99 against with 36 abstentions, acknowledges that the Union is currently confronted with "difficulties to honour its commitments towards South-East European countries" and calls for a series of institutional changes to improve its "integration capacity".
The notion of "integration capacity" implies that, after any new accession, the EU institutions are able to function properly and democratically, to adequately finance their activities and to attain their political objectives. Therefore, MEPs say that the Union should decide on which reforms are needed to proceed with a new enlargement by taking into consideration the impact of the new Member State on its institutional and decision-making structure. The Nice Treaty, says the report, does not provide "an adequate basis for further enlargements."
MEPs stress that the "integration capacity" should not be seen as a new criterion for candidate countries, since it is up to the EU to improve its ability to accept new countries and deepen its integration process. MEPs also say that all past enlargements have "tended to strengthen the Union, foster its economic growth, reinforce its role in the world and stimulate the development of new EU policies."
As far as the reforms are concerned, MEPs' proposals include: the adoption of a new qualified majority voting system at the Council to simplify decision making; a clear definition of the EU's values, objectives and competences; more transparency in Council's operations; increased powers of scrutiny for national parliaments and the adoption of a clause setting out how Member States could leave the EU. MEPs also propose an amendment calling for reinforcement of the European Neighbourhood Policy to provide a framework for relations with those countries with no prospect of accession.
MEPs reiterate their conviction that a constitutional settlement must be achieved before the next European Parliamentary elections in 2009. They reaffirm that the Constitutional Treaty would enhance the Union's integration capacity if ratified.
The House takes the view that the assent of the European Parliament, required for Council to act under Article 49 TEU on the accession of new member states, should apply to the decision to open negotiations, as well as their conclusion.
Enlargement: Turkey, Croatia and the Western Balkans
The European Parliament adopted a resolution by 481 votes in favour to 66 against with 38 abstentions on candidate countries and possible future candidates, notably Turkey, Croatia and the Western Balkans.
Future enlargements of the European Union should take more account of the performance of candidate countries than they did in the past and will, in any event, require changes in the EU Treaty, Parliament said. A date for final accession should not be given too soon and accession negotiations should follow a timetable based on "effective compliance" with the political criteria. Compliance with these criteria should be given greater priority in accession negotiations and Parliament intends to play a more active role in monitoring the accession process..
MEPs urged the EU governments to "conclude the constitutional process by the end of 2008", pointing out that "the Treaty of Nice does not provide an adequate basis for future enlargements". They want the necessary treaty reforms to be ready before the next European elections "so as to avoid a delay in current accession negotiations", notably in those with Croatia.
Turkey
With regard to Turkey, Parliament noted the European Commission report which says that the pace of reform has slowed and stressed that Turkey ratify and fully implement the so-called Ankara Protocol, which extends the EC-Turkey association agreement to all new Member States, including Cyprus. The EU governments stated in September 2005 that implementation of the protocol would be evaluated in 2006 and that failure to implement it would "affect the overall progress in the negotiations". MEPs consider last Monday's Council decision not to open eight important chapters in the negotations "an unavoidable consequence of Turkey's position". They call on the German Presidency to continue efforts in this area but also with regards to "further alleviating the isolation of the Turkish Cypriot community in close cooperation with renewed UN efforts" within a reasonable timescale..
Croatia
Croatia's continued progress "towards EU integration" was welcomed by the MEPs, who called on "the negotiators on both sides to maintain the momentum reached in these negotiations with a view to their early conclusion".
Western Balkans
The "clear European membership prospects" offered to the Western Balkan countries, needs to be maintained, the Parliament said, in order to consolidate peace and prosperity in the region, but MEPs reminded these countries that it is the pace of reform that will determine the pace of their integration in the EU.
MEPs debate the enlargement process
On Wednesday morning Parliament held a keynote debate on enlargement, just ahead of this week's European Council, where enlargement will be a main agenda item. The debate was opened by Parliament's two rapporteurs, Elmar BROK (EPP-ED, DE) and Alexander STUBB (EPP-ED, FI).
Elmar BROK (EPP-ED, DE), rapporteur on the Commission's strategy paper on progress in the enlargement process, said that underlying all discussion " we must remember enlargement has been the most successful EU policy - positive for the economy, a significant contribution to the unification of Europe and acting as a major incentive for the reform process to candidate countries ".
Looking to the future of enlargement, he went on, " we are facing a decision between a real political Union concerned in particular with Europe's role in the world or remaining purely an economic project ". This choice needs to be made and goes hand in hand with the need for revising current institutional arrangements as envisaged by the Constitution. " We need clarity what we are offering countries that want to join the Union. We have already offered certain prospects to certain Balkan countries. These must be honoured. But we also need to look wider than the possibility of full membership to more multi-lateral forms of co-operation that can be offered now as opposed to at the end of fifteen years of negotiation ". We also need clarify internally so that we can avoid internal crisis and stalemate and we therefore need the institutional revisions offered by the constitution.
On Turkey, he said " it is a pity Turkey's legal obligations are not currently being fulfilled" but "what is happening now doesn't mean Turkey can for ever put off meeting its legal obligations ".
Alexander STUBB (EPP-ED, FI), rapporteur on the institutional aspects of the EU's capacity to integrate new Member States, told the House that five main points underlay his report.
Firstly, a change of terminology from absorption policy to integration policy. " No-one wants to be "absorbed" by the European Union ", he said. Secondly, " a sensitivity to the various interests and attitudes to the issue from those who want a widening of the Union without political deepening, to those who want the opposite and those who are against both ". These positions are not new, they always present and each new enlargement has always been preceded by a thorough institutional debate. " We now need the Constitution before further enlargement ".
Thirdly, a definition of integration capacity. It is not a condition for enlargement but a criterion and covers issues of institutions, budget and policies. Fourthly, making sure there is adequate public debate around enlargement. He wished to point the finger at the Council for its failure in this area. There were many chances for public debate. " Please do your job, Council, and show some strategic thinking ", said Mr Stubb. Lastly, the need for a Constitution before 2009.
He concluded by saying " Enlargement is the best policy the European Union has ever had. It has brought peace. prosperity, security and stability ".
Council Presidency - Minister Paula Lehtomaki
For the Council Presidency, Paula LEHTOMAKI, Finnish Trade and Development Minister, told the House "enlargement is an essential part of the European integration process" and the prospect of accession had always encouraged candidate states to implement reforms. Thanks to enlargement, the EU has become a bigger player on the international stage, helping the market to respond to the challenges of globalisation. We now have peace, stability, democracy, the rule of law and prosperity. "We need to ensure that this success story continues" .
The Union must continue with enlargement as "an open and objective process without new strings being attached" . We have to pay closer attention than ever before to how it happens in practice, improving the quality of enlargement and developing the Union's readiness and capacity for enlargement. The absorption capacity of the EU "is not a criterion for accession nor should it ever be so" . Nevertheless, it cannot be ignored if enlargement is to be a success.
The Union must also live up to its obligations, in the Western Balkans for example. Regarding Turkey, "The Presidency has done everything in its power to keep the negotiations going. We are happy with the Council's decision taken on Monday. It is a basis on which to proceed" . Progress in the accession process can only happen on the basis of internal reform and the accession conditions being actively met.
Concluding, she told MEPs, "There is a degree of enlargement fatigue around. By communicating timely and factually accurate information, we can break the spell of fatigue".
Commissioner Olli Rehn
The Commissioner thanked the Finnish Presidency among other things for Monday's decision on how accession negotiations with Turkey should proceed. "This is a clear signal to Turkey that there will be consequences if it does not live up to its obligations". "The decision demonstrates that the EU is able to take decisions on delicate and difficult decisions without ... turning the whole thing into a major crisis".
Pointing out that the Union must ensure its own capacity to function while integrating new Members, the Commissioner stated that "We risk increasing confusion among our own citizens and damaging our credibility in the candidate countries. We must build up a renewed consensus on enlargement by combining the two sides of the coin".
The Commission will carry out impact assessments on enlargement and evaluate the budgetary implications (particularly in areas such as agriculture). The Commissioner stated that "Difficult issues, such as judicial reform and the fight against corruption must be addressed at an early stage of negotiations". He added "We should not create something overly complicated ... I believe we all are in favour of simplification, not complication".
"Some wonder whether enlargement is done at the expense of deepening. My answer is no. The EU has managed to do this before and it can be done again" . A new institutional settlement should be in place by the time the next new Member is ready to join the Union. A Political Declaration is to be adopted in Berlin next March and the remaining steps should be concluded by the end of 2008. Mr Rehn concluded by stating that "we need to maintain the momentum of enlargement" .
Political group speakers
For the EPP-ED group, Spanish MEP Inigo MÉNDEZ de VIGO wished to stress that enlargement was " positive for the existing Member States ". Unfortunately, he added, the EU was not ready. " You don't invite guests into your house if it isn't in order ." To put it in order, " the constitutional treaty is needed ".
However, he warned against " cherry picking " the Constitution. It was essential to preserve "a proper balance". The message from his group to the European Council was thus " no future enlargement without the constitutional treaty ".
On behalf of the Socialists, Hannes SWOBODA (PES, AT) said " many people believe the smaller the EU the better, while others think the bigger the better ". In practice, a key need was for " the EU to speak with one voice ", in other words the emphasis should be " on quality not quantity ". Overall, then, the " most important elements of the constitution " were certainly needed. However, fundamental changes on the EU's financial basis were also needed.
On Turkey, he said, this country must certainly meet its obligations, but in the EU " we must also politically do our job on Cyprus ". Turning to the Neighbourhood policy, he believed a broader " vision of a greater, enlarged Europe ", for example an EU-Black Sea Community should be contemplated.
Belgian MEP Annemie NEYTS-UYTTEBROECK , for the ALDE group, argued that the term " absorption capacity " was being used " as an excuse to question enlargement ". She wished to make three points. Firstly, " enlargement so far has been an undeniable success ". Secondly, all commitments must be adhered to, in respect of Croatia, the Balkans and Turkey. On this point, she backed the Commission's approach to negotiations with Turkey as " not shutting the door but being fair and balanced ". Thirdly, the EU must "reform its own institutions before enlargement".
Dutch MEP Joost LAGENDIJK , for the Greens/EFA, stressed that each EU candidate " must be judged on its merits" and that "difficult issues must not be put off to the end ". On the question of " absorption capacity or integration capacity ", he regretted that some were using these terms " as an argument against enlargement".
He then emphasised that, while he was in favour of the western Balkan countries and Turkey as EU candidates, he was sure further enlargement " will not work with the current institutional framework ". Moreover, public support was essential and to get this, " credible arguments, stressing the Union's long-term interests " must be made by leaders who did not just listen to the latest opinion polls. This particularly applied in the case of Turkey. " We cannot base ourselves on rumour and fear in the Union ", he concluded.
" Enlargement is slowing down, leaving us little room for manoeuvre", said, Erik MEIJER (NL) for the GUE/NGL. The " neo-liberal attitude of our economies ", worries about migratory flows and poor working and housing conditions for migrant workers, and concern over human rights in Turkey mean that " we risk closing the door to these countries, and hence damaging their prospects " he said.
" Trumpeting the Constitution [as a pretext for slowing enlargement] is misguided ", and the same goes for the notion of " integration capacity ", said Konrad SZYMANSKI , of Poland, for the UEN. " If enlargement is such a success, why do we fill reports with cowardly Euro-scepticism ?" he asked, adding that the EU " is perhaps trying to do too much ", and hence raising expectations too high. " The simple fact is that candidates must meet conditions ", he concluded.
The Stubb report is disappointing in that it " does nothing to fill the institutional gap " said Dutch MEP Bastiaan BELDER for the IND/DEM group. It confirms that we need an EU Constitution, but offers no vision of the future for enlargement. Mr Belder said that a provision for enlargement procedures should be included in the EU Treaty and also deplored the " lack of political leadership " in defining the boundaries of the Union.
For the non-attached members, Philip CLAEYS, of Belgium, warned that " horse-trading " with Turkey over its refusal to implement customs union needs to be handled very carefully. "We have always told citizens that negotiations would be suspended if conditions were not met, but now we seem to be doing the opposite" he said.
Andrew DUFF (ALDE, UK) said he welcomed "the suppression of the terminology of 'absorption capacity' ….and of 'privileged partnership', which is a faintly patronising concept without, frankly, much privilege to it" . He went on "we must seek now to develop the neighbourhood policy quickly and creatively, to establish upon the eastern frontier stable circumstances" for countries that cannot or do not wish to join. He advocated including in a renegotiated Constitutional Treaty a chapter describing the enlargement policy and describing more clearly the accession process, as well as creating "a fresh class of associate membership" . All this would "serve to reassure the public about the quality of the accession process and pace of expansion".
Jim ALLISTER (NA, UK) complained that "the proponents of the rejected Constitution see enlargement as a bandwagon for securing its approval" . In fact, it was "spurious spin that enlargement demands a Constitution" . And there was no mention anywhere of who would pay for all this enlargement - just the expectation that the UK for example would happily go on bankrolling it. "With the EU costing my country £4bn net per annum - we cannot afford any more charity."
Mary Lou McDONALD (GUE/NGL, IE) welcomed the debate and stated that "I am one of those who is very much pro-enlargement ... but I am also a person who is against the Constitution". She went on to say that she thought this concept of enlargement is potentially one that could be used to sell the Constitution and to imply that it is "simply a case of tweaking" the existing Treaties. She said that "To communicate, we must listen and we must have that very fundamental debate about the direction of the Union" . Ms McDonald concluded by stating that she supported the accession of Turkey but that the issue of Cyprus must be sorted out, saying the situation was one of continuing illegal occupation.
Gerard BATTEN (IND/DEM, UK) was unhappy that the EU had a "seemingly limitless need to to absorb more countries" and to take more and more power from democratic nation states and "concentrate it in a centralised and undemocratic European Union" . The Stubb report was talking about nothing other than "a United States of Europe" so, unsurprisingly, "UKIP does not agree with that". However, said Mr Batten, "I have found something in his report we can agree with". This was "the adoption of a clause enabling Member States to withdraw from the European Union" .
Richard CORBETT (PES, UK) told the House "Alexander Stubb said that enlargement was the most successful EU policy, spreading peace, prosperity and security across the continent ". That logic still applied. "Enlargement is one of the many factors which drives reform. Supporters of reform should be supporters of enlargement. There is a need to push for both together and not to make complete institutional reform the pre-requisite for enlargement. The two agendas should drive each other forward and there is a possibility that we may see a new Constitutional Treaty and a new Accession Treaty on the same day - rolled into one".
Charles TANNOCK (EPP-ED, UK) argued that "the smooth, successive waves of enlargement have been a magnificent achievement for the EU" . The 2004 enlargement, despite dire warnings, had proven a great success. However, unlike Mr Brok, Mr Tannock did not feel further enlargement required a Constitutional Treaty. Any necessary changes could be achieved by amendments to the Nice Treaty. As rapporteur for the Neighbourhood Policy he believed "there should be a split between Southern/Euromed countries and a new Eastern concept of an EU-Black Sea Community" . However, Moldova and Ukraine should be told that they will be able to become potential EU candidates.
Responses to the debate
Council Presidency - Minister Paula Lehtomaki
Responding to the debate, the Minister emphasised the need to ensure that the Union retains its ability to act in all situations. She pointed out that the EU has 'done its homework' in relation to a variety of ongoing issues - on Monday, an agreement was reached that the economic situation of Cyprus should be taken forward at an early stage. In relation to the Applicant countries, the Minister again stated that they have to fulfil the membership criteria of the EU and that this fulfilment of criteria must be seen objectively. She said that "We trust the Commission in its willingness and ability to carry out evaluation".
The Constitutional Treaty contains many elements which are important for improving the EU's integration ability. The Minister stated "We must believe and trust in the ability of the Union". She went on to point out that Constitutions are only one of the instruments necessary to carry out policy and that political will and commitment to the European project are also necessary.
She concluded on the issue of the Neighbourhood policy by saying that it is "an important area of policy by itself and shouldn't be seen as a substitute of enlargement". Those countries interested in joining will not accept one instead of the other.
Commissioner Olli Rehn
The final speaker in the debate was Commissioner Rehn , who pointed out that "We have in Europe two discourses that don't meet often - one emphasising the significance of enlargement the other only our absorption capacity".
Referring to the points made concerning the European Neighbourhood policy and the Commission's report of 8th November, he pointed to the EU's variety of relationships with other European countries - Switzerland, EEA and through the European Neighbourhood Policy - and emphasised that the European Neighbourhood Policy is "distinct from and parallel to the process of enlargement".
The Commission was not in favour of the suggestions to include cultural criteria in the Copenhagen criteria, he added. He concluded by quoting the Philosopher Ulrich Becker who, writing in yesterday's Le Monde about the recent visit of the Pope to Turkey, spoke of " the European miracle " that " enemies have become neighbours ".
20061207IPR01152 Commission communication on the Enlargement Strategy and Main Challenges 2006-2007 Institutional aspects of the European Union's capacity to integrate new Member States
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/reports/sidesSearch.do
EN
2
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5386112
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
