Strasbourg Plenary session: 11 - 14 December
Institutions
2006-12-08 - 13:14
The REACH chemicals package is one item being voted on
The last Strasbourg plenary of the year will be one the busiest for MEPs. Parliament will vote in second-reading on a compromise between MEPs and the Council on the "REACH" chemical package. Parliament will also vote on the approval of Romanian and Bulgarian Commissioners-designate before the two countries join the EU on 1 January 2007. Belarus opposition leader Aliaksandr Milinkevich will be awarded the 2006 Sakharov Prize for "Freedom of Thought" by Parliament's President Josep Borrell.
Parliament will also debate and vote on the €115.5 billion EU budget for 2007 in a final second-reading. The House will debate the forthcoming European Council (14 and 15 December) which will focus on further enlargement of the EU and justice and home affairs. MEPs will also focus on new rules on TV commercials and product placement under the revision of the "Television without Frontiers" Directive and a standard EU-wide format for driving licences. Monday 11 December On Monday MEPs will debate the "REACH" chemicals package - a law that could affect 30,000 chemicals currently on the market in the EU. It will force manufacturers and distributors to draw up lists of the most hazardous substances. A vote follows on Wednesday.
Tuesday 12 December Tuesday starts off with a joint debate on the financing of development co-operation. After two years of negotiations with the Council, Parliament's Development Committee is recommending approving an agreement on the financing instrument for development co-operation for 2007-2013, which reflects Parliament's main demands on the structure and priorities of Community aid.
This debate is followed by a discussion on improving the cleanliness of groundwater.
Parliament will also vote and discuss on the approval of the Romanian and Bulgarian Commissioners - Leonard Orban and Meglena Kuneva.
The Parliament's annual Sakharov prize for freedom of thought will be awarded to the leader of the opposition in Belarus - Aliaksandr Milinkevich - at midday on Tuesday.
Tuesday afternoon starts with the House debating a proposed overhaul of the advertising rules for TV channels in Europe, including a new approach to product placement. The new legislation aims to update the 1997 TWF directive, now to be dubbed the Audiovisual Media Services Directive, to bring it into line with new developments in audiovisual technology and advertising. Later on Tuesday afternoon, MEPs debate the EU budget for 2007 totalling €115.5 billion in payment appropriations, the vote will take place on Thursday. On Tuesday evening, the European Parliament debates an agreement between the Employment Committee and Council on the Commission's proposal to establish a European Globalisation Adjustment Fund (EGF). The Fund which will provide up to €500 million each year to help reintegrate into the labour market workers made redundant due to changes in global trade patterns, will be able to become operational as of 1 January 2007, if the plenary follows the recommendations of the Employment Committee. Wednesday 13 December Wednesday starts off with a joint debate on the enlargement process. Elmar Brok for the Foreign Affairs Committee will be putting forward a report concerning EU enlargement notably to Turkey, Croatia and the Western Balkan countries. In a separate report, the Constitutional Affairs Committee says the European Union needs to develop its institutional, financial and policy structure before any further enlargement can take place. This comes in a report on the institutional reforms required to improve the EU's capacity to integrate new Member States. The key debate of the week is on the preparation for the forthcoming European Council to be held in Brussels on 14 and 15 December. Enlargement and Justice and Home Affairs are the main topics on the table for EU Heads of State and government. On Wednesday evening, MEPs turn their attention to a legislative report at second-reading on the introduction of a standard EU-wide format for driving licences comes before the House. As from 2013, all newly issued or replacement driving licences will be in a single EU-wide credit card format, which will replace the over 110 different models currently existing in the EU. Thursday 14 December On Thursday a report on carbon dioxide emissions will be tabled. Parliament will also debate the establishment of an Instrument for Nuclear Safety and Security Assistance for third countries. As is customary, the session ends on Thursday afternoon with debates and votes on three human rights issues around the world. The topics are: the situation in Fiji, the implication of UN forces in sexual abuse in Liberia and Haiti and the freeing of medical personnel held in Libya. Extraordinary plenary 18 December
An "extraordinary" plenary session will take place on Monday 18 December from 11am - 1pm in Brussels. The purpose is to allow Finnish Prime Minister Matti Vanhanen to inform MEPs of what happened at the European Council. He is also expected to give a summary of the Finnish President of the EU.
20061208STO01249 Upcoming Plenary in full
EN
1
PHOTO
20061207PHT01243.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061127BRI00306 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
