Romanian & Bulgarian Commissioners, Clean water dominate Tuesday
Institutions
2006-12-13 - 11:53
MEPs approved measures to combat water pollution
On the second day of their Plenary in Strasbourg, MEPs voted in favour of Romania and Bulgaria's candidates to be future European Commissioners. With both countries joining the EU in two weeks, their nominees now look set to take their place on the EU's executive. MEPs also approved legislation that should improve the cleanliness of groundwater - for many regions the main source of drinking water. The Sakharov prize was also awarded to Aliaksandr Milinkevich, Belarusian opposition leader.
The two Commissioners approved are: Meglena Kuneva from Bulgaria who has been allocated the Consumer Protection portfolio. Her duties will include ensuring that Europe's Consumers get a fair deal in terms of price and quality. For Romania: Leonard Orban will take over the "multilingualism" file at the Commission. He will be responsible for promoting language learning across the EU.
Applause for Romanian, Bulgarian candidates
Both candidates had a question and answer session with MEPs on 27 November. The object of this exercise was for Members to question the two about their experience and judge their suitability for the post. The "Yes" vote and subsequent applause by MEPs were firm endorsements their candidatures.
Their future boss - Commission President José Manuel Barroso - had earlier told MEPs: "it is my firm belief that both candidates in the course of the hearings have proved their personal integrity and independence, their general competence and professional experience, as well as their deep and genuine European commitment".
Cleaner groundwater, cleaner drinking water
MEPs backed tough new legislation that should improve the cleanliness of water by much stricter measures against pollution by preventing "hazardous substances" such as cyanide, arsenic, biocides and phytopharmaceutical substances seeping into the water.
The measure is particularly important as in many areas groundwater is the largest source of public drinking water. aking prior to the debate Christa Klass, the German People's Party MEP who drafted a report on the issue said that "groundwater is our most important natural resource but over half the bodies of freshwater in the EU are polluted and can never be cleaned up again". EU members have two years to integrate the directive into EU law.
Sakharov prize: "we are doing this for our children"
In his remarks after receiving the award, Aliaksandr Milinkevich told MEPs that "we are fighting for freedom and defending our independence...we are doing this for our children, who like French, Lithuanian, Polish and British children have the right to live in a free country". Parliament's President Borrell - who presented the prize - told Mr Milinkevich that "you are fighting against fear and intimidation", a reference to the authoritarian regime of President Lukashenka in Belarus.
20061213STO01482 Parliament's Press release Parliament's press release on ground water Watch live
EN
1
PHOTO
20061212PHT01471.jpg
EN
4
LINK
/eplive/public/freetext_page_direct/20061120FTX00012-2101/default_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207IPR01147 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207IPR01146 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
