MEPs adopt resolution on Commission Work Programme for 2007
Institutions
2006-12-13 - 15:10
Parliament adopted a joint resolution welcoming the emphasis in the Commission's Legislative and Work Programme for 2007 on modernising the European economy and improving the well-being of citizens. The House agrees in this context with the importance attributed to security, health, innovation, a cleaner environment, energy and climate change, the internal market, migration and integration, Europe’s global visibility and effectiveness, and improved communication with European citizens.
The Parliament regrets, however, a certain lack of ambition in several fields. The House believes that, in order to restore the momentum behind the European project, the Commission should play its full role in strengthening and modernising Europe's social market economy, based on sustainable development.
Parliament believes that the distinction drawn between 'strategic initiatives' and 'priority initiatives' increases the clarity and credibility of the Legislative and Work Programme. The House requests, nevertheless, the Commission to be more coherent and precise in explaining the distinction between those two categories, and in particular to clarify the timescale for the presentation of 'priority initiatives'. Parliament invites the Commission to present after six months an update on progress made in implementing the LWP.
Modernising the European economy
MEPs call on the Commission to improve the coordination of economic policies, in particular with a view to promoting national and European initiatives aimed at fostering research, skills and new technologies, to sharing best practices on ways to improve the effectiveness and quality of public spending, and to enhancing the quality of statistical data.
Research and development
The House reiterates the urgency of fostering cooperative research to improve the competitiveness of the European economy, in particular in the areas of advanced technologies. The House urges that enhanced coordinated efforts be undertaken to promote the telecoms and information society technology sectors.
Parliament believes that the establishment of the proposed European Institute of Technology (EIT), if it is based on the right principles, could contribute to the competitiveness of the European economy by helping to reverse the fragmentation of research, education and innovation efforts which has stunted progress so far. The House insists that no funds previously earmarked for the 7th Framework Programme of Research should be used to finance EIT activities.
Internal market
The House calls on the Commission to step up efforts to complete the internal market, so as to enable citizens to reap its full benefits. Parliament believes, however, that the Single Market Strategy review should not provide a pretext for failing to bring forward internal market initiatives as necessary. The House insists that the single market can only be developed successfully in a context of promoting fair competition, cohesion, a high level of consumer protection, and respect for the Göteborg principles.
Security for citizens, justice and migration
Parliament demands the EU Member States' and the Commission's commitment to address the structural causes of massive migration by adapting and updating their current policies, in order to enable developing countries to protect and build their economies, and to allow decent incomes for their populations, which constitutes the only long-term alternative in order to reduce illegal immigration.
The House calls on the Member States to strengthen cooperation and mutual technical assistance between their border control services and for increased financing for FRONTEX, in order to combat human trafficking. The House requests that the conclusion of readmission agreements be fair and respect the fundamental rights of migrants and take into consideration the shared needs of EU Member States and of the countries of origin and transit.
Secure, competitive and sustainable energy
Parliament welcomes the Commission’s proposal to make the development of 'European energy policy' a strategic objective for 2007, based on the principles of security and diversity of supply, sustainability, efficiency and greater energy independence.
MEPs stress that an essential element of a common energy policy should be enhanced solidarity between Member States in order to deal with difficulties related to the physical security of infrastructures and security of supply. MEPs consider, furthermore, that such enhanced solidarity would considerably strengthen the capacity of the EU to defend its common interest on energy issues at international level.
Making Europe a better place to live
The House underlines the leading role of the European Union at international level in promoting environmental issues, and agrees that, for subsequent years, efforts should be directed towards the protection of biodiversity and towards climate change, especially by developing the concept of 'green diplomacy', as well as seeking a specific energy policy focused on increasing the share of renewable energy, energy saving and efficiency in Europe. The House welcomes in this respect the Green Paper on Post-2012 Climate Change, which will help identify areas in which action is needed.
Parliament calls on the Commission to support a strong role for the EU in devising post-Kyoto policies and new targets. The House expects the proposal to review the EU emissions trading scheme to aim at improving the environmental effectiveness of the scheme, thereby also including aviation emissions in the trading scheme.
Europe as a world partner
Parliament notes that the countries of South-East Europe are coming closer to acquiring the accession momentum referred to in the 'Thessaloniki Declaration', and expects the Union to take a leading role in consolidating stability and increasing prosperity in the Western Balkans, thus helping the countries of the region on their way to EU membership.
Russia
The House reminds the Commission that the current Partnership and Cooperation Agreement with Russia will run out in 2007. Parliament calls on the Commission to propose guiding principles for the strategic content of the EU's relations with Russia, and in particular to emphasise the importance of placing democracy, human rights and freedom of expression at the core of future relations, instituting a clear mechanism to monitor the implementation of all the clauses of such an agreement.
Development policy
Parliament requests the Member States and the Commission to be more ambitious in respecting their commitment to the Millennium Development Goals, and calls on the Commission to come forward with concrete proposals for alternative financing of development programmes.
The House believes that, in order to enable the ACP countries to meet the development goals, the regional development aspect should be properly respected in negotiations on the Economic Partnership Agreements.
Trade policy and WTO negotiations
At the multilateral level, Parliament calls for a successful and ambitious outcome of the Doha Round. MEPs regret that it was necessary to suspend the negotiations on the Doha Development Agenda sine die and points out that a failure of multilateral negotiations and a shift to bilateral/regional agreements could lead to an unequal process of liberalisation and uneven development and would thus adversely affect the least developed countries in particular.
ESDP
MEPs stress the need to strengthen the mechanisms for parliamentary oversight of the development of European Security and Defence Policy (ESDP) in general, and ESDP missions in particular, and highlights the need to provide proactive information and to conduct debates before joint actions in the field of ESDP are decided on, so that parliaments can voice their opinion and concerns.
Budgetary responsibility
Parliament expects all new reforms set out in the new Interinstitutional Agreement on budgetary discipline and sound financial management of 17 May 2006 to be fully implemented in the course of 2007, thus enabling a swift impact in terms of higher-quality implementation of the budget. The House asks the Commission to ensure, facilitate and encourage the total implementation of the Community Budget, in particular in the new Member States, given the fact that 2007 will be a crucial year for the implementation of the new structural policy. Finally, the House asks the Commission to apply all the necessary measures in order to ensure that the operational programmes for the new financing period, in accordance with the strategic guidelines for cohesion, are ready and start to be implemented on time for all Member States.
20061208IPR01266 Motions for resolutions - Legislative and work programme of the Commission for 2007
EN
1
LINK
/sce/server/intranet/amend_motions_texts/sce_amend_motions_texts_main_01.jsp?amend_text_type=P
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
