Financing instrument for the promotion of democracy and human rights worldwide
Human rights
2006-12-12 - 13:45
Following the debate held on 29 November in Brussels on a report drawn up by Hélène FLAUTRE (Greens/EFA, FR) and Edward McMILLAN-SCOTT (EPP-ED, UK), Parliament adopted a report during on the legislative proposal aimed at updating the EU's financial mechanism for supporting human rights and democracy around the world.
After a year of pressure from the European Parliament, in July the Commission finally presented a proposal for a financial instrument for the promotion of democracy and human rights. MEPs want to adjust its aims and scope. They are also proposing changes to make it faster and more efficient in responding to urgent developments. This is the only instrument which allows funds to be allocated direct to civil society organisations without the agreement of the government of the third country concerned.
According to the EU Treaty, developing and strengthening democracy and the rule of law, as well as respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, are among the goals of the Common Foreign and Security Policy. The co-rapporteurs believed it was essential for the EU to have an effective instrument to further these goals, one which would be both strategic and flexible and which would complement other funding mechanisms, such as the Stability Instrument and the geographic funding programmes.
In order to work effectively, the new mechanism need to be more flexible than that which it is replacing. It needs in particular to avoid excessively bureaucratic procedures which placed severe constraints on the capacity to reach to difficult situations.
The two co-rapporteurs have therefore tried to refocus the objectives and scope of the instrument so it is centred on support for non-state players promoting democracy and human rights. They have insisted on new measures to allow the EU to respond quickly and effectively to emergency situations which often face human rights defenders. They therefore introduced ad-hoc measure to allow funding to protect and support human rights defenders in urgent cases with going through a tendering process.
In parallel, changes to the Financial Regulation, aimed at allowing funding of unregistered organisations, should allow more flexibility in the operation of the mechanism better to support independent players active in defending freedom in third countries. This should overcome some of the weaknesses in the existing system for which the Commission has been criticised in the past.
The promotion of political pluralism and parliamentary democracy, and support for parliamentary projects in favour of democracy and human rights, were also added to the mechanism by MEPs in the committee.
Parliament's role in the setting of strategic priorities and in the operation of the instrument was one of the main issues subject to negotiations between the EP, Council and Commission. The co-rapporteurs succeeded in getting agreement on the setting up of a dialogue on these issues, though the Council has refused to make a formal commitment to take part. It is proposed that Parliament should receive an annual report, evaluation reports and the minutes of the Human Rights and Democracy Committee. It is also proposed that there should be a Commission/Parliament working group.
The legislation has been adopted at this first reading stage, and the instrument will enter into force by the end of the year, thereby preventing a break in EU funding for human rights and democracy, notably the inclusion of electoral observation missions.
The financing instrument is aimed at the following areas:
(a) promotion and enhancement of participatory and representative democracy, including parliamentary democracy, and the processes of democratisation, mainly through civil society organisations, inter alia in:
i) promoting freedom of association and assembly, unhindered movement of persons, freedom of opinion and expression, including artistic and cultural expression, independent media, unimpeded access to information, and measures to combat administrative obstacles to the exercise of these freedoms, including the fight against censorship;
ii) strengthening the rule of law, promoting the independence of the judiciary, encouraging and evaluating legal and institutional reforms, and promoting access to justice;
iii) promoting and strengthening the International Criminal Court, ad hoc international criminal tribunals and the processes of transitional justice and truth and reconciliation mechanisms;
iv) supporting reforms to achieve effective and transparent democratic accountability and oversight, including that of the security and justice sectors, and encouraging measures against corruption;
v) promoting political pluralism and democratic political representation, and encouraging political participation by citizens, in particular marginalised groups, in democratic reform processes at local, regional and national level;
vi) promoting equal participation of men and women in social, economic and political life, and supporting equality of opportunity, participation and political representation of women;
vi a) supporting measures to facilitate the peaceful conciliation of group interests, including support for confidence-building measures relating to human rights and democratisation.
20061208IPR01261 Financing instrument for the promotion of democracy andhuman rights worldwide (European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights) Debate held on 29 November in Brussels
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5363482
-//EP//TEXT CRE 20061129 ITEM-016 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
