Joint Parliamentary meeting: EU institutional change essential to get results
Future of Europe/European integration
2006-12-05 - 18:47
There was a broad consensus, at the second meeting on the Future of Europe between EU national parliaments and the European Parliament, on the need to achieve a new constitutional settlement for the Union before 2009. Most of the nearly 200 MEPs and national MPs taking part in the meeting, which concluded on Tuesday, wanted the draft Constitution to be the basis for discussion on future institutional changes.
"This forum achieves one of the main objectives of my Presidency: to reinforce and deepen the relations between the EP and national parliaments" said European Parliament President Josep Borrell, summing up the meeting at a press conference. He said that there had been widespread agreement on the need to preserve the major achievements of the constitutional treaty, adding that "these meetings are very useful to prepare the ground" for the forthcoming German Presidency to find a way out of the constitutional deadlock.
Mr Borrell was also able to congratulate the Finnish Parliament's Speaker Paavo Lipponen on Finland becoming, on Tuesday, the sixteenth Member State to ratify the Constitution. Mr Lipponen, who co-chaired the meeting with the EP President, said: "This was a very successful conference. We are succeeding in bringing the European cause forward." Nevertheless, he said, greater efforts were needed to reach an agreement. He supported he idea of using the Constitution as a basis for debate: "We should keep the Treaty in one piece and preserve its main contents".
Institutional reform seen as essential
During Tuesday morning's plenary debate, the Members of the European Parliament and national parliaments put forward ideas on how to find a way out of the stalemate after 18 months of reflection on the Future of Europe. Following Monday's discussions in three working groups, a broad majority of speakers agreed that reforms are essential to allow the EU to respond to citizens' needs. Some objectives, it was argued, such as energy supply security or tackling climate change, could only be achieved if the Treaties are reformed. Elmar Brok (EPP-ED, DE), said more solidarity among Member States was required: "We need to act together. Only if we do this we can win citizens' hearts." Regina Bastos (Portuguese Parliament) said "reforming our European institutions is vital."
Keeping the substance of the Constitution…
There were different opinions on the way to achieve reforms. Juan Moscoso (Spanish Parliament) said: "The Constitution as it stands is the solution to the problem. We encourage the other countries to ratify, particularly the Euro-zone". Most of the MEPs and national parliamentarians who spoke said the draft Constitution should serve as basis for any new agreement. According to Kurt Bodewig (German Bundestag) two thirds of EU Member States would have ratified the Constitution by 2007: "Let's recognise it: we must build on that," he said. France Cukjati, Speaker of Slovenian National Assembly, agreed that the bulk of the Constitution should remain unchanged. Jo Leinen (PES, DE), Chair of the EP Constitutional Affairs Committee, proposed to "save the substance and be flexible on the form […] renegotiation makes no sense if you have 18 ratifications".
… or trying a new approach?
Contrasting views came from Jan Hamacek, (Czech Parliament): "The opinions of people from France and The Netherlands cannot be ignored," he said. Hubert Haenel (French Senate), said that, although only two countries had explicitly rejected the text, others were in the same situation, with public opinion frustrated. He added: "Since Maastricht, from citizens' point of view, the EU seems to focus on its internal business: it is difficult to get people excited about that". Francis Wurtz (FR), leader of the EP's GUE/NGL group, said the next major challenge for Europe would be addressing social issues, such as current problems occurring at Volkswagen. For Jens-Peter Bonde (IND/DEM, DK) the best solution was to renegotiate the whole text: "It is better to start from scratch and call a new convention," he said.
Moving forward with a "Europe of results"?
Finnish Prime Minister and President-in-Office of the Council, Matti Vanhanen, who opened Tuesday's session, said: "We do not think that the fragmentation of this Constitutional Treaty will provide the way ahead." At the same time, he argued, "a 'Europe of results' is the best way to make progress on the Constitution". Commission President José Manuel Barroso argued that without a new Treaty, Europe would be trying to deliver effective policy "with one hand tied behind its back".
What's next?
The debate also focused on how to achieve consensus among the Member States during the forthcoming German Presidency. Graham Watson (UK), leader of the ALDE group in the EP, said: "We still have along way yet to go - efforts must come especially from national capitals, from Paris, London, Warsaw, The Hague". Hans-Gert Poettering (DE), leader of the EP's EPP-ED group, referred to the plan for a 'Berlin Declaration', to be delivered next year by the European Council to propose a roadmap out of the deadlock. He said: "If the three institutions work together, we can send a clear signal on the way forward." Gottfried Kneifel, Austrian Bundesrat President, suggested that next year's marking of the 50th anniversary of the signature of the Rome Treaty could be the occasion to send a clear message to citizens on what sort of Europe they can expect. Jean Eigeman, (Netherlands Parliament), agreed, saying that "the 50th anniversary is a good opportunity to get closer to the young generation."
The debates held of the Joint Parliamentary Meeting on Monday and Tuesday, co-organised by the Finnish Parliament and the European Parliament, are aimed at contributing to the discussions of the European Council of 14 and 15 December. The next Joint Parliamentary meeting will be organised under the German Presidency.
Versions of this press release in all 20 official languages will be available on Wednesday
2006-12-04 Co-chair Josep Borrell, EP President Co-chair Paavo Lipponen, Speaker of the Finnish Parliament
Joint Parliamentary meeting on the Future Of Europe
20061204IPR00923 The web site for the Joint Parliamentary meeting on "the Future of Europe"
EN
1
LINK
http://www.futureofeurope.europarl.europa.eu
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
