EP and national parliaments: EU own resources and shared political project are "indivisible"
Budget
2006-12-05 - 10:21
National and European parliamentarians, resuming the debate they began last May on the funding of the EU budget, concluded that "own resources" must above all be underpinned by a clear political project. The idea of a Community tax, however, did not receive enthusiastic backing.
According to European Parliament rapporteur Alain Lamassoure (EPP-ED, FR), the EP and national parliaments could agree "to envisage a reform of the system of own resources, which must be in symbiosis with the project that the EU wished to set itself for the future". Several speakers shared this view, in particular Andrew Duff (ALDE, UK), who even wondered how far one could think of a "superior package" involving the constitution and the funding of Community policies. Gérard Deprez (ALDE, BE) believed the first step should be an agreement on how the EU spends its money and that that should not be limited to the issue of "the British cheque versus the common agricultural policy" (two topics which were the focus of criticism by most speakers). Neena Gill (PES, UK) thought that this mismatch between the EU's spending and its policies could be seen in the small amount allocated to research, while other more longstanding policies received more generous sums.
There was no shortage of ideas for defining the contours of a reform of the EU's own resources system but no clear consensus could be reached, which was understandable given the exploratory nature of the interparliamentary meeting.
Unpopularity of a European tax
A European tax was virtually ruled out. Several speakers stressed that any Community fiscal resource would be hard to plan. However, it was above all its unpopularity that would rule it out almost by default. "This tax would be very unpopular", said José Matos de Gama, Speaker of the Portuguese Parliament. "The EU's legitimacy would be wiped out", argued Bengt-Anders Johansson, a member of the Swedish Parliament. Richard Corbett (PES, UK) added that, while an EU tax would be more "visible", it would not necessarily be fairer than the current GNI-based resource.
In the end one of the few speakers to support a European tax was Pia Noora Kauppi (EPP-ED, FI), who regarded it as the "only option not linked to the competition principle". Italian MP Giuseppe Vegas was also in favour of a European tax but in a context of national "participation".
The idea of an environmental tax resource did not garner unanimous backing either. Slovenian MP Milenko Ziheri agreed with the principle, unlike Proinsias De Rossa (PES, IE), who said "This resource will diminish if progress is made on environmental protection and that would not be desirable". Others, including Mr Vegas, highlighted the adverse effect which this type of tax could have on businesses in the EU. Helga Trüpel (Greens/EFA, DE) believed such taxes were "indispensable" because of the "disastrous" state of the climate.
A combination of several options was another possibility raised at the meeting. Ms Trüpel, for example, proposed a mix of "1% of VAT and a tax on CO2, plus a standard national contribution". Former Finnish MEP Astrid Thors argued that the public could accept one new form of tax but not two at the same time.
EP to produce report in March 2007
In the end there is every chance that the main "winner" in the own resources debate will be the "GNI resource", i.e. the "national contribution" paid by each Member State to the Community budget. "Do not think that the fruit of our labours in this forum will necessarily be the exclusion of this resource", warned Lord Grenfell of the British House of Lords.
Catherine Guy-Quint (PES, FR), co-chair of the meeting, was disappointed that no-one had put forward the argument of "European added value" and she stressed that current Community policies should not all be rejected so radically.
Alain Lamassoure proposed that the debate between the EP and national parliaments should continue over the coming months. The EP is scheduled to adopt an own-initiative report on own-resources in March 2007.
A fundamental review of the Community budget is planned for 2008-09, both for revenue and expenditure, in line with decisions of the European Council taken in December 2005. Unanimity is required in the Council to modify the own-resources system.
2006-12-04 Committee on Budgets Co-chair Catherine Guy-Quint PES FR Co-chair Michael Link Bundestag DE
Interparliamentary meeting on the future of Europe, 4 and 5 December 2006
20061204IPR00920 Le site de la rencontre parlementaire
EN
1
LINK
http://www.futureofeurope.europarl.europa.eu/future/cms/lang/fr/pid/86
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
