MEPs adopt EU budget for 2007 at €126.5bn for 27 Member States
Budget
2006-12-14 - 12:39
The European Parliament adopted the 2007 budget in second reading as President Borrell signed it with the European Commission and the Finnish Presidency of the European Union. Following the vote, commitments appropriations for next year are set at €126.5bn, payments at €115.5bn, equalling 0.99 % of GNI. It represents an increase of 3.2% over 2006 levels in payments.
The 2007 budget is the first one to deal with an Union of 27 member states, following the accession of Bulgaria and Romania on 1 January of next year.
The crux throughout the preparation has been the question of posts at the Commission, as well as expenditure for the Common Foreign Security Policy - CFSP. In the end, Parliament opposed the job cuts proposed by the Finnish Presidency and managed to get a pledge from Council to be timely and adequately informed on all CFSP actions.
In a remarkable sign of coherence between the political groups, the vote on the whole Section III - Commission was taken "en bloc" in one go.
Co-rapporteur James ELLES (EPP-ED, UK) said: "In shaping the value for money principle, a variety of innovative elements have been added to the standard budget procedure with a view to improving the effectiveness of EU spending and ensuring better value for money for its citizens. Now, our task consists of taking the value for money approach further by establishing a mechanism for an annual evaluation of performance of specific programmes. I warmly welcome that the Commission supports this approach." A joint declaration by the EP and the Commission stresses the need to integrate such a "value for money approach" in the yearly budgetary procedure.
Heading 1a and 1b, "Sustainable growth"
Parliament sees Lisbon Agenda lines as pivotal for the EU ; reaffirming its Annual Political Strategy views, the EP has spread a number of payment increases on lines dealing with research and innovation which aim at boosting European competitiveness, while regretting that Council had cut them in the first place. The Competitiveness and Innovation Program (CIP) is an apt example of such a targeted increase in payments, with a series of CIP lines revised upwards . Galileo is also seen as a key programme by the EP and its relative under-funding has been compensated by the increase of €3m taking the total to €100m for 2007 in both commitments and payments.
Parliament already indicated it saw the poor funding of the Lisbon-related lines as a "deficit" in the resolution accompanying the adoption of the 2007-13 Financial Perspective.
On the structural funds front, Parliament adopted a series of increases for payments appropriations which are smaller than initially envisaged at first reading (like for instance the ESF - convergence).
Total for Heading 1 combined is €54.3bn in commitments and €44.9bn in payments.
Heading 2, "Natural resources"
Parliament is unhappy with the cuts across the board applied by Council for farm spending as the Common Agricultural Policy sees the application of new implementation rules in 2007. Most particularly, the EP deplores that Council rejected the proposal to fund a vaccine for the Blue Tongue disease under that heading, a failure compensated by the Commission's initiative to work on it in the Research budget.
Total for Heading 2 is €56.2bn in commitments and €54.7bn in payments.
Heading 3, "Justice and Home Affairs"
The EP sees the area of freedom, security and justice, and in particular the promotion of fundamental rights, the definition of a common asylum and migration policy and the fight against terrorism and organised crime, as Union’s key priorities.
Parliament restored its increase for the External Borders Fund to €170m to allow EU surveillance missions.
Heading 4, "the EU as a global partner"
An agreement was achieved on the Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP). While the Budget Committee agreed to grant the amount of € 159.2 million to the CFSP (initially set at this level by the Commission in its Pre-Draft Budget), Council committed itself providing European lawmakers with timely and forward looking information on planned individual CFSP actions and decisions. The up-coming mission in Kosovo is one example where the EP urges council to be informed.
After Parliament's first reading, 50% of CFSP appropriations had been cut and spread on a number of other lines of the heading, a move which struck a chord among key stakeholders of the negotiation on B07.
Parliament has stayed within the ceiling of heading 4, "The EU as a global partner". This means that, contrary to previous years, Parliament does not ask for the "flexibility instrument" (which can free up to 200m for non-recurring, unforeseen needs) to be used.
Heading 5, "administration"
Parliament defeated Council's approach to cut the staff of the European Commission. Nevertheless, the members insisted that a substantive screening exercise providing a mid-term evaluation of the Commission's staff needs is carried out. This screening exercise should comprise a detailed report on the Commission's staffing of support and coordination functions. It is due to be delivered on 30 April 2007.
After receiving the political commitment letter from the President of the European Commission, the Budget Committee decided to lift the € 50 million reserve on staff salaries. This decision has been confirmed in today's vote in Plenary.
One of the conditions for lifting the reserve was the commitment from the European Commission to integrate the Parliament's views in the revised Annual Policy Strategy 2007.
Other elements
It should be underlined that, with the adoption of the report on the Globalisation Adjustment Fund, 500 millions will be available from the EU Budget during the course of 2007 for this purpose, whereas the yearly €1bn European Solidarity Fund is also there to help Member States to cope with natural disasters.
Other institutions
The so-called "other institutions", for which Mr Louis Grech (PES, MT) is the rapporteur, deal among others with Parliament's budget for next year.
A notable element of the second reading deals with the Committee of the Regions and the Economic and Social Committees, which are expected to keep a single support structure, to keep costs in check.
2008 budget
The 2008 budget will be steered by two Finnish members of the Budgets committee: Kyösti Virrankoski (ALDE, FI) will deal with the Commission's budget, whereas Ville Itälä (EPP-ED, FI) will be in charge of the other institutions. Preparation of the 2008 Budget will start on 24 January 2007 in Brussels, for a first exchange of views on the guidelines for the following year.
20061207IPR01150 Draft general budget for 2007, amended by the Council (all sections)
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5305832
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
