Irish MEPs lead on promotion of safety, financing EU development co-operation and the International Fund for Ireland
Institutions
Ireland
2006-12-20 - 14:58
International Fund for Ireland - MEPs back the €60 million from 2007-2010
During the December I Plenary Session of the European Parliament in Strasbourg (11th-14th), three Irish MEPs presented reports for the approval of their colleagues - Jim Higgins (FG/EPP-ED), Gay Mitchell (FG/EPP-ED) and Kathy Sinnott (Ind./Ind.)
Prevention of Injury and the Promotion of Safety - Kathy Sinnott (Ind./Ind.)
On 12 December, MEPs voted overwhelmingly in favour of a report drafted by Kathy Sinnott on behalf of the Committee on Environment, Public Health & Food Safety which made a series of recommendations to EU Member States, based on a non-legislative proposal from the European Commission, supporting the prevention of injuries and the promotion of safety. On the basis of the fact that injuries, which are preventable, cause the death of a quarter of a million people and result in 65 million hospital treatments each year, the report calls on the European Commission to submit a legislative proposal for the creation of injury surveillance systems and the sharing of best practices, in particular in the context of the forthcoming European Health Programme.
Commenting on the report, Kathy Sinnott stated that "injury and safety is something that is close to us all. We live with the reality that in a split second, lives can be lost or changed by one event and this is the challenge that faces us when we are dealing with something as widespread, serious and preventable as injury."
Financial instrument for EU development cooperation - Gay Mitchell (FG/EPP-ED)
On 12 December, MEPs voted on a long-awaited report, which addressed the issue of the effective delivery of EU aid in the developing world. Two years ago, Gay Mitchell (FG/EPP-ED) was appointed by his colleagues on the Development Committee to prepare the European Parliament's view on the issue. Following much discussion and debate with the European Commission and the Council of the European Union, a compromise was finally reached which will mean that the EU will spend €40 billion on development aid between 2007 and 2013, with a particular emphasis on health and education (20% of funding).
During the presentation of his report, Gay Mitchell (FG/EPP-ED) stated that "2.5 million children under five years of age die every year from diseases for which vaccines have been available in the West for the past 30 years." He also pointed out that "the EU and member states are the biggest contributors to the developing world" and that this funding is provided in addition to the money being spent on development by the Member States.
Although welcoming the creation of the single financial instrument for development cooperation, MEP Proinsias De Rossa (Labour/PES) pointed out that hitherto separate budget lines must be included - "It is imperative that Sexual and Reproductive Health and Rights (SRHR) are included in the DCI for the period 2007 - 2013, as important tools for poverty eradication .. We cannot in conscience allow the situation to continue that in the developing world 90,000 women die every year as a result of having recourse to back-street abortions, while up to 600,00 women die from pregnancy related complications."
International Fund for Ireland - Jim Higgins (FG/EPP-ED)
On Wednesday 13 December, MEPs voted in favour of continuing funding for the International Fund for Ireland (IFI) to the tune of €60 million over the course of the next four years (2007-2010). The IFI was established after the 1985 Anglo-Irish Agreement and the European Community has been contributing to it since 1989.
Senator Higgins, who was appointed rapporteur on the issue by his colleagues on the Regional Committee, stated that "to date the International Fund for Ireland has contributed €803 million of funding and has leveraged a further €1.46 billion in supporting 5,700 projects and the creation of 55,000 direct and indirect jobs. It has also played a crucial role in easing sectarian tensions and bridging divisions between the two traditions on the island."
While approving the conclusions of the Irish rapporteur, MEPs also voted by a large majority to increase the role of the Parliament in the decision-making process of the IFI, from consultation to codecision (equal power with the Council of the European Union). Marian Harkin MEP (Ind./ALDE), also a member of the Regional Committee, expressed her concern about this decision, stating that it "will delay funding to projects underway and may even lead to certain ongoing projects being ineligible for further funding .... it sends out a potentially negative signal at a politically sensitive time in Northern Ireland."
20061218IPR01622 More from Strasbourg plenary December 11 - 14 2006 All Irish MEPs by region European Parliament Office in Dublin
EN
1
PHOTO
20061220PHT01692.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/members/public/geoSearch/zoneList.do?country=IE&language=EN
EN
4
LINK
http://www.europarl.ie/
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
