Post-Briefing - 11-14 December 2006 - Strasbourg and 18 December 2006 - Brussels
2006-12-18 - 13:47
Parliament adopts REACH - new EU chemicals legislation and new chemicals agency
Parliament adopted the compromise it negotiated with Council on the new regulation for chemicals - REACH -which will oblige producers to register all those chemical substances produced or imported above a total quantity of 1 tonne per year. Registration will affect about 30,000 substances. For more hazardous substances, producers will have to submit a substitution plan to replace them with safer alternatives.
Belarus opposition leader Aliaksandr Milinkevich - 2006 European Parliament Sakharov Prize Winner for Freedom of Thought
Leader of the Belarusian Opposition Aliaksandr Milinkevich received the 2006 Sakharov Prize from European Parliament President Borrell. Each year, the Parliament awards the Sakharov prize to exceptional people or organisations fighting against oppression, intolerance and injustice. The aim is to help them in their efforts to protect human rights, democracy and the rule of law around the world.
European Parliament says EU must reform before enlarging further
Parliament says the European Union needs to develop its institutional, financial and policy structure before any further enlargement can take place. This comes in a report on the institutional reforms required to improve the EU's capacity to integrate new Member States.
MEPs adopt EU budget for 2007 at €126.5bn for 27 Member States
The European Parliament adopted the 2007 budget in second reading as President Borrell signed it with the European Commission and the Finnish Presidency of the European Union. Following the vote, commitments appropriations for next year are set at €126.5bn, payments at €115.5bn, equalling 0.99 % of GNI. It represents an increase of 3.2% over 2006 levels in payments.
A cleaner, greener future for EU energy policy
The European Parliament says there should be binding targets for reducing carbon dioxide emissions and on increasing the use of renewable energy sources. These views are set out in a wide ranging report on the Commission's energy strategy proposals, adopted by a large majority on Thursday, 14 December.
MEPs approve the Bulgarian and Romanian Commissioners-designate
Voting by 583 votes in favour to 21 against and 28 abstentions, MEPs approved the appointment of the Bulgarian Commissioner, Mrs Meglena Kuneva for the term of office remaining until 31 October 2009. MEPs also approved by 595 votes in favour to 16 against and 29 abstentions the appointment of Romanian Commissioner, Mr Leonard Orban for the term of office remaining until 31 October 2009.
MEPs set new rules on TV commercials and product placement
The European Parliament backed a proposed overhaul of the advertising rules for TV channels in Europe, including a new approach to product placement. In widening the scope of the so-called Television without Frontiers (TWF) Directive to all audiovisual media services, MEPs also voted to include a new means of broadcasting. Parliament agreed to allow breaks for commercials in movies and some other TV programmes every 30 minutes.
International Fund for Ireland: EP favours continued EU funding, but with new legal basis
The EU should go on contributing €15 million per year to the International Fund for Ireland (IFI) until it is wound up in 2010, but Parliament should have co-decision powers over this funding, rather than merely being consulted. This was the message that came out of Parliament's plenary vote on a report by Jim Higgins (EPP - ED, IRL), on Wednesday 13 December, which recommends changing the IFI's legal basis.
Extraordinary Plenary - Monday 18 December 2006
MEPs debate the Finnish Presidency and European Council with PM Vanhanen
Parliament held a debate on the outcome of the European Council Summit held on 14 and 15 December in Brussels. PM Vanhanen gave an overview of the Finnish Presidency and spelt out the conclusions of the summit which focused on further enlargement and progress on justice and home affairs.
EP and Council officially sign REACH and FP7
European Parliament President Josep Borrell and Finnish Prime Minister Matti Vanhanen signed two major pieces of EU legislation in the Chamber in Brussels, officially signing both REACH - new chemicals legislation and the Seventh Framework Programme (FP7) for Research. REACH enters into force on 1 June 2007 and FP7 enters into force on 1 January 2007.
Latest texts adopted by the European Parliament, click here :
Draft Agenda of 15-18 January 2007 plenary in Strasbourg, click here : 20061207BRI01143
EN
1
A
/activities/expert.do?language=EN#
EN
2
A
/sce/data/fast_access/doc//292/01%20janvier%20STR%20En.pdf
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Opening of December Plenary in Strasbourg
2006-12-18 - 13:47
Opening the last plenary session of 2006 in Strasbourg, President BORRELL announced a series of changes to the agenda. Highlights of the week included a debate and final vote on REACH, the awarding of the Sakharov Prize to Belarusian Alexander Milinkevich, the final vote on the EU budget for 2007, a debate on the forthcoming European Council, debates and votes on TV without frontiers and new EU rules on driving licenses. .
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
MEPs approve the Bulgarian and Romanian Commissioners-designate
2006-12-18 - 13:47
Voting by 583 votes in favour to 21 against and 28 abstentions, MEPs approved the appointment of the Bulgarian Commissioner, Mrs Meglena Kuneva for the term of office remaining until 31 October 2009. MEPs also approved by 595 votes in favour to 16 against and 29 abstentions the appointment of Romanian Commissioner, Mr Leonard Orban for the term of office remaining until 31 October 2009. Mrs Kuneva's portfolio is consumer protection and Mr Orban's portfolio is multilingualism.
Before the vote, Commission President José Manuel Barroso said: "It is the first time that an accession treaty explicitly foresees a consultation of the European Parliament on the appointment of Commissioners from new Member States. I very much welcome that important role given to your institution as it increases both the democratic rights of Parliament and the Commission's accountability. I stand here before you today to ask for your approval of our two new colleagues. I do this because I sincerely believe that they both fulfil the highest standards. The approval by the European Parliament on the appointment of the two Commissioners-designate will allow the Council to formally appoint them. Mrs Kuneva and Mr Orban will thus become full members of the Commission as of 1 January 2007.
In the course of the last weeks many of you had the occasion to get to know the two Commissioners-designate, be it through bilateral context or through the hearings. Mrs Kuneva and Mr Orban have successfully passed in the relevant Parliamentary committees. It is my firm belief that both candidates in the course of the hearings have proved their personal integrity and independence, their general competence and professional experience, as well as their deep and genuine European commitment.
The promotion of linguistic and cultural diversity in the European Union touches the very substance of our European values and identity and is the prerequisite for communicating Europe and the multicultural dialogue. I am sure that Mr Orban is the right person to do this job. The protection of consumer rights is central to the interests of each and every one of our citizens. I am sure that Mrs Kuneva is the best person to do this.
The 1 January 2007 will be a truly historic date. The accession of Bulgaria and Romania will complete the fifth enlargement of the European Union. The enlargement has not only contributed to peace, prosperity and stability throughout Europe, but has also made all of us richer socially, economically, and culturally. With Bulgaria and Romania becoming members of the European Union, we will see the fulfilment of the ambitions and hopes of so many people who have fought for freedom in Europe for so long.
The new Member States will now be firmly anchored in the community of European values which inform and permeate the public purpose of the European Union. Their rightful place at the heart of this community will give them new confidence and new dynamism which, I am sure, will generate benefits for the whole of our Union."
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
MEPs adopt resolution on Commission Work Programme for 2007
2006-12-18 - 13:47
In adopting a joint resolution welcoming the emphasis in the Commission's Legislative and Work Programme for 2007 on modernising the European economy and improving the well-being of citizens, the House agreed in this context with the importance attributed to security, health, innovation, a cleaner environment, energy and climate change, the internal market, migration and integration, Europe’s global visibility and effectiveness, and improved communication with European citizens. The Parliament regrets, however, a certain lack of ambition in several fields. The House believes that, in order to restore the momentum behind the European project, the Commission should play its full role in strengthening and modernising Europe's social market economy, based on sustainable development.
Parliament believes that the distinction drawn between 'strategic initiatives' and 'priority initiatives' increases the clarity and credibility of the Legislative and Work Programme. The House requests, nevertheless, the Commission to be more coherent and precise in explaining the distinction between those two categories, and in particular to clarify the timescale for the presentation of 'priority initiatives'. Parliament invites the Commission to present after six months an update on progress made in implementing the LWP.
Modernising the European economy
MEPs call on the Commission to improve the coordination of economic policies, in particular with a view to promoting national and European initiatives aimed at fostering research, skills and new technologies, to sharing best practices on ways to improve the effectiveness and quality of public spending, and to enhancing the quality of statistical data.
Research and development
The House reiterates the urgency of fostering cooperative research to improve the competitiveness of the European economy, in particular in the areas of advanced technologies. The House urges that enhanced coordinated efforts be undertaken to promote the telecoms and information society technology sectors.
Parliament believes that the establishment of the proposed European Institute of Technology (EIT), if it is based on the right principles, could contribute to the competitiveness of the European economy by helping to reverse the fragmentation of research, education and innovation efforts which has stunted progress so far. The House insists that no funds previously earmarked for the 7th Framework Programme of Research should be used to finance EIT activities.
Internal market
The House calls on the Commission to step up efforts to complete the internal market, so as to enable citizens to reap its full benefits. Parliament believes, however, that the Single Market Strategy review should not provide a pretext for failing to bring forward internal market initiatives as necessary. The House insists that the single market can only be developed successfully in a context of promoting fair competition, cohesion, a high level of consumer protection, and respect for the Göteborg principles.
Security for citizens, justice and migration
Parliament demands the EU Member States' and the Commission's commitment to address the structural causes of massive migration by adapting and updating their current policies, in order to enable developing countries to protect and build their economies, and to allow decent incomes for their populations, which constitutes the only long-term alternative in order to reduce illegal immigration.
The House calls on the Member States to strengthen cooperation and mutual technical assistance between their border control services and for increased financing for FRONTEX, in order to combat human trafficking. The House requests that the conclusion of readmission agreements be fair and respect the fundamental rights of migrants and take into consideration the shared needs of EU Member States and of the countries of origin and transit.
Secure, competitive and sustainable energy
Parliament welcomes the Commission’s proposal to make the development of 'European energy policy' a strategic objective for 2007, based on the principles of security and diversity of supply, sustainability, efficiency and greater energy independence.
MEPs stress that an essential element of a common energy policy should be enhanced solidarity between Member States in order to deal with difficulties related to the physical security of infrastructures and security of supply. MEPs consider, furthermore, that such enhanced solidarity would considerably strengthen the capacity of the EU to defend its common interest on energy issues at international level.
Making Europe a better place to live
The House underlines the leading role of the European Union at international level in promoting environmental issues, and agrees that, for subsequent years, efforts should be directed towards the protection of biodiversity and towards climate change, especially by developing the concept of 'green diplomacy', as well as seeking a specific energy policy focused on increasing the share of renewable energy, energy saving and efficiency in Europe. The House welcomes in this respect the Green Paper on Post-2012 Climate Change, which will help identify areas in which action is needed.
Parliament calls on the Commission to support a strong role for the EU in devising post-Kyoto policies and new targets. The House expects the proposal to review the EU emissions trading scheme to aim at improving the environmental effectiveness of the scheme, thereby also including aviation emissions in the trading scheme.
Europe as a world partner
Parliament notes that the countries of South-East Europe are coming closer to acquiring the accession momentum referred to in the 'Thessaloniki Declaration', and expects the Union to take a leading role in consolidating stability and increasing prosperity in the Western Balkans, thus helping the countries of the region on their way to EU membership.
Russia
The House reminds the Commission that the current Partnership and Cooperation Agreement with Russia will run out in 2007. Parliament calls on the Commission to propose guiding principles for the strategic content of the EU's relations with Russia, and in particular to emphasise the importance of placing democracy, human rights and freedom of expression at the core of future relations, instituting a clear mechanism to monitor the implementation of all the clauses of such an agreement.
Development policy
Parliament requests the Member States and the Commission to be more ambitious in respecting their commitment to the Millennium Development Goals, and calls on the Commission to come forward with concrete proposals for alternative financing of development programmes.
The House believes that, in order to enable the ACP countries to meet the development goals, the regional development aspect should be properly respected in negotiations on the Economic Partnership Agreements.
Trade policy and WTO negotiations
At the multilateral level, Parliament calls for a successful and ambitious outcome of the Doha Round. MEPs regret that it was necessary to suspend the negotiations on the Doha Development Agenda sine die and points out that a failure of multilateral negotiations and a shift to bilateral/regional agreements could lead to an unequal process of liberalisation and uneven development and would thus adversely affect the least developed countries in particular.
ESDP
MEPs stress the need to strengthen the mechanisms for parliamentary oversight of the development of European Security and Defence Policy (ESDP) in general, and ESDP missions in particular, and highlights the need to provide proactive information and to conduct debates before joint actions in the field of ESDP are decided on, so that parliaments can voice their opinion and concerns.
Budgetary responsibility
Parliament expects all new reforms set out in the new Interinstitutional Agreement on budgetary discipline and sound financial management of 17 May 2006 to be fully implemented in the course of 2007, thus enabling a swift impact in terms of higher-quality implementation of the budget. The House asks the Commission to ensure, facilitate and encourage the total implementation of the Community Budget, in particular in the new Member States, given the fact that 2007 will be a crucial year for the implementation of the new structural policy. Finally, the House asks the Commission to apply all the necessary measures in order to ensure that the operational programmes for the new financing period, in accordance with the strategic guidelines for cohesion, are ready and start to be implemented on time for all Member States.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Development cooperation: priority to the Millennium Development Goals
2006-12-18 - 13:47
After two years of negotiations with the Council, Parliament approved an agreement on the financing instrument for development co-operation for 2007-2013, which reflects Parliament's main demands on the structure and priorities of Community aid. Another key point for MEPs is that Parliament preserved its co-decision powers, which the Commission had sought to bring into question. In a report drafted by Gay MITCHELL (EPP-ED, IE), the Parliament agreed to renew what is one of the EU's most important instruments for funding its development cooperation, with a budget of nearly €17 billion for 2007-2013.
Following pressure from MEPs, the instrument's scope will be restricted to developing countries. The Commission had wanted to extend it to industrialised countries which have pre-accession, neighbourhood or partnership agreements with the EU. MEPs, however, insist that development policy must focus on the developing countries, in line with the Millennium Goals.
Parliament also battled for, and won, a separate instrument for human rights. In addition, the Commission promised to allocate 20% of the geographical programmes to primary and secondary education as well as basic healthcare.
Parliament's powers safeguarded
Development policy is the only external relations area in which Parliament has co-decision powers with the Council. It was important for MEPs to safeguard these powers for the purpose of deciding on the geographical programmes and thematic areas of aid. The Commission had wanted to decide on its own after receiving the opinion of a committee of experts (the "comitology" procedure) but the accord reached with the Council preserves Parliament's co-decision rights.
The Commission must also inform Parliament regularly of the work done by the above committee. Parliament will receive, at the same time as members of that committee, the meeting agendas, the strategy plans for each country and the minutes of the meetings.
Lastly, the Parliament emphasises that the funding provided must be approved by the national auditing body and the parliament of each partner country concerned. Any suspension of aid will be decided by the EU Council of Ministers by a qualified majority, after Parliament has delivered an opinion.
Financing Instrument for cooperation and the industrialised countries
Parliament adopted a non-binding report by David MARTIN (PES, UK) on the financing instrument for co-operation with the industrialised countries. The Beneficiary countries are: Australia, Bahrain; Brunei, Canada, Chinese Taipei, Hong-Kong, Japan, Republic of Korea, Kuwait, Macao, New Zealand, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, United Arab Emirates and the United States.
The amendments adopted by Parliament can be summarised along three main headlines:
First to clarify and simplify the drafting of the proposal; second, to bring the proposal in line with other external instruments for financial assistance; and third, to improve Parliament's scrutiny of this instrument and involvement in programming.
1. Tightening and clarifying the proposal
A number of amendments are introduced in order to bring clarity and consistency to some aspects of the wording of the proposal. Most notably, the House finds the notion of EU "strategic interest" problematic in a legal text. Parliament agrees in principle with the Commission's views on the nature of this instrument which, unlike other "assistance" instruments, should also reflect the needs and interests of the EU. However, the notion of "strategic" interests is unnecessarily political or even geopolitical.
2. Bringing ICI into line with other external instruments
Parliament has included a number of highly relevant articles/clauses/recitals which are included in other instruments for external assistance:
Review Clause
Given the substantial changes introduced in the new proposal, with the extension from 6 to 17 countries, there is no reason to forget the "review clause" included in the other instruments for external assistance. This proposal is a new departure, involving new countries and activities. The Commission itself may want to propose adjustments for the mid-term review.
Human Rights/Democracy Clause
With the extension of the geographical coverage of the instrument, it is necessary, as in other instruments, to introduce a Human Rights/Democracy Clause. The wording in the proposed new recital mirrors the wording of article 181a itself.
MEPs see no reason not to include it here, particularly given the heterogeneous group of countries with whom the EU intends to develop cooperation: NICs from Asia like Singapore, Brunei, Hon Kong, Taipei, Macao or Gulf Cooperation Council Countries like UAE, Kuwait, Oman and Bahrain or Saudi Arabia.
General Principles
The section on general principles is incomplete: Complementarity and Coherence of cooperation are two important principles which should be included.
The new regulation will bring together a highly heterogeneous group of countries and set of activities. Henceforth the need to also introduce the "principle of differentiation" in both the recitals and the article on general principles: an assessment of the specific situation of the partner countries and the specific interests of the Community in a given country should be the first step to decide on the exact type of cooperation to be developed with a partner country.
Protecting the Community’s financial interests
The specific article on the protection of the Community’s financial interests should be included as in other instruments for external assistance.
3. The role of Parliament
Finally, Parliament believes that the role of the European Parliament should be strengthened with regard to the evaluation, reporting mechanisms and its involvement in a structured dialogue over multi-annual cooperation programmes.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Minute of silence for the passing away of Loyola de Palacio
2006-12-18 - 13:47
Following the death of Loyola de Palacio, President Josep Borrell made the following statement and held one minute of silence: "We yesterday concluded the day with the sad news of the death of Loyola de Palacio, former Minister of Agriculture in Spain, head of list of the Spanish Popular Party in the elections to the European Parliament of 1999, Vice-President of the European Commission with responsibility for relations with the European Parliament and the portfolio of Transport and Energy. We will remember her as the person who negotiated two fundamental texts for the institutions:- the Framework Agreement between the Parliament and the Commission - and the Inter-institutional Agreement on "Better lawmaking." Loyola de Palacio was a strong and determined interlocutor and always loyal to European values. Very appreciated for using clear and direct language in the offices and corridors of this House and of the Commission. The last months of her life can be example for all. I feel a personal feeling of loss and it is sad news for all people that new her."
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
MEPs debate the Finnish Presidency and European Council with PM Vanhanen
2006-12-18 - 13:47
Parliament held a debate on the outcome of the European Council summit held on 14 and 15 December in Brussels. Prime Minister Vanhanen gave an overview of the Finnish Presidency and spelt out the conclusions of the summit which focussed on further enlargement and progress on justice and home affairs. Opening the debate, Prime Minister Vanhanen said: "It is a pleasure for me to be here once again to talk with you in my capacity as President of the European Council. The meeting of the European Council during Finland’s Presidency was held in Brussels on 14 and 15 December. Today I would like to report to you on the results of our meeting. As Finland’s six-month Council Presidency draws to a close, I also want to tell you what Finland has done to move the Union forward over the past half year.
Last Thursday at the European Council we offered Josep Borrell our sincere thanks for all that he has done as President of Parliament, now that his term of office is drawing to a close. I would like to thank him here once again for his dedicated efforts for the good of Europe. Mr President, it has been a pleasure working with you. We have achieved a great many good results, for which I owe you many thanks. Your work has been much appreciated."
I also want to thank the European Parliament for all its support and hard work. Together, we have chalked up some significant achievements. The EU legislative framework on chemicals, the Reach Regulation, has finally been adopted. Consumers and business have both been waiting for this. We also managed to get the Services Directive adopted, thus creating the world’s largest market in services. And the seventh Framework Programme for Research lays the foundations for Europe's future competitiveness."
At the start of the Finnish Presidency, I said that the European Parliament was clearly becoming the place where thorny, complex problems were tackled and sound European solutions were found. That is still my firm belief and today I want to thank Parliament for its good cooperation and express my appreciation for its work. In an increasingly politicised Europe, Parliament is more important than ever.
The European Council conducted a thorough and wide-ranging discussion on the EU’s policy on enlargement, in line with the mandate given to it by the June European Council. If there is one basic point that bears repeating, it is that the Union’s enlargement policy has been a huge success. The Union has succeeded in uniting Europe and overcoming the divisions of the Cold War. Today, the EU is a proud and close union of 25 Member States – 27 from the beginning of next year. It is a pleasure to welcome Bulgaria and Romania to our European family.
Turkey’s membership was not on the agenda for the European Council. The decisions concerning Turkey’s accession process were taken at the General Affairs and External Relations Council preceding the European Council meeting. The EU is capable of making decisions. During its Presidency, Finland tried to find solutions that would lead to implementation of the Protocol to the Ankara Agreement and direct trade with north Cyprus. However, we were unsuccessful and so we were forced to take measures with regard to Turkey. The situation was clear: Turkey did not honour its commitments and that has consequences. But I want to stress that Turkey’s future is in the European Union. Turkey’s accession process did not grind to a halt during the Finnish Presidency, nor was it shunted into a siding. And there was no question of the much predicted derailment. The process may have slowed down for a while but the final destination is unchanged.
The outcome of the European Council is that the Union is still open to new members. Enlargement will continue and those applicants that meet the conditions set by the Union will be able to join. This prospect of membership – the knowledge that the Union is open to new members – is essential to stability in Europe; it encourages reform in neighbouring countries, as they progress along the European path. This incentive must not be withdrawn. One of the objectives the Finnish Presidency set itself was to keep the EU's enlargement policy open – not to close the door on deserving applicants. We succeeded. An open Union growing in strength: that is our future.
On the basis of the discussions at the European Council we can say clearly that the Western Balkans' membership prospects are real. The region's future clearly lies in the EU. That is of fundamental importance for us.
At the same time, though, we have to make sure our enlargement policy is properly delineated. The corollary to openness is rigorous application of the conditions. There are no short-cuts to EU membership. Membership is possible only when the membership criteria have been met.
It was important that there was no discussion of the limits to enlargement. There is simply no place for them. No artificial limits should be set. The proper limits are based not on geography but on values. The construction of Europe is a work in progress while there are still democratic black holes like Belarus so close by. A disgrace to Europe. There should not be any such places left in Europe.
At the European Council, I presented an assessment of the situation regarding the Constitutional Treaty. During our Presidency, we held systematic discussions with all Member States concerning the Constitutional Treaty. I shan’t go into detail on the Member States’ positions, as we are bound by the confidential nature of the talks but I do want to give you an outline of the picture that emerged in the course of the consultations.
The first thing to mention is the change in atmosphere that took place during our Presidency. When it started, people were still in a bit of a dream world. No one really wanted to give it active consideration. Now people in the Member States have started to think actively about the future and many take the view that the Constitutional Treaty was actually a well thought-out and rather effective package. But the dilemma is this: the treaty cannot be put before the Member States that rejected it in exactly the same form as before and yet, for all that, it is a well-balanced package. Upsetting the balance would cause more problems than it would solve. For that reason there is a broad consensus that restarting negotiations from scratch, as if there had been no agreement, is not an option.
The institutional provisions in the Constitutional Treaty in particular are the result of long negotiation and hard thinking. It is difficult to reopen the negotiations without creating new problems. Furthermore, it is my own personal opinion that picking the treaty apart would be no more than an apparent solution at best. For instance we cannot separate Part I from Part III: the competences of the Union and of the Member States need to be clearly defined. And then Part II of the Constitutional Treaty sets out the fundamental values on which the Union is based. I don’t see how we could disregard those.
So far, 16 Member States have ratified the Constitutional Treaty. At the start of the New Year, that number will grow to 18, with Bulgaria and Romania. However, this is not a question that can be resolved by force of numbers. The Constitutional Treaty will not enter into force unless it is endorsed by all 27 Member States. It would seem to make sense to try and find a solution before 2009 when the next elections to the European Parliament are held and a new Commission is appointed.
But the fact remains that the Constitutional Treaty is still on hold and we will be handing the baton on to Germany. We are looking to the German Presidency to take this difficult issue forward. At the same time, though, it is important that we use whatever practical means we can to push ahead with European cooperation. Justice and home affairs are one particularly important example. Our citizens expect concrete action to improve security and justice.
But justice and home affairs is beset by a serious problem. The need for unanimity prevents genuine progress from being made on police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters. And that kind of cooperation is important to our citizens. They are entitled to expect more effective joint action in improving security and combating crime. At present, however, decisions on cooperation are either watered down or not made at all, as we saw just recently with regard to the transfer of sentenced persons. The need for unanimity in justice and home affairs is a real barrier that stops us from making genuine progress.
However, we do have a procedure that would enable us to make decisions on justice and home affairs more effectively. That procedure is the “passerelle”, provided for by Article42, which allows us to decide, unanimously, to switch to qualified-majority voting. The Finnish Presidency was very eager to make use of this possibility but at the September meeting of the Justice and Home Affairs Ministers in Tampere it became clear that a number of Member States are opposed to it. And so that avenue is closed to us.
That is why I welcome the fact that, in spite of everything, the European Council sent an unequivocal message that more effective decision-making on justice and home affairs is important, along with the principles set out in the Constitutional Treaty, and that means switching to qualified majority voting. That is something of a breakthrough and we should welcome it. Future Presidencies should honour that decision.
In this connection, I would say that, if there was one thing that I could change in the Union here and now – speaking as President of the Council – it would be to increase the number of decisions taken by qualified majority. It is without question the most effective, the fairest and indeed the best way of making good decisions. The unanimity requirement does not serve European common interest at all well in relation to any but the most critical of matters.
The European Council held in-depth discussions on the Union's policy on migration. In a spirit of solidarity, we all remember the problems that the Mediterranean Member States faced in the summer. The Finnish Presidency actively addressed the challenge of illegal immigration and the matter was discussed at the informal summit in Lahti in October. Now, at the December meeting of the European Council, we agreed on a comprehensive approach to both legal and illegal migration and we noted what a complex issue this is. Immigration is not just, and not even primarily, a question of better border supervision. The really crucial things are events in the country of departure, transit and an orderly immigration policy, which the EU so badly needs on account of its own aging population. Europe is not an island shut off from the outside world.
The European Council also confirmed the important results of the informal summit in Lahti. We all agree that Europe needs a more focused innovation policy. We cannot maintain our current level of prosperity unless we stay genuinely competitive and cultivate our skills as the basis for success. During the Finnish Presidency, innovation was put at the very centre of competition policy. Promoting innovation must be an integral part of the EU’s competition strategy. Now that the groundwork has been done, it is for the spring European Council to formulate some forward-looking innovation-policy guidelines.
Another essential task, if we are to safeguard sustainable economic growth and secure our competitive position, is to agree on common energy policy goals and engage in wide-ranging, global cooperation to manage climate change. These themes have attracted a growing amount of attention during the Finnish Presidency. At the same time, they were among the most important areas of cooperation discussed this autumn with Russia, the United States and our Asian partners.
The European Council’s conclusions on energy and climate issues demonstrate that more consistent progress is now being made. The conclusions prepare the ground for the German Presidency and the spring summit at which these issues will be high on the agenda.
On Friday, I received some direct feedback from the press. They thought that the European Council was boring, the dullest of all time, that the decisions lacked drama and that there were no last-minute solutions hammered out in the early hours of the morning. If it is dull for decisions to be taken in an orderly fashion and on schedule, then yes, I have to say that I am dull and proud of it. Europe needs concrete results, not contrived political drama.
I am convinced that a Europe of results is the best way of moving the Union forwards. We need practical solutions that make a difference to our citizens. Those are the foundations we have to lay if we want to develop the Union’s legitimacy, if we want to build major structures like the Constitutional Treaty.
There are 13 days left until the end of the Finnish Presidency. Naturally, we will remain on duty until the last minute. During the Presidency, one of the main priorities has been to strengthen the unity of the EU. We will not make much of an impression in the world if we cannot present a more united front in our external relations.
The early part of Finland’s Presidency was marked by a serious crisis in the Middle East, culminating in a serious conflict in Lebanon. I am proud to say that the EU took a strong and united position on the Lebanese crisis. It acted decisively to implement the resolutions passed by the UN Security Council and, most crucially, it was able to mobilise troops, which made for a sufficiently strong UN operation in Lebanon. The summer was a testing time but the Union came through it with flying colours. And I would like to say thank you once again to all the Member States for the support the Presidency received in dealing with this matter.
It is essential for the EU to be united and resolute in its external relations and to use a wide range of instruments to work for a better world. Since enlargement the Union has moved into the leading position in the world on a number of counts. We must take full advantage of this. During our Presidency, we have also done a great deal to improve the coherence of development policy, for instance: an issue of primary importance to a significant global actor like the EU.
One of Finland’s priorities was to strengthen the EU's policy towards Russia. Here too, the practical importance of a united policy is very much in evidence. At the informal summit in Lahti, we had a good discussion with the Russian President, Mr Putin and the EU succeeded in speaking with one voice to Russia. Russia is clearly an important partner for the EU. That much can be seen from a quick look at any map. Russia is important for the EU, we are bound together by many ties but it is fair to say that certain trends in Russia give us cause for concern. I am not altogether sure that Russia is heading in the right direction. We need to see a firmer commitment to democracy, the rule of law and the market economy. We do not want Russia to go in an authoritarian direction. We are fully entitled to be concerned at the way things are going in Russia.
Russia is an acid test of the EU’s unity. Finland would like to have arrived at a consensus on starting negotiations with Russia on a comprehensive new agreement. For reasons you already know, that consensus was beyond reach. I think the new agreement provides an excellent illustration of the problem we face: we need a strong joint agreement as the main basis for cooperation between us, and to provide a lasting foundation for trade and energy cooperation. If no common agreement is possible, then I am afraid the short-termist fall-back option is a network of bilateral agreements that would enable Russia to treat different Member States in different ways. Some will get good agreements, some will get bad ones and some may get no agreement at all. And yet a united EU is self-evidently important enough to Russia as a partner for it to be able, as a single entity, to negotiate a decent agreement. Just how united is Europe if we are competing amongst ourselves to see who can get the best conditions? That is not what European solidarity is about.
Presidencies start with high ambitions but real life brings us all back down to earth. We have achieved a great deal but some crucial matters have been left unresolved. Finland worked hard for a decision on amending the Working Time Directive and I think we got pretty close to achieving it. But it wasn't enough. The problem has not gone away of course and I wish subsequent Presidencies success in finding a solution to this issue.
I am rather sad that this is the last time I will be representing the Finnish Presidency at a plenary session of Parliament. I have some splendid memories of good cooperation with Parliament and I would like to thank you all for the support you have given Finland in its endeavours. I believe that Europe’s future lies in unity. A united Europe where border fences are an increasingly rare sight. I am particularly pleased that we achieved a result on Schengen enlargement. That is the kind of progress Europe’s citizens expect from us as decision-makers. Once again, I offer my sincerest thanks to the European Parliament for its excellent cooperation."
European Commission President
Commission President José Manuel BARROSO said last weekend's European Council had demonstrated that the EU could move forward through a "Europe of consensus and progress". He congratulated the Finnish presidency on "holding fast to a Europe of results, concentrating on delivery".
A key requirement in this had been the partnership of Council, Commission and Parliament. In the past year, said Mr Barroso, there had been a move "away from seeing the EU as a zero-sum game" towards seeing it as a "win-win situation for everybody". Examples of such progress were the services directive, enlargement, energy policy, REACH, the 7th framework programme and the new Schengen system. "We have seen the three institutions more focused on results and less on Brussels turf wars".
Various lessons had been drawn. Firstly, the renewed consensus on enlargement recognised that the strategic need for enlargement must be balanced with the EU's integration capacity. "With the right preparation, enlargement is a win-win situation", he stressed. Secondly, on migration, in particular following the autumn's migration crisis, Europe's leaders had acknowledged that "it is not enough to manage the situation, it must be tackled at source". Given the need for more efficient decision-making in justice and home affairs, he regretted that some Member States opposed wider use of the passerelle clause.
Among other topics, the Commission president pointed to four quarters of significant jobs growth this year, which highlighted the value of economic reform. On energy and climate change, where the Commission is finalising its policy proposals, he believed "Europe's citizens will not thank the EU for timidity in this area".
Finally, Mr Barroso said he had the impression there was a "gathering momentum and will" by the Member States to work on the Constitution and he emphasised that "the Europe of the future cannot be built with the tools and instruments of the past".
Political group speakers
Hans-Gert POETTERING, the outgoing German leader of the EPP-ED group, first congratulated the Finnish presidency on its "famous successes such as REACH, the services directive and the 7th framework programme", and added the EP could be proud of its leading role in passing this legislation.
Turning to external affairs, he highlighted the EU's "difficult relations with Russia", saying while they had a difficult partnership, it must remain a partnership. Human rights were of great concern in this context. But above all, there must be "no bilateral accords": the whole EU must be involved in any agreements. On Turkey too, partnership and friendly relations were crucial. "But Turkey must deliver on its commitments".
On the Constitution, his group wanted a result before the next European elections and he hoped the EU's scheduled declaration in March 2007 would show the way forward.
Lastly, on immigration, he stressed that we "cannot accept death and poverty at our doors". However, a key part of the solution was to ensure "that people have a future in their own countries".
Martin SCHULZ (DE), for the Socialist group, believed that "given the circumstances, the Finnish Presidency has done a good job". On its watch, the EU had recognised both "its responsibility for pursing enlargement" and the fact that there could be "no more enlargement without reform". Indeed, "the people's expectations of Europe could only be achieved with constitutional reform".
Another message to emerge from the last six months was that "Europe needs a migration policy which is not just about restrictions. We need migration on this continent and we need immigration". But "if we want to direct immigration, we need the relevant instruments" - in other words, greater use of the passerelle in justice and home affairs. In this sense, therefore, last weekend's European Council had been "a summit of lost opportunities".
Reviewing the legislative achievements of the last half year, Mr Schulz highlighted the services directive, in which Parliament had played its role, "taking a destructive neo-liberal concept and turned it into a social market piece of legislation", as well as REACH, where a "reasonable compromise" between industrial and environmental concerns had been found.
For the Liberals, Graham WATSON (UK) thanked the Finnish presidency for ensuring that the Council had taken the overwhelming majority of its decisions in public over the last six months. He hope the Germany presidency would continue this policy.
Among the presidency's achievements, he listed REACH, the services directive, next year's budget and the accession of Romania and Bulgaria. He also saluted its efforts to use the footbridge/passerelle clause for justice and home affairs and called on German Chancellor Angela Merkel to do more on this front under the her country's presidency, saying "Europa muss handlungsfähig sein" (Europe must have the means to act).
On migration, he believed there was "too much accent on security and too little on the humanitarian issues". He welcomed the new emphasis on development, saying it was "not enough to have a rapid enhancement of Frontex" (the EU's border patrol agency).
Among the summit's conclusions he wished to highlight paragraph 5, which made a "strong statement that enlargement has been a success". There was "a need for the EU's leaders to tell our people that", he said.
On behalf of the UEN group, Irish Member Brian CROWLEY said the Finnish presidency's success had been due to "the four Cs: consistency, coordination, cooperation and consensus". However, unlike previous speakers he warned against use of the passerelle for JHA affairs, saying "if there is no agreement between Member States, there can be no action".
He welcomed the EU's "solidarity" vis-à-vis Russia over the export ban on Polish food products, saying the Member States must not give in. On immigration, he supported those who stressed the need to "look at the core reasons why people are running away" from their countries. The genocide in Darfur was an example of "a failure by the international community to react". In 2007, we must say "never again".
Monica FRASSONI (IT) for the Greens/EFA group welcomed the "generous efforts" made by the Finnish Presidency on immigration, climate change and the Constitutional Treaty. However, Ms Frassoni disagreed with the Finnish government's views on nuclear energy and the construction of a new nuclear plant in Finland. "On immigration, much more was agreed at Tampere during the last Finnish Presidency, " she said. Ms Frassoni said that her group could not agree with the outcome on the Services Directive and more should have been done on institutional reform. As to relations with Russia, Ms Frassoni stressed the importance of reducing dependency and the importance of re-launching investment in renewable energy sources. She thanked Mr Pottering and President Borrell for their co-operation.
For the GUE/NGL group, Sylvia-Yvonne KAUFMANN (DE) thanked President Borrell, Julian Priestley and Mr Poettering. She pointed out that her group could not agree with the outcome of both the Services Directive and REACH. Referring to Mr Schulz, Ms Kaufmann said "The Services Directive is nothing to crow about, the EU has not turned away from economic liberalism." Ms Kaufmann said that the Nice Treaty was not an appropriate basis for the EU to function effectively and tough institutional reforms would be needed during the German Presidency. "Social and wage dumping would only serve to lose the interest of Europeans, more should be done on social justice, she concluded."
Nigel FARAGE (UK), speaking for the IND/DEM group, said that the Finnish Presidency "had passed the test". The Finnish Parliament had also ratified the European Constitution, despite, "in a recent opinion poll only one-in-four saying they were in favour in Finland". The Constitution, he said, may be dead "but the contents are not, improving EU decision making would be mean more power for the EU". The Finnish Presidency's motto had been "to carry on regardless" with the German Presidency coming back with a new Treaty, "but in Britain this would not wash, the voice of the people will be heard."
Koenraad DILLEN (BE), a non-attached MEP, said that he too could not support the consensus of the larger groups. Mr Dillen said that negotiations with Turkey should be stopped. Referring to a fictional TV programme shown in Belgium on the independence of Flanders, he said that the Prime Minister of Luxembourg had said the Flemish independence would be "unacceptable to Europe". Mr Dillen disagreed and said that the Flemish people should have the democratic right to vote on its independence.
PM Vanhanen response to the debate
Summing up for the Council, Mr Vanhanen rejected Mr Farage's charge that the EU plans to "carry on regardless" by saying that "it's not about more powers". On the contrary, he said, "politics is about giving those who have power the instruments to use it", and without quality majority voting, "we don't have the instruments at our disposal".
Mr Vanhanen echoed the view of Françoise Grossetête (EPP - ED, France), that EP contributions to major proposals such as the REACH chemical regulation had made "2006 the year of the European Parliament".
Looking ahead to 2007, Mr Vanhanen cited as major challenges: reaching decision on the European Institute of Technology, enlargement negotiations with the Western Balkans (which, he said, "should proceed in parallel with institutional reform"), and the need for a decision on the fate of the constitution in time for the 2009 elections.
He concluded by noting that Finland's experience in cross-party coalition-building at national level had proven very useful in similar exercises at EU level.
Commission President Barroso response to the debate
Summing up for the Commission, President Barroso noted that this would be the last EU Presidency with 25 Member States, and thanked Parliament for its support in ensuring that the Commissioners for Bulgaria and Romania could take office on time.
Replying to questions about EU relations with Russia, President Barroso set out his "doctrine" that the EU must avoid the twin risks of "business as usual" and confrontation, and instead seek constructive, positive engagement, particularly on energy issues. Russia "needs a stable partner as much as we need a stable supplier". But the EU must stand firm on principles, and notably human rights - "this is not negotiable", he said, adding that solidarity among EU Member States "has to be a cornerstone of our foreign relations".
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
EP and Council officially sign REACH and FP7
2006-12-18 - 13:47
European Parliament President Josep Borrell and Finnish Prime Minister Matti Vanhanen signed two major pieces of EU legislation in the Chamber in Brussels, officially signing both REACH - new chemicals legislation and the Seventh Framework Programme (FP7) for Research. REACH enters into force on 1 June 2007 and FP7 enters into force on 1 January 2007. REACH: official signing by EP President Borrell and Finnish Prime Minister Vanhanen
On Monday 18 December, EP President Josep BORRELL and Finnish Prime Minister Matti VANHANEN officially signed the REACH regulation. This ceremony took place in Brussels at 11am just before the start of Parliament's extraordinary plenary session being held to debate Finland's six-month tenure of the EU presidency. Once signed, the regulation is due to be published in the EU Official Journal by the end of 2006 and to enter into force on 1 June 2007.
The European Parliament gave its approval at second reading by an overwhelming majority, on 13 December 2006, to the compromise negotiated with the Council on the draft REACH regulation (Registration, Evaluation and Authorisation of CHemicals). MEPs decided that a fair balance had been struck between the interests of consumers and the environment on the one hand and those of the European chemicals industry on the other.
The REACH project will replace around 40 existing legislative texts. The aim is to gather more data on the safety of around 30,000 substances that were placed on the market before 1981 - the year since which formal applications for authorisation have been required - and are manufactured or imported in quantities of over one tonne per year. Of these products, around 3000 hazardous substances must now be subject to a strict authorisation procedure.
REACH seeks to improve protection of human health and the environment while making Europe's chemicals industry more competitive. It is the fruit of many years of negotiations between the European Parliament, the Member States represented by the Council, and the European Commission.
In its ambition, scope and technical complexity, REACH is one of the most important pieces of legislation ever examined by the European Parliament. The text, which exceeded 1000 pages at first reading in November 2005, was still 720 pages long at the end.
Seventh Framework Research Programme: Public signature ceremony in the EP
The President of the European Parliament, Josep BORRELL and the Finnish Prime Minister, Matti VANHANEN signed in a public ceremony on Monday 18 December in Brussels the Seventh Framework Research Programme. The ceremony took place at 11am in the Brussels debating Chamber just before the opening of the extraordinary plenary session of the EP on the results of the European Council held on 14 and 15 December in Brussels and on the conclusions of the Finnish Presidency. The programme will be entering into force on 1 January 2007.
The Framework Research Programme (FP7) was adopted by the European Parliament on 30 November 2006, after an agreement in second reading had been reached with the Council. It is the EU's main instrument for funding scientific research and is with a budget of more than €54 billion over its seven-year life the EU's third largest financial instrument.
FP7 is intended to build on the achievements of its predecessor by making further progress towards the creation of a European Research Area, the equivalent of a "common market" for research. The long-term goal is for the European Union to become the world’s leading research area. Simpler instruments and procedures for funding and participation are a feature of FP7, which will promote collaborative research based on broad research areas, with much continuity from FP6 plus two new topics, space and security. Only projects involving several partners from different countries will be financed. The programme's funds are not general subsidies to research organisations or companies: they may only be used for specific work or research projects.
The second reading compromise adopted by the European Parliament on 30 November 2006 does not include major changes to the Commission’s proposal in terms of structure, content or operational arrangements. The European Parliament strongly backed the programme from the outset and made every effort to speed it through the legislative process. Nevertheless, the first draft of FP7 put forward by the European Commission was modified in some respects during the co-decision procedure between Parliament and the Council of Ministers.
Successive framework programmes (FPs) have operated since 1984, each covering a five year period. The current programme - FP6 - expires at the end of 2006. However, FP7 will run for seven years - from 1 January 2007 to 2013 - so as to coincide with the EU's multiannual budget framework (the Financial Perspective).
FP7 will have a budget of €54 582 million in current prices. Of this, €50 521 million is for the European Community programme and €2751 million for the Euratom programme, which runs from 2007 to 2011. A further €1310 million is indicatively planned for the Euratom programme for 2012-2013 but this will need to be confirmed at a later stage.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Environment
Parliament adopts REACH - new EU chemicals legislation and new chemicals agency
2006-12-18 - 13:47
Parliament adopted the compromise it negotiated with Council on the new regulation for chemicals - REACH -which will oblige producers to register all those chemical substances produced or imported above a total quantity of 1 tonne per year. Registration will affect about 30,000 substances. For more hazardous substances, producers will have to submit a substitution plan to replace them with safer alternatives. When no alternative exists, producers will have to present a research plan aimed at finding one. The compromise package agreed with the Council and tabled by four political groups (EPP-ED, PES, ALDE and UEN), was approved with 529 in favour, 98 against and 24 abstentions.
The regulation will enter into force progressively from June 2007, and the registration process will take 11 years to be completed. The calendar for registration depends on the risk of the substance and the quantity produced. All covered substances will have to be registered by 2018. REACH also creates a new Chemicals Agency, to be based in Helsinki, which will be responsible for the authorisation process.
Registration will affect about 30,000 substances. The calendar for registration depends on the risk of the substance and the quantity produced. All covered substances will have to be registered by 2018.
European Parliament President Josep Borrell commenting on the EP adoption of REACH said: "This vote, on one of the most complex texts in the history of the EU, sets up an essential piece of legislation to protect public health and the environment from the risks of chemical substances, without threatening European competitiveness. It offers EU citizens true protection against the multitude of toxic substances in everyday life in Europe."
REACH will replace the current dual system which differentiates between:
- "new" chemicals, i.e. the roughly 3,000 substances placed on the market after 1981, the year since which formal authorisation has been required by Community legislation,
- "existing" substances, placed on the market before 1981 and numbering around 100,000. REACH replaces the current 40 legislative texts with a single regulation establishing a single system called REACH (Registration, Evaluation and Authorisation of Chemicals).
Helsinki Chemicals Agency
REACH replaces the current 40 legislative texts with a single regulation establishing a single system called REACH (Registration, Evaluation and Authorisation of Chemicals). It also creates a new Chemicals Agency, to be based in Helsinki, which will be responsible for the registration and authorisation process.
The authorisation process will cover about 3 000 substances considered more dangerous. The Agency will be responsible to authorise them and the producers will have to present either replacement proposals or research plans to develop alternatives. The authorisation will be for a limited time period.
The regulation transfers the burden of proof regarding testing and evaluation of the risks of chemicals from the authorities to industry.
It also includes obligations of duty of care for the industry and of communication to the public about dangerous substances in products. It also includes safeguards for confidential information and provisions to avoid duplication of animal testing.
The issues at second reading
The EP Environment Committee, voting on 10 October 2006, adopted a very firm position by 42 votes to 12 with six abstentions. Essentially following the recommendations of its rapporteur Guido Sacconi (PES, IT), it made no less than 172 amendments to the Council text, seeking to reinstate several points from first reading which had not been accepted by the Member States. Apart from the substitution of the most hazardous substances, the amendments related to the operators' "duty of care", a compulsory chemical safety report for chemicals in amounts of less than 10 tonnes and the promotion of alternatives to animal testing.
A series of trialogues - EP, Council and Commission - was then held to narrow the gap between the different institutions and, if possible, clinch an agreement on REACH at second reading so that it can be implemented swiftly. The talks concluded successfully on 30 November after the sixth trialogue, less than a week before the deadline (6 December at 6pm) for tabling amendments for the plenary vote.
The amendments adopted on 13 December reflect the compromise thrashed out with representatives of the Member States, the REACH regulation, once rubber-stamped by the Council, will enter into force progressively from June 2007.
The main features of the compromise struck between Parliament and the Council and adopted by the European Parliament are:
- Authorisation of hazardous substances
For the most dangerous substances, there will be an obligation for producers to submit a substitution plan to replace them with safer alternatives. Where no alternative exists, producers will have to present a research and development plan aimed at finding one. Under a review clause, it will be decided after six years, on the basis of the latest scientific data, whether endocrine disruptors should be included in a list of substances which can only be authorised in the light of an analysis of their socio-economic costs and benefits. A clause was agreed to review after six years, on the basis of the latest scientific data, the inclusion of these substances among those which can only be authorised in the light of an analysis of the socio-economic costs and benefits.
- Registration of substances
The Commission must decide in 12 years' time whether or not to recommend extending the requirement for chemical safety reports for substances produced or imported in amounts of less than 10 tonnes per year. This deadline was shortened to seven years for cancerous or mutagenic substances or those toxic to reproduction. The intellectual property provisions were strengthened, with data protection extended from three to six years.
- Duty of care
As MEPs wanted, the "duty of care" principle will be enshrined in the regulation. It will be in a recital stipulating that the manufacturing, import or placing on the market of substances must be done prudently and responsibly, to ensure that, under reasonably foreseeable circumstances, human health or the environment are not adversely affected. This will involve collecting all necessary information on the substances in question and relaying all recommendations about risk management along the distribution chain.
- Animal welfare
The promotion of alternatives to the animal testing of chemicals, an issue of prime concern to MEPs, is now included among the goals of REACH. To avoid duplication of animal testing, interested parties will have 45 days to state their views before each new plan for animal tests. Information on toxicity to human beings should if possible be discovered using means other than tests on vertebrate animals, through alternative methods such as in vivo procedures. These alternative methods must be validated by the Commission, once recognised by the agency, or international institutions. The Commission will submit a report every three years on the use of alternative tests and, if necessary, bring forward fresh legislative proposals.
- Evaluation of substances
Parliament will appoint two members of the Helsinki-based European Chemicals Agency and the Executive Director will have to undergo a hearing with MEPs before his/her appointment is confirmed. However, Parliament's demands for guarantees of the independence of the agency's members vis-à-vis industry and the publication of declarations of interest were not accepted.
- Communication of information
A clause was added on the duty to inform the public about dangerous substances contained in products. The distribution chain, including consumers who request it, must be informed of the presence of any chemical in an amount greater than 0.1% of the total product weight. The Commission must consider the possibility of establishing a European quality mark for chemical products.
- Comitology
The Council accepted a number of amendments bringing REACH into line with the new comitology provisions, which give the EP a right of scrutiny over certain Commission decisions.
Entry into force
Following the compromise, REACH is due to enter into force progressively from 1 June 2007.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Environment
Cleaner groundwater on the way - conciliation approved
2006-12-18 - 13:47
The European Parliament approved an agreement reached in conciliation with the Council in October on legislation to improve the cleanliness standards of groundwater. During the conciliation talks, Parliament's negotiating team successfully pushed for stricter measures by Member States to prevent inputs into groundwater of hazardous substances. As MEPs had wanted, the scope of the directive was broadened so that its aim will now be to protect groundwater "against pollution and deterioration" and not only "against pollution" as Council had proposed in its common position. This point was important to Parliament, as groundwater is the most sensitive and, in many regions, the largest source of public drinking water.
In another key point of the agreement, Parliament successfully demanded that Member States be required to take "all measures necessary to prevent inputs into groundwater of any hazardous substances" and not merely "all measures necessary to aim to prevent" this type of pollution, as the Council wanted. These "hazardous substances" include cyanide, arsenic, biocides and phytopharmaceutical substances, which are listed in an annex to the framework directive on water adopted on 23 October 2000. Any change to the list of hazardous substances will henceforth have to be decided under codecision, as laid down in the new decision on comitology.
To ensure consistency with other Community directives which deal with water, pollution by nitrates used in farming will not be covered by the groundwater directive. The limit value of 50mg/l for nitrate pollution, as laid down in the 1991 directive on nitrates, will therefore continue to apply. However, since protecting groundwater, especially against pesticides, will require changes in some farming practices which could entail a loss of income, MEPs successfully pushed for the CAP regulation on rural development to provide special aid in such cases.
With the exception of pesticides, the text approved by the Parliament delegation does not impose single standards at EU level but seeks to harmonise methods for measuring potential pollutants. The regulation will not prevent Member States keeping or introducing stricter protection measures, especially in safeguard zones, which could be extended to the entire territory of a Member State.
The conciliation agreement reached with the Council was approved by Parliament's delegation by an overwhelming majority (16 votes for, none against and 4 abstentions) and can therefore be expected to sail through the plenary.
Environment Committee rapporteur Christa Klass (EPP-ED, DE), who piloted the legislation through Parliament, said "Groundwater is our most important natural resource but over half the bodies of freshwater in the EU are polluted and can never be cleaned up again. This is why we must protect them better".
The rules will have to be reviewed six years after the directive enters into force (i.e. in 2013 if the legislative procedure is completed in 2007) then again every six years. Member States will have two years to transpose the directive into national law. It should therefore take effect from early 2009.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Human rights
Belarus opposition leader Aliaksandr Milinkevich - 2006 European Parliament Sakharov Prize Winner for Freedom of Thought
2006-12-18 - 13:47
Leader of the Belarusian Opposition Aliaksandr Milinkevich received the 2006 Sakharov Prize from European Parliament President Borrell. Each year, the Parliament awards the Sakharov prize to exceptional people or organisations fighting against oppression, intolerance and injustice. The aim is to help them in their efforts to protect human rights, democracy and the rule of law around the world. Mr Milinkevich gave the €50,000 awarded with the prize to the human rights NGO - the Norwegian Helsinki Committee.
President Josep Borrell said: "In Europe we very often take human rights for granted and enjoy our freedoms to think, to speak and to believe as something indisputable and natural. However, still too many people around the globe are deprived of their fundamental right to live in freedom. It may be difficult to believe, but democracy is denied to ten million people who live on our own continent, in Europe, in Belarus. As Europeans, we have a special duty to defend and promote human rights in the world; therefore we should never tolerate the breach of human dignity and suppression of democratic values on our own soil and beyond. The 2006 Sakharov prize manifests this determination as strongly as ever.
Mr Aliaksandr Milinkevich, you are fighting against fear and intimidation, which reigns in Belarus. You are fighting for a simple liberty to speak one’s mind, to choose one’s future. You have become a true symbol of resistance against the oppression and of hope for a democratic future. Your personality is remarkable, your endeavours are outstanding and your example is inspiring not only to the Belarusian people, but also to us all here at the European Parliament. We stand shoulder to shoulder with you in supporting the promise of democracy in Belarus and the aspiration of Belarusian society to obtain the right to elect their leaders democratically, the right to have access to independent information, the right to establish non-governmental organisations and the right to have an independent and impartial judiciary.
We are all dismayed by the fact that 17 years since the fall of the Berlin Wall, 17 years since we awarded our first Sakharov Prize, the artificial division of Belarus from Europe still exists.
We ... deeply regret that contrary to any signs of change of heart in Minsk, the situation of democracy, human rights and rule of law is further deteriorating. There is no doubt that the future of Belarus lies with Europe. The Belarusian people deserve to live in a European dream of democracy, freedom and prosperity. I believe that it is not the question of whether, but only the question of when Belarus will join the European family of democratic nations.
The experience of my own country in the 1980's and that of our Member States from Eastern and Central Europe, who have successfully emerged from the totalitarian regime as democratic and free nations, shows us that it is in nobody’s power to stop people from thinking, hoping, dreaming, striving for and winning freedom.
Our 2006 Prize winner is a scientist like Andrei Sakharov. Both shared the same views and values, both experienced the sad consequences of standing up to a totalitarian regime. This year’s Sakharov Prize is given not only to a civic leader, but also to a scientist. A scientist, who dreams, who is trying to see the future with a fresh vision unimaginable to others. While some of these dreams seem impossible to realize, scientists sometimes are able to invent ways and precise solutions to make these dreams come true.
The Sakharov prize is therefore given this year to the HOPE for a democratic Belarus and to every person that has the courage not only to dream of freedom but to turn this dream into reality."
President Josep Borrell then awarded the certificate for the 2006 Sakharov Prize to Aliaksandr Milinkevich.
Speaking in Belarusian, Mr Milinkevich began his address to Parliament by expressing his thanks for the award, saying the prize was not for him alone but for all the Belarusians who are continuing their struggle for Belarus to rejoin the family of democratic European nations. Belarus had always been a European country, he said, and had been the first in Europe to have the prototype of a democratic constitution in the sixteenth century Grand Duchy of Lithuania. During the second world war, the country had the most powerful resistance movement in Europe, at the cost of the lives of a third of the population. One million of the six million Jews killed in the Holocaust were from Belarus, he said. The country had seen its national identity uprooted and its historical memory amputated, he said. Belarus had welcomed independence in 1991, but had not realised that independence and freedom were not the same thing.
“Today we are fighting for freedom and defending our independence [...] We are doing this for our children, who like French, Lithuanian, Polish and British children have the right to live in a free country. It was our children who spent long nights in freezing temperatures on the square in Minsk after March's elections. They were arrested and imprisoned, expelled from their universities for their choice of conscience. I am proud of them,” he said.
The regime, he said, had made thousands of arrests. The prisons had never been as full as during that week in March. Nevertheless, the authorities had not expected such large numbers to participate in protests. “This was our first victory,” he said, “but I know we will need many more similar victories to put an end to this illegal regime.” Former presidential candidate Aliaksandr Kazulin had been sentence to five and a half years in prison. He had been on hunger strike for 50 days, and his life was now at risk, said Mr Milinkevich. Mentioning all the political prisoners in his country, he said the prize was a sign that Europe was paying attention to the situation in Belarus. It could also, he said have been a prize for opposition figures such as Hienadz Karpienka, Yury Zakharanka or Viktar Hantchar, “But they have vanished without trace and we believe they have been murdered. These are the methods [...] used by the Belarus regime against their opponents.
Andrei Sakharov had always called for non-violent resistance, said Mr Milinkevich. “In this I am also a follower of his,” he said. “We need to overcome the fear which over the last ten years has been planted in people's spirits by unceasing propaganda,” he said, recalling a comment of Mr Sakharov that freedom of thought was the only guarantee against national myths which can lead to bloody dictatorship. “This is what is happening now in Belarus. Monuments to Stalin are being reinstated [...] the official media provides an unending torrent of lies and falsehoods, just as it did in Sakharov's time. The main enemy is said to be the West, and local democrats are presented as its agents.”
Mr Lukashenko had spoken of the opposition going abroad to call for sanctions on Belarus. “I want to use this opportunity to say, in particular to the people of Belarus, that these are lies. We would never call for sanctions, as we know they would hit ordinary people most severely.” Mr Milinkevich said that Moscow's conditions for its political and economic support to Lukashenko were that Belarus adopt a single currency with Russia – in effect, the Russian ruble – and that it ratify a “State Union” treaty. These would both cause the loss of Belarus's sovereignty. So far, the Lukashenko regime had resisted this approach: “they know perfectly well that with the loss of independence and the arrival of Russian capital in Belarus, few of them would keep their posts and their wealth.” But it may be that self-preservation would lead the regime to accept Moscow's terms and organise a referendum. “We need to be clear that it is democracy and not dictatorship which could be the guarantee of Belarusian independence.” Mr Milinkevich nevertheless stressed that a democratic, independent Belarus would want close and friendly relations with Russia.
He called on the EU to widen the scope of its travel restrictions on members of the regime, but at the same time called for the EU not to raise to €60 the price of a Schengen entry visa, as planned on 1 January 2007. For most Belarusians, he said, this would act as a new Berlin wall.
The latest proposal from the European Commission, inviting the Minsk regime to end its self-imposed isolation in Europe, were welcome, he said, though there was little change of the Lukashenko government responding positively: “They know that once democratisation starts it will inevitably, and swiftly, result in the end of their power. The present leader of Belarus could never again win a genuinely free election.” He urged Europe to let Belarusians know that, contrary to their state's propaganda, Europe was leaving its doors open for a free and democratic Belarus.
He urged the EU to go beyond its existing support for democratic development, which was only effective in countries actually trying to establish democracies. There needed to be support also for countries under dictatorships, support for free media, civil society and repressed individuals. Europe should not shrug, he said, simply asking 'What can we do?' - “There is a lot you can do!” he said.
“I am deeply convinced that Europe cannot be complete without Belarus,” he said. “I want to thank you for having faith in our victory. I promise it will not be long coming. My country is not the same as it used to be – it is less frightened, and it believes in change. Belarus will soon rejoin the European family as a free and democratic state. History shows that dictatorships do not last, and end badly for their tyrants. The only choice when faced with a dictatorship is to struggle against it. Because we have no other choice.”
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Human rights
Financing instrument for the promotion of democracy and human rights worldwide
2006-12-18 - 13:47
Following the debate held on 29 November in Brussels on a report drawn up by Hélène FLAUTRE (Greens/EFA, FR) and Edward McMILLAN-SCOTT (EPP-ED, UK), Parliament adopted a report during on the legislative proposal aimed at updating the EU's financial mechanism for supporting human rights and democracy around the world. After a year of pressure from the European Parliament, in July the Commission finally presented a proposal for a financial instrument for the promotion of democracy and human rights. MEPs want to adjust its aims and scope. They are also proposing changes to make it faster and more efficient in responding to urgent developments. This is the only instrument which allows funds to be allocated direct to civil society organisations without the agreement of the government of the third country concerned.
According to the EU Treaty, developing and strengthening democracy and the rule of law, as well as respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms, are among the goals of the Common Foreign and Security Policy. The co-rapporteurs believed it was essential for the EU to have an effective instrument to further these goals, one which would be both strategic and flexible and which would complement other funding mechanisms, such as the Stability Instrument and the geographic funding programmes.
In order to work effectively, the new mechanism need to be more flexible than that which it is replacing. It needs in particular to avoid excessively bureaucratic procedures which placed severe constraints on the capacity to reach to difficult situations.
The two co-rapporteurs have therefore tried to refocus the objectives and scope of the instrument so it is centred on support for non-state players promoting democracy and human rights. They have insisted on new measures to allow the EU to respond quickly and effectively to emergency situations which often face human rights defenders. They therefore introduced ad-hoc measure to allow funding to protect and support human rights defenders in urgent cases with going through a tendering process.
In parallel, changes to the Financial Regulation, aimed at allowing funding of unregistered organisations, should allow more flexibility in the operation of the mechanism better to support independent players active in defending freedom in third countries. This should overcome some of the weaknesses in the existing system for which the Commission has been criticised in the past.
The promotion of political pluralism and parliamentary democracy, and support for parliamentary projects in favour of democracy and human rights, were also added to the mechanism by MEPs in the committee.
Parliament's role in the setting of strategic priorities and in the operation of the instrument was one of the main issues subject to negotiations between the EP, Council and Commission. The co-rapporteurs succeeded in getting agreement on the setting up of a dialogue on these issues, though the Council has refused to make a formal commitment to take part. It is proposed that Parliament should receive an annual report, evaluation reports and the minutes of the Human Rights and Democracy Committee. It is also proposed that there should be a Commission/Parliament working group.
The legislation has been adopted at this first reading stage, and the instrument will enter into force by the end of the year, thereby preventing a break in EU funding for human rights and democracy, notably the inclusion of electoral observation missions.
The financing instrument is aimed at the following areas:
(a) promotion and enhancement of participatory and representative democracy, including parliamentary democracy, and the processes of democratisation, mainly through civil society organisations, inter alia in:
i) promoting freedom of association and assembly, unhindered movement of persons, freedom of opinion and expression, including artistic and cultural expression, independent media, unimpeded access to information, and measures to combat administrative obstacles to the exercise of these freedoms, including the fight against censorship;
ii) strengthening the rule of law, promoting the independence of the judiciary, encouraging and evaluating legal and institutional reforms, and promoting access to justice;
iii) promoting and strengthening the International Criminal Court, ad hoc international criminal tribunals and the processes of transitional justice and truth and reconciliation mechanisms;
iv) supporting reforms to achieve effective and transparent democratic accountability and oversight, including that of the security and justice sectors, and encouraging measures against corruption;
v) promoting political pluralism and democratic political representation, and encouraging political participation by citizens, in particular marginalised groups, in democratic reform processes at local, regional and national level;
vi) promoting equal participation of men and women in social, economic and political life, and supporting equality of opportunity, participation and political representation of women;
vi a) supporting measures to facilitate the peaceful conciliation of group interests, including support for confidence-building measures relating to human rights and democratisation.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Human rights
Human rights: Fiji, Burma and sexual abuses by UN forces in Liberia and Haiti
2006-12-18 - 13:47
At the end of the session MEPs adopted three resolutions on human rights. They condemned the coup in Fiji, called on governments and the United Nations to take tougher action over reported sexual abuse by UN troops in Liberia and Haiti, and criticised the government of Burma for its continuing oppression of its own people. Coup in Fiji condemned
In a resolution on the situation in Fiji following the overthrow on 5 December 2006 of the democratically elected government, Parliament says the coup showed "contempt for the Fijian constitution and the rule of law, for the people of Fiji and Fiji’s traditional institutions". It adds that that the crisis is crippling Fiji’s economy.
The resolution "strongly condemns the take-over of power from the democratically elected government of Fiji by the Fijian military forces and reiterates its strongest possible opposition to actions that undermine the democratic process". It also demands that the military forces "stand back and return power to the democratically elected government".
Democratic legitimacy of toppled government
Recalling that Fiji held general elections in May 2006, which were deemed credible by international observers including the EU Election Observation Mission, the resolution emphasises that "the coalition government formed by Prime Minister Qarase following the elections has full democratic legitimacy as well as a very large majority in Parliament".
Reconciling ethnic groups
MEPs also stress that "the future of Fiji’s multiethnic society depends on the credibility and legitimacy of democratic institutions on the basis of the principle of equality of human beings regardless of ethnic origin, as supported by all communities" and that "a lasting resolution of the current political crisis can only be achieved through peaceful means, respecting the concerns and interests of all communities". They therefore suggest a ‘truth and reconciliation commission’ be set up in Fiji as a contribution to peaceful coexistence between the country’s two main communities.
Call to suspend some aid and ban those linked to the coup from the EU
Parliament points out that respect for human rights, democratic principles and the rule of law is an essential element of the Cotonou Agreement governing the EU's relations with the ACP States. Moreover, development aid to Fiji worth 23 million euros was restored by the EU in 2004, with the aim of providing equal access to education and training for all ethnic groups. Noting also that the Commonwealth has decided to suspend Fiji’s membership of its decision‑making councils, the resolution issues a call for "the EU Commission and Member States to suspend immediately all non‑humanitarian aid to Fiji, as specified in Article 96 of the Cotonou Partnership Agreement, with the exception of educational programmes, provided that these are implemented by NGOs".
In addition, MEPs want "an immediate travel ban to prevent members of the military forces, their families or any person linked to the coup d’état in Fiji from entering the Member States of the European Union". Lastly, the resolution calls on "all Members of the Pacific Islands Forum and other regional and international actors to exert pressure to resolve the situation and to achieve long-lasting political, economic and social stability in Fiji".
* * *
Sexual abuses by UN forces in Liberia and in Haiti
In a resolution on the reported involvement of United Nations forces in sexual abuse in Liberia and Haiti, Parliament issues a strong condemnation of the situation and calls on the UN and its Member States to ensure that the perpetrators do not escape punishment.
Parliament expresses "its profound shock at the odious crimes attributed to UN personnel, including the trading of sex for food" and "condemns the acts of UN peacekeepers in Haiti and Liberia that have subjected children to rape and prostitution".
Honourable majority of peacekeepers betrayed by abuses of minority
It points out that, under the Statute establishing the International Criminal Court, rape, sexual slavery, enforced prostitution and any form of sexual violence are crimes against humanity and war crimes. It adds that the recent claims concerning children in Haiti and Liberia being subjected to rape and prostitution by UN peacekeepers make this the latest in a sad series of similar scandals.
There are nearly 100,000 UN peacekeepers in the world, and the resolution acknowledges that the vast majority of these serve loyally and honourably, but it says their contributions to peace and security "are undermined by the serious sexual abuses by a small number of individual UN personnel".
Governments and UN must bring perpetrators to justice
Pointing out that UN personnel expelled from the organisation for sexual exploitation are rarely prosecuted in their country of origin, MEPs call on "Member States of the UN sending personnel on peacekeeping missions to follow up all claims of sexual abuse and exploitation, particularly those which concern minors, and to bring those individuals who have committed sexual abuses to court as quickly as possible".
They also call on "the UN Secretary General to carry out further investigations into UN peacekeepers' and humanitarian aid workers' role in sexual exploitation and abuse of children and vulnerable people in order to put in place an effective monitoring system and enforce the UN's zero tolerance policy".
Concern over UN "culture of silence"
The resolution welcomes the UN Secretary General's announcement about a forthcoming strategy to assist victims of sexual exploitation and abuse as well as the use of DNA sampling to prevent further abuses. However, it expresses "serious concern over reports of a 'culture of silence' in some UN missions, stemming from the fear of punishment and retaliation" and therefore "calls on the UN to take all necessary steps to create a working environment enabling staff to report abuses without fear of retaliation".
Unless the UN can urgently put a stop to this behaviour it will have a detrimental impact on the credibility and moral authority of the institution as a whole, say MEPs, and some Member States may reduce the number of their troops at a time when there is a strong need for peace-keeping missions.
The resolution calls on the UN and the EU to support measures to empower women in conflict and post-conflict situations so that they are less vulnerable to sexual exploitation. Lastly, it welcomes the national campaign to combat Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA) launched by the Liberian government and backs President Sirleaf's call to the international community "not to misuse [its] wealth and power to sexually exploit children and women".
* * *
Burma in the dock
In a resolution on Burma, Parliament accuses the country's State Peace and Development Council of continuing "to subject the people of Burma to appalling human rights abuses, such as forced labour, persecution of dissidents, conscription of child soldiers and forced relocation". The EP "condemns the SPDC for its relentless suppression of the Burmese people over 40 years and its total failure to make any significant move towards democracy".
Parliament says the National Convention, whose purpose is to draft a constitution, "lacks any credibility due to the absence of democratically elected representatives, most notably the National League for Democracy (NLD), as well as ethnic groups".
In addition, MEPs deplore "the SPDC's recent closure of five International Committee of the Red Cross field offices" as well as "other measures designed to intimidate humanitarian relief NGOs".
They also strongly condemn "the regime's brutal crackdown on several large ethnic groups", with "some 82,000 people forced to leave their homes in eastern Burma in 2006, bringing the number of internally displaced people within Burma to at least 500,000".
Tougher action needed by Burma's neighbours
Arguing that "Burma's neighbours need to take a more robust stance against the abuses of the military regime in that country", Parliament welcomes the fact-finding mission to Burma by the Malaysian Foreign Minister, Syed Hamid Albar, as a result of the position taken the previous year by the eleventh ASEAN summit, and "trusts that this will now result in tougher measures by ASEAN nations against the military junta in Burma".
The resolution also urges China, India and other countries which continue to supply weaponry and other support to the military junta to desist from this and to join the international community in its efforts to bring about change for the better in Burma.
Parliament welcomes the International Labour Organisation's decision to take its concerns about the SPDC's use of forced labour before the UN Security Council and the International Court of Justice.
Call for tighter and broader EU sanctions
MEPs stress that the EU's targeted sanctions have so far failed to achieve the desired impact. They call on the Council "to ensure that all Member States rigorously apply existing restrictive measures" and also "to expand the scope of the sanctions and to enlarge the list of those targeted, so that it includes all SPDC ministers, deputies, members, supporters and workers, in addition to their family members, and businessmen and other prominent individuals associated with the regime".
They insist that all aid destined for Burma must be delivered through genuine non-governmental organisations and must reach the people for whom it is intended, with the least possible involvement of the SPDC.
Lastly, Parliament calls on the UN Security Council "to pass a binding resolution requiring the restoration of democracy in Burma and the release of all political prisoners" (estimated to number over 1100), including Aung San Suu Kyi, who has spent 10 out of the last 16 years under house arrest, an illegal measure that the military junta extends every year.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Human rights
Follow-up to the Sakharov Prize - MEPs deplore that prize-winners prevented from receiving award in person
2006-12-18 - 13:47
In adopting a joint resolution, Parliament deplores the fact that some prize-winners have still not been authorised to receive their prize in person, which represents a violation of one of the fundamental rights of each human being (namely the freedom to enter and leave one’s own country without hindrance – a right which is specifically recognised by the Universal Declaration of Human Rights). The 1990 prize winner (the Burmese dissident Aung San Suu Kyi, who is under house arrest) and the 2005 prize winner (the Cuban collective Damas de Blanco) have not yet been authorised to come to receive the prize.
The Conference of Presidents decided to dispatch two delegations to Cuba and Burma to establish contact with the prize winners in order to check on their personal situation. The winner of the 1996 Sakharov Prize - Wei Jinsheng, who was still imprisoned at the time - has not yet had the opportunity to address the Plenary and receive the reward linked to the prize.
The House demands that, following the Conference of Presidents' decision to dispatch two delegations (one to Burma and the other to Cuba), the authorities of those countries facilitate the delegations' journeys. Parliament welcomes the decision taken by the Conference of Presidents on 16 November to establish a follow-up mechanism for winners of the Sakharov Prize and systematically to dispatch a European Parliament delegation to meet those prize winners who have not been authorised by the authorities of their countries to attend the prize-giving ceremony. The House reiterates its demand that all winners of the Sakharov Prize (and in particular Aung San Suu Kyi, Oswaldo Payá Sardiñas and the Cuban collective Damas de Blanco) be given access to the European institutions. The House calls upon its President to take all the necessary steps in order to enable these decisions to be implemented.
Finally, Parliament calls upon the Conference of Presidents to enter on the agenda for its next meeting the organisation of a ceremony to award the Sakharov Prize to Wei Jinsheng.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Enlargement
European Parliament says EU must reform before enlarging further
2006-12-18 - 13:47
Parliament says the European Union needs to develop its institutional, financial and policy structure before any further enlargement can take place. This comes in a report on the institutional reforms required to improve the EU's capacity to integrate new Member States. The report by Alexander STUBB (EPP-ED, FI), adopted by 398 votes in favour, 99 against with 36 abstentions, acknowledges that the Union is currently confronted with "difficulties to honour its commitments towards South-East European countries" and calls for a series of institutional changes to improve its "integration capacity".
The notion of "integration capacity" implies that, after any new accession, the EU institutions are able to function properly and democratically, to adequately finance their activities and to attain their political objectives. Therefore, MEPs say that the Union should decide on which reforms are needed to proceed with a new enlargement by taking into consideration the impact of the new Member State on its institutional and decision-making structure. The Nice Treaty, says the report, does not provide "an adequate basis for further enlargements."
MEPs stress that the "integration capacity" should not be seen as a new criterion for candidate countries, since it is up to the EU to improve its ability to accept new countries and deepen its integration process. MEPs also say that all past enlargements have "tended to strengthen the Union, foster its economic growth, reinforce its role in the world and stimulate the development of new EU policies."
As far as the reforms are concerned, MEPs' proposals include: the adoption of a new qualified majority voting system at the Council to simplify decision making; a clear definition of the EU's values, objectives and competences; more transparency in Council's operations; increased powers of scrutiny for national parliaments and the adoption of a clause setting out how Member States could leave the EU. MEPs also propose an amendment calling for reinforcement of the European Neighbourhood Policy to provide a framework for relations with those countries with no prospect of accession.
MEPs reiterate their conviction that a constitutional settlement must be achieved before the next European Parliamentary elections in 2009. They reaffirm that the Constitutional Treaty would enhance the Union's integration capacity if ratified.
The House takes the view that the assent of the European Parliament, required for Council to act under Article 49 TEU on the accession of new member states, should apply to the decision to open negotiations, as well as their conclusion.
Enlargement: Turkey, Croatia and the Western Balkans
The European Parliament adopted a resolution by 481 votes in favour to 66 against with 38 abstentions on candidate countries and possible future candidates, notably Turkey, Croatia and the Western Balkans.
Future enlargements of the European Union should take more account of the performance of candidate countries than they did in the past and will, in any event, require changes in the EU Treaty, Parliament said. A date for final accession should not be given too soon and accession negotiations should follow a timetable based on "effective compliance" with the political criteria. Compliance with these criteria should be given greater priority in accession negotiations and Parliament intends to play a more active role in monitoring the accession process..
MEPs urged the EU governments to "conclude the constitutional process by the end of 2008", pointing out that "the Treaty of Nice does not provide an adequate basis for future enlargements". They want the necessary treaty reforms to be ready before the next European elections "so as to avoid a delay in current accession negotiations", notably in those with Croatia.
Turkey
With regard to Turkey, Parliament noted the European Commission report which says that the pace of reform has slowed and stressed that Turkey ratify and fully implement the so-called Ankara Protocol, which extends the EC-Turkey association agreement to all new Member States, including Cyprus. The EU governments stated in September 2005 that implementation of the protocol would be evaluated in 2006 and that failure to implement it would "affect the overall progress in the negotiations". MEPs consider last Monday's Council decision not to open eight important chapters in the negotations "an unavoidable consequence of Turkey's position". They call on the German Presidency to continue efforts in this area but also with regards to "further alleviating the isolation of the Turkish Cypriot community in close cooperation with renewed UN efforts" within a reasonable timescale..
Croatia
Croatia's continued progress "towards EU integration" was welcomed by the MEPs, who called on "the negotiators on both sides to maintain the momentum reached in these negotiations with a view to their early conclusion".
Western Balkans
The "clear European membership prospects" offered to the Western Balkan countries, needs to be maintained, the Parliament said, in order to consolidate peace and prosperity in the region, but MEPs reminded these countries that it is the pace of reform that will determine the pace of their integration in the EU.
MEPs debate the enlargement process
On Wednesday, 13 December, Parliament held a keynote debate on enlargement, just ahead of the 14-15 December European Council, where enlargement was the main agenda item. The debate was opened by Parliament's two rapporteurs, Elmar BROK (EPP-ED, DE) and Alexander STUBB (EPP-ED, FI).
Elmar BROK (EPP-ED, DE), rapporteur on the Commission's strategy paper on progress in the enlargement process, said that underlying all discussion "we must remember enlargement has been the most successful EU policy - positive for the economy, a significant contribution to the unification of Europe and acting as a major incentive for the reform process to candidate countries".
Looking to the future of enlargement, he went on, "we are facing a decision between a real political Union concerned in particular with Europe's role in the world or remaining purely an economic project". This choice needs to be made and goes hand in hand with the need for revising current institutional arrangements as envisaged by the Constitution. "We need clarity what we are offering countries that want to join the Union. We have already offered certain prospects to certain Balkan countries. These must be honoured. But we also need to look wider than the possibility of full membership to more multi-lateral forms of co-operation that can be offered now as opposed to at the end of fifteen years of negotiation". We also need clarify internally so that we can avoid internal crisis and stalemate and we therefore need the institutional revisions offered by the constitution.
On Turkey, he said "it is a pity Turkey's legal obligations are not currently being fulfilled" but "what is happening now doesn't mean Turkey can for ever put off meeting its legal obligations".
Alexander STUBB (EPP-ED, FI), rapporteur on the institutional aspects of the EU's capacity to integrate new Member States, told the House that five main points underlay his report.
Firstly, a change of terminology from absorption policy to integration policy. "No-one wants to be "absorbed" by the European Union", he said. Secondly, "a sensitivity to the various interests and attitudes to the issue from those who want a widening of the Union without political deepening, to those who want the opposite and those who are against both". These positions are not new, they always present and each new enlargement has always been preceded by a thorough institutional debate. "We now need the Constitution before further enlargement".
Thirdly, a definition of integration capacity. It is not a condition for enlargement but a criterion and covers issues of institutions, budget and policies. Fourthly, making sure there is adequate public debate around enlargement. He wished to point the finger at the Council for its failure in this area. There were many chances for public debate. "Please do your job, Council, and show some strategic thinking", said Mr Stubb. Lastly, the need for a Constitution before 2009.
He concluded by saying "Enlargement is the best policy the European Union has ever had. It has brought peace. prosperity, security and stability".
Council Presidency - Minister Paula Lehtomaki
For the Council Presidency, Paula LEHTOMAKI, Finnish Trade and Development Minister, told the House "enlargement is an essential part of the European integration process" and the prospect of accession had always encouraged candidate states to implement reforms. Thanks to enlargement, the EU has become a bigger player on the international stage, helping the market to respond to the challenges of globalisation. We now have peace, stability, democracy, the rule of law and prosperity. "We need to ensure that this success story continues".
The Union must continue with enlargement as "an open and objective process without new strings being attached". We have to pay closer attention than ever before to how it happens in practice, improving the quality of enlargement and developing the Union's readiness and capacity for enlargement. The absorption capacity of the EU "is not a criterion for accession nor should it ever be so". Nevertheless, it cannot be ignored if enlargement is to be a success.
The Union must also live up to its obligations, in the Western Balkans for example. Regarding Turkey, "The Presidency has done everything in its power to keep the negotiations going. We are happy with the Council's decision taken on Monday. It is a basis on which to proceed". Progress in the accession process can only happen on the basis of internal reform and the accession conditions being actively met.
Concluding, she told MEPs, "There is a degree of enlargement fatigue around. By communicating timely and factually accurate information, we can break the spell of fatigue".
Commissioner Olli Rehn
The Commissioner thanked the Finnish Presidency among other things for Monday's decision on how accession negotiations with Turkey should proceed. "This is a clear signal to Turkey that there will be consequences if it does not live up to its obligations". "The decision demonstrates that the EU is able to take decisions on delicate and difficult decisions without ... turning the whole thing into a major crisis".
Pointing out that the Union must ensure its own capacity to function while integrating new Members, the Commissioner stated that "We risk increasing confusion among our own citizens and damaging our credibility in the candidate countries. We must build up a renewed consensus on enlargement by combining the two sides of the coin".
The Commission will carry out impact assessments on enlargement and evaluate the budgetary implications (particularly in areas such as agriculture). The Commissioner stated that "Difficult issues, such as judicial reform and the fight against corruption must be addressed at an early stage of negotiations". He added "We should not create something overly complicated ... I believe we all are in favour of simplification, not complication".
"Some wonder whether enlargement is done at the expense of deepening. My answer is no. The EU has managed to do this before and it can be done again". A new institutional settlement should be in place by the time the next new Member is ready to join the Union. A Political Declaration is to be adopted in Berlin next March and the remaining steps should be concluded by the end of 2008. Mr Rehn concluded by stating that "we need to maintain the momentum of enlargement".
Political group speakers
For the EPP-ED group, Spanish MEP Inigo MÉNDEZ de VIGO wished to stress that enlargement was "positive for the existing Member States". Unfortunately, he added, the EU was not ready. "You don't invite guests into your house if it isn't in order." To put it in order, "the constitutional treaty is needed".
However, he warned against "cherry picking" the Constitution. It was essential to preserve "a proper balance". The message from his group to the European Council was thus "no future enlargement without the constitutional treaty".
On behalf of the Socialists, Hannes SWOBODA (PES, AT) said "many people believe the smaller the EU the better, while others think the bigger the better". In practice, a key need was for "the EU to speak with one voice", in other words the emphasis should be "on quality not quantity". Overall, then, the "most important elements of the constitution" were certainly needed. However, fundamental changes on the EU's financial basis were also needed.
On Turkey, he said, this country must certainly meet its obligations, but in the EU "we must also politically do our job on Cyprus". Turning to the Neighbourhood policy, he believed a broader "vision of a greater, enlarged Europe", for example an EU-Black Sea Community should be contemplated.
Belgian MEP Annemie NEYTS-UYTTEBROECK, for the ALDE group, argued that the term "absorption capacity" was being used "as an excuse to question enlargement". She wished to make three points. Firstly, "enlargement so far has been an undeniable success". Secondly, all commitments must be adhered to, in respect of Croatia, the Balkans and Turkey. On this point, she backed the Commission's approach to negotiations with Turkey as "not shutting the door but being fair and balanced". Thirdly, the EU must "reform its own institutions before enlargement".
Dutch MEP Joost LAGENDIJK, for the Greens/EFA, stressed that each EU candidate "must be judged on its merits" and that "difficult issues must not be put off to the end". On the question of "absorption capacity or integration capacity", he regretted that some were using these terms "as an argument against enlargement".
He then emphasised that, while he was in favour of the western Balkan countries and Turkey as EU candidates, he was sure further enlargement "will not work with the current institutional framework". Moreover, public support was essential and to get this, "credible arguments, stressing the Union's long-term interests" must be made by leaders who did not just listen to the latest opinion polls. This particularly applied in the case of Turkey. "We cannot base ourselves on rumour and fear in the Union", he concluded.
"Enlargement is slowing down, leaving us little room for manoeuvre", said, Erik MEIJER (NL) for the GUE/NGL. The "neo-liberal attitude of our economies", worries about migratory flows and poor working and housing conditions for migrant workers, and concern over human rights in Turkey mean that "we risk closing the door to these countries, and hence damaging their prospects" he said.
"Trumpeting the Constitution [as a pretext for slowing enlargement] is misguided", and the same goes for the notion of "integration capacity", said Konrad SZYMANSKI, of Poland, for the UEN. "If enlargement is such a success, why do we fill reports with cowardly Euro-scepticism?" he asked, adding that the EU "is perhaps trying to do too much", and hence raising expectations too high. "The simple fact is that candidates must meet conditions", he concluded.
The Stubb report is disappointing in that it "does nothing to fill the institutional gap" said Dutch MEP Bastiaan BELDER for the IND/DEM group. It confirms that we need an EU Constitution, but offers no vision of the future for enlargement. Mr Belder said that a provision for enlargement procedures should be included in the EU Treaty and also deplored the "lack of political leadership" in defining the boundaries of the Union.
For the non-attached members, Philip CLAEYS, of Belgium, warned that "horse-trading" with Turkey over its refusal to implement customs union needs to be handled very carefully. "We have always told citizens that negotiations would be suspended if conditions were not met, but now we seem to be doing the opposite" he said.
British and Irish speakers
Andrew DUFF (ALDE, UK) said he welcomed "the suppression of the terminology of 'absorption capacity' ….and of 'privileged partnership', which is a faintly patronising concept without, frankly, much privilege to it". He went on "we must seek now to develop the neighbourhood policy quickly and creatively, to establish upon the eastern frontier stable circumstances" for countries that cannot or do not wish to join. He advocated including in a renegotiated Constitutional Treaty a chapter describing the enlargement policy and describing more clearly the accession process, as well as creating "a fresh class of associate membership". All this would "serve to reassure the public about the quality of the accession process and pace of expansion".
Jim ALLISTER (NA, UK) complained that "the proponents of the rejected Constitution see enlargement as a bandwagon for securing its approval". In fact, it was "spurious spin that enlargement demands a Constitution". And there was no mention anywhere of who would pay for all this enlargement - just the expectation that the UK for example would happily go on bankrolling it. "With the EU costing my country £4bn net per annum - we cannot afford any more charity."
Mary Lou McDONALD (GUE/NGL, IE) welcomed the debate and stated that "I am one of those who is very much pro-enlargement ... but I am also a person who is against the Constitution". She went on to say that she thought this concept of enlargement is potentially one that could be used to sell the Constitution and to imply that it is "simply a case of tweaking" the existing Treaties. She said that "To communicate, we must listen and we must have that very fundamental debate about the direction of the Union". Ms McDonald concluded by stating that she supported the accession of Turkey but that the issue of Cyprus must be sorted out, saying the situation was one of continuing illegal occupation.
Gerard BATTEN (IND/DEM, UK) was unhappy that the EU had a "seemingly limitless need to to absorb more countries" and to take more and more power from democratic nation states and "concentrate it in a centralised and undemocratic European Union". The Stubb report was talking about nothing other than "a United States of Europe" so, unsurprisingly, "UKIP does not agree with that". However, said Mr Batten, "I have found something in his report we can agree with". This was "the adoption of a clause enabling Member States to withdraw from the European Union".
Richard CORBETT (PES, UK) told the House "Alexander Stubb said that enlargement was the most successful EU policy, spreading peace, prosperity and security across the continent". That logic still applied. "Enlargement is one of the many factors which drives reform. Supporters of reform should be supporters of enlargement. There is a need to push for both together and not to make complete institutional reform the pre-requisite for enlargement. The two agendas should drive each other forward and there is a possibility that we may see a new Constitutional Treaty and a new Accession Treaty on the same day - rolled into one".
Charles TANNOCK (EPP-ED, UK) argued that "the smooth, successive waves of enlargement have been a magnificent achievement for the EU". The 2004 enlargement, despite dire warnings, had proven a great success. However, unlike Mr Brok, Mr Tannock did not feel further enlargement required a Constitutional Treaty. Any necessary changes could be achieved by amendments to the Nice Treaty. As rapporteur for the Neighbourhood Policy he believed "there should be a split between Southern/Euromed countries and a new Eastern concept of an EU-Black Sea Community". However, Moldova and Ukraine should be told that they will be able to become potential EU candidates.
Responses to the debate
Council Presidency - Minister Paula Lehtomaki
Responding to the debate, the Minister emphasised the need to ensure that the Union retains its ability to act in all situations. She pointed out that the EU has 'done its homework' in relation to a variety of ongoing issues - on Monday, an agreement was reached that the economic situation of Cyprus should be taken forward at an early stage. In relation to the Applicant countries, the Minister again stated that they have to fulfil the membership criteria of the EU and that this fulfilment of criteria must be seen objectively. She said that "We trust the Commission in its willingness and ability to carry out evaluation".
The Constitutional Treaty contains many elements which are important for improving the EU's integration ability. The Minister stated "We must believe and trust in the ability of the Union". She went on to point out that Constitutions are only one of the instruments necessary to carry out policy and that political will and commitment to the European project are also necessary.
She concluded on the issue of the Neighbourhood policy by saying that it is "an important area of policy by itself and shouldn't be seen as a substitute of enlargement". Those countries interested in joining will not accept one instead of the other.
Commissioner Olli Rehn
The final speaker in the debate was Commissioner Rehn, who pointed out that "We have in Europe two discourses that don't meet often - one emphasising the significance of enlargement the other only our absorption capacity".
Referring to the points made concerning the European Neighbourhood policy and the Commission's report of 8th November, he pointed to the EU's variety of relationships with other European countries - Switzerland, EEA and through the European Neighbourhood Policy - and emphasised that the European Neighbourhood Policy is "distinct from and parallel to the process of enlargement".
The Commission was not in favour of the suggestions to include cultural criteria in the Copenhagen criteria, he added. He concluded by quoting the Philosopher Ulrich Becker who, writing in yesterday's Le Monde about the recent visit of the Pope to Turkey, spoke of "the European miracle" that "enemies have become neighbours".
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Budget
MEPs adopt EU budget for 2007 at €126.5bn for 27 Member States
2006-12-18 - 13:47
The European Parliament adopted the 2007 budget in second reading as President Borrell signed it with the European Commission and the Finnish Presidency of the European Union. Following the vote, commitments appropriations for next year are set at €126.5bn, payments at €115.5bn, equalling 0.99 % of GNI. It represents an increase of 3.2% over 2006 levels in payments. The 2007 budget is the first one to deal with an Union of 27 member states, following the accession of Bulgaria and Romania on 1 January of next year.
The crux throughout the preparation has been the question of posts at the Commission, as well as expenditure for the Common Foreign Security Policy - CFSP. In the end, Parliament opposed the job cuts proposed by the Finnish Presidency and managed to get a pledge from Council to be timely and adequately informed on all CFSP actions.
In a remarkable sign of coherence between the political groups, the vote on the whole Section III - Commission was taken "en bloc" in one go.
Co-rapporteur James ELLES (EPP-ED, UK) said: "In shaping the value for money principle, a variety of innovative elements have been added to the standard budget procedure with a view to improving the effectiveness of EU spending and ensuring better value for money for its citizens. Now, our task consists of taking the value for money approach further by establishing a mechanism for an annual evaluation of performance of specific programmes. I warmly welcome that the Commission supports this approach." A joint declaration by the EP and the Commission stresses the need to integrate such a "value for money approach" in the yearly budgetary procedure.
Heading 1a and 1b, "Sustainable growth"
Parliament sees Lisbon Agenda lines as pivotal for the EU ; reaffirming its Annual Political Strategy views, the EP has spread a number of payment increases on lines dealing with research and innovation which aim at boosting European competitiveness, while regretting that Council had cut them in the first place. The Competitiveness and Innovation Program (CIP) is an apt example of such a targeted increase in payments, with a series of CIP lines revised upwards. Galileo is also seen as a key programme by the EP and its relative under-funding has been compensated by the increase of €3m taking the total to €100m for 2007 in both commitments and payments.
Parliament already indicated it saw the poor funding of the Lisbon-related lines as a "deficit" in the resolution accompanying the adoption of the 2007-13 Financial Perspective.
On the structural funds front, Parliament adopted a series of increases for payments appropriations which are smaller than initially envisaged at first reading (like for instance the ESF - convergence).
Total for Heading 1 combined is €54.3bn in commitments and €44.9bn in payments.
Heading 2, "Natural resources"
Parliament is unhappy with the cuts across the board applied by Council for farm spending as the Common Agricultural Policy sees the application of new implementation rules in 2007. Most particularly, the EP deplores that Council rejected the proposal to fund a vaccine for the Blue Tongue disease under that heading, a failure compensated by the Commission's initiative to work on it in the Research budget.
Total for Heading 2 is €56.2bn in commitments and €54.7bn in payments.
Heading 3, "Justice and Home Affairs"
The EP sees the area of freedom, security and justice, and in particular the promotion of fundamental rights, the definition of a common asylum and migration policy and the fight against terrorism and organised crime, as Union’s key priorities.
Parliament restored its increase for the External Borders Fund to €170m to allow EU surveillance missions.
Heading 4, "the EU as a global partner"
An agreement was achieved on the Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP). While the Budget Committee agreed to grant the amount of € 159.2 million to the CFSP (initially set at this level by the Commission in its Pre-Draft Budget), Council committed itself providing European lawmakers with timely and forward looking information on planned individual CFSP actions and decisions. The up-coming mission in Kosovo is one example where the EP urges council to be informed.
After Parliament's first reading, 50% of CFSP appropriations had been cut and spread on a number of other lines of the heading, a move which struck a chord among key stakeholders of the negotiation on B07.
Parliament has stayed within the ceiling of heading 4, "The EU as a global partner". This means that, contrary to previous years, Parliament does not ask for the "flexibility instrument" (which can free up to 200m for non-recurring, unforeseen needs) to be used.
Heading 5, "administration"
Parliament defeated Council's approach to cut the staff of the European Commission. Nevertheless, the members insisted that a substantive screening exercise providing a mid-term evaluation of the Commission's staff needs is carried out. This screening exercise should comprise a detailed report on the Commission's staffing of support and coordination functions. It is due to be delivered on 30 April 2007.
After receiving the political commitment letter from the President of the European Commission, the Budget Committee decided to lift the € 50 million reserve on staff salaries. This decision has been confirmed in today's vote in Plenary.
One of the conditions for lifting the reserve was the commitment from the European Commission to integrate the Parliament's views in the revised Annual Policy Strategy 2007.
Other elements
It should be underlined that, with the adoption of the report on the Globalisation Adjustment Fund, 500 millions will be available from the EU Budget during the course of 2007 for this purpose, whereas the yearly €1bn European Solidarity Fund is also there to help Member States to cope with natural disasters.
Other institutions
The so-called "other institutions", for which Mr Louis Grech (PES, MT) is the rapporteur, deal among others with Parliament's budget for next year.
A notable element of the second reading deals with the Committee of the Regions and the Economic and Social Committees, which are expected to keep a single support structure, to keep costs in check.
2008 budget
The 2008 budget will be steered by two Finnish members of the Budgets committee: Kyösti Virrankoski (ALDE, FI) will deal with the Commission's budget, whereas Ville Itälä (EPP-ED, FI) will be in charge of the other institutions. Preparation of the 2008 Budget will start on 24 January 2007 in Brussels, for a first exchange of views on the guidelines for the following year.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Energy
A cleaner, greener future for EU energy policy
2006-12-18 - 13:47
The European Parliament says there should be binding targets for reducing carbon dioxide emissions and on increasing the use of renewable energy sources. These views are set out in a wide ranging report on the Commission's energy strategy proposals, adopted by a large majority on Thursday, 14 December. In the report, drawn up by Eluned Morgan (PES, UK), Parliament welcomes the Commission's green paper on a European strategy for sustainable, competitive and secure energy, but stresses that changing conditions in the broader global energy market need to be taken into account. MEPs want a systematic approach considering production, distribution and consumption in order to develop a policy which secures affordable energy.
A binding CO2 target for 2020 and changes in Emissions Trading Scheme
To tackle climate change, MEPs say EU leaders should agree within the next year on a binding CO2 target for 2020 and an indicative one for 2050. They say the existing Emissions Trading Scheme (ETS) needs to be changed, to include a move towards auctioning or benchmarking based on output - and also to bring in further emitting sectors including all types of freight transport.
Energy Efficiency to be a priority across the board
The report asks the Council and Commission to make the EU the most energy efficient economy in the world by 2020 and to set energy efficiency measures as cross-cutting priority for all EU policy areas. It supports an EU target for energy efficiency improvements of at least 20 per cent by 2020. MEPs call for an EU strategy on transport energy use, aiming at the phasing out of fossil fuel, a reduction in oil dependency and the gradual introduction of clean energy.
Targets for renewables supported - nuclear power is up to Member States
In order to help diversify energy sources, the House says the EU needs a stable long-term policy framework, with binding sectoral targets for renewables to reach 25 per cent in primary energy by 2020 - and a route map to reach 50 per cent by 2040. Parliament recognises the role that nuclear energy plays in some Member States as part of the energy mix and as a way of avoiding CO2 emissions, but says decisions on the future of nuclear power must be taken by the Member States individually.
Consumers at the centre of energy policies
MEPs stress that consumers must be placed at the centre of all future energy policies and that energy poverty should feature more clearly in the Commission's proposals. Consumers should have easy access to price and choice information, to an easy method of switching energy provider and a right to be heard by the regulators in each Member State.
EU should speak with one voice with third countries
Parliament says a common stance vis-à-vis third countries is needed to increase the EU's ability to negotiate with energy producing and consuming countries. The Commissioner responsible for energy should, say MEPs, work to a well defined mandate with a long-term energy planning vision. MEPs urge the Commission and the Member States to take very seriously the real danger of a deficit in gas supplies from Russia after 2010. They insist on the ratification of the Transit Protocol and the Energy Charter Treaty, which are instrumental in ensuring much needed foreign investment in Russia’s energy infrastructure and to assure sufficient gas supply to the EU.
Nuclear Safety and Security Assistance
The European Parliament adopted a report under the consultation procedure on a proposed regulation establishing an Instrument for Nuclear Safety and Security Assistance. The proposed Regulation is aimed at supporting efforts to enhance nuclear safety, radiation protection and the application of efficient and effective safeguards of nuclear materials in third countries. The substance of the proposal is to provide financial, economic and technical assistance complementary to any assistance that is normally provided for under the other external cooperation instruments for the years 2007 - 2013.
In the report by Esko Seppänen (GUE/NGL), adopted with a large majority, the Parliament adopted a number of non-binding amendments, where is recommended to the Council that "priority should be given to nuclear installations and activities which are likely to have significant effects on the Member States."
MEPs underline the importance of the "polluter pays" principle. The financial instrument should not be used "for paying taxes, customs duties or other fiscal charges in beneficiary countries". Considering that the large amounts of money involved and the mediocre past record of nuclear assistance programs in the East, MEPs reinforced the need for more frequent reporting by the Commission to the EP.
Background
Community assistance under this regulation shall be implemented on the basis of multi-annual strategy papers and indicative programmes and shall be established for a period of up to seven years. They shall set out the Community’s strategy for the provision of assistance under this Regulation, having regard to the needs of the countries concerned, the Community’s priorities, the international situation and the activities of the main partners.
The financial, economic and technical assistance provided under this Regulation shall be complementary to any assistance that is provided by the European Community under the Humanitarian Aid instrument, the Pre-accession instrument, the European Neighbourhood and Partnership instrument, the Development Cooperation and Economic Cooperation instrument, and the instrument for Stability.
Implementing biomass as an alternative font of energy
The importance of developing the investigation and the application of biomass and biofuels to become one of the most important sources of energy in the EU in the future is in the centre of the report by Werner LANGEN (EPP-ED, DE), adopted by the European Parliament. Members urge the Commission to work for a European market for biomass and call the Members States to eliminate barriers inside and between them.
Biomass can be an alternative font of energy in Europe and can reduce dependence on imports and fossil fuels. An increased use of biomass could make a contribution to the main objectives of energy policy: security of supply, competitiveness and environmental sustainability. Its use in heating and cooling, transport and electricity generation assures a noticeable reduction in greenhouse gas emission. Actuality the EU uses 4% of its energy needs from biomass. The objectives settled for the use of renewable energies in the EU are 12% in 2010 made up of a share of 21% for the electricity sector and of 5.75% for biofuels.
Members underline the importance of implementation of the cost-effective and sustainable production and use of biomass. They also ask the Commission "to introduce a mandatory and comprehensive certification scheme allowing sustainable production of biofuels at all stages, including standards for the cultivation and processing phases as well as for the overall life-cycle greenhouse gas balance, applicable to biofuels both produced within, and imported into, the European Union".
Member States are called upon to "promote the use of biofuels through the taxation and excise system so as to make the production and use of biofuels more attractive". The committee expects them "to come up with investment incentives for the production and use of biomass and biofuels that are the most efficient from a climatic point of view and compatible with structural and agricultural policy rules taking particular account of environmentally-compatible, regionally-adapted and traditional varieties; believes that such incentive schemes must under no circumstances lead to the replacement of sustainable local food production".
Given the size of the wood market and the potential uses available, the wood biomass is seen by members as an appropriated resource, but they underline that the market shortages an the rising prices must be take in attention. Therefore, even if MEPs endorsed the Commission intention to put forward an action plan for forestry they underlined that the use of forest biomass must not lead to increased pressure on natural forests.
The Parliament "is convinced that the sustainable production and use of biomass offers considerable advantages for developing countries and technology transfer with these thirds countries and (underlines that) the export of bioenergy technologies should be supported by the European Union". But this policy should be balanced and these countries should first satisfy their energy needs more than developing their export capacity.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Information
MEPs set new rules on TV commercials and product placement
2006-12-18 - 13:47
The European Parliament backed a proposed overhaul of the advertising rules for TV channels in Europe, including a new approach to product placement. In widening the scope of the so-called Television without Frontiers (TWF) Directive to all audiovisual media services, MEPs also voted to include a new means of broadcasting. Parliament agreed to allow breaks for commercials in movies and some other TV programmes every 30 minutes. Product placement should be soon legal all across Europe but subject to common EU wide limits.
By adopting the first reading co-decision report, Parliament also endorsed mechanisms to allow all Member States to adopt stricter, but duly justified rules and to enable them to fight abuses by audiovisual media service providers based in other EU countries. Several amendments on ethical and fairness issues as well as on definitions were adopted too.
The new legislation aims to update the 1997 TWF directive, now to be dubbed the Audiovisual Media Services Directive, to bring it into line with new developments in audiovisual technology and advertising. The Commission's proposal is intended to create a level playing field for public and private broadcasters and independent producers. It also aims to widen the scope of the rules to include new media.
Strict limits on product placement
In one of the most controversial areas of the directive, Parliament backed a new amendment brokered by Ruth Hieronymi (EPP-ED, DE) which would see product placement allowed in a limited range of programmes, and then only under strict rules.
Product placement would be banned in "news and current affairs programmes, children's programmes, documentaries and programmes of advice". "Product integration and thematic placement shall be prohibited in principle."
Member States could still permit it "in cinematographic works, films and series made for television and sports broadcasts", as well as in cases of "production props where no payment is made but certain goods or services are merely provided for free of charge with a view to their inclusion in a programme."
Even where they are allowed, however, the content and the scheduling programmes that feature product placement should, say MEPs, never affect "the responsibility and editorial independence" of the broadcaster; nor should they "directly encourage the purchase or rental of goods or services" or give "undue prominence to the product in question".
Lastly, viewers should be appropriately notified of the existence of product placement in such programmes, "at the start and the end of the programme and by a signal at least every 20 minutes during the programme".
In cases of production props the viewer should be informed of the use of any such aid "by appropriate means".
MEPs agreed with the Commission that product placement for tobacco products or cigarettes (or producers whose principal activity is the manufacture or sale of cigarettes and other tobacco products) should be completely banned. (
This ban would also apply to "specific medicinal products or medical treatments available only on prescription in the Member State within whose jurisdiction the media service provider falls".
New rules on advertising
The Parliament voted to limit advertising breaks in "the transmission of films made for television (excluding series, serials, light entertainment programmes and documentaries), cinematographic works, children’s programmes and news programmes" to "once for each scheduled period of 30 minutes" - and not, as the Commission had proposed, every 35 minutes, or the Culture Committee with 45 minutes. On this amendment, 324 MEPs voted in favour and 323 against.
Television advertising and teleshopping will have be "readily recognisable and distinguishable from editorial content". Television advertising and teleshopping will also have to be kept "quite distinct from other parts of the programme service by optical and/or acoustic and/or spatial means".
And the proportion of short forms of advertising such as advertising spots and teleshopping spots within a given clock hour must not exceed 20%.
MEPs also ask the Member States and the Commission to "encourage audiovisual service provider to develop a code of conduct regarding children's programming containing or being interrupted by advertising, sponsorship or any marketing of unhealthy and inappropriate foods and drinks such as those high in fat, sugar and salt and of alcoholic beverages".
Derogations from the country of origin principle
Derogations from the so called country of origin principle allow all Member States to adopt more detailed or stricter rules, provided that they are "justified for reasons of public policy, including the protection of minors or public security or public health or the protection of cultural diversity". Once a Member State considers that a broadcaster under the jurisdiction of another Member State takes advantage of the Directive "in abusive or fraudulent manner in order to circumvent such rules", it may contact the Member State having jurisdiction with a view to achieving a mutually satisfactory solution to any problems posed.
In an attempt to prevent any further abuse or fraudulent conduct, MEPs also clarified a set of criteria when a Member State may adopt appropriate measures against the media service provider based in another EU country. Such measures have to be "objectively necessary, applied in a non-discriminatory manner, be suitable for attaining the objectives which they pursue and may not go beyond what is necessary to attain them".
The European Commission would have to be asked whether the measures are compatible with Community law. If it says no, "the Member State in question shall refrain from taking the proposed measures".
Ethical and fairness issues
Under the Commission's proposal, Member States would have to ensure that commercials aired by providers under their jurisdiction do not include or incite prejudice or discrimination. The Parliament proposes additional conditions, saying commercials should not offend on the basis of gender, disability, age or sexual orientation, nor "violate human dignity."
Member States will have to ensure that programmes broadcast by media service providers under their jurisdiction do not contain "anything which might seriously impair the physical, psychological and moral development of minors, particularly programmes showing pornography or senseless violence".
Member States must ensure that audio-visual media services are gradually made accessible to people with a visual or hearing disability, and must submit a bi-annual report to the Commission on the progress they have made.
Member States must also establish a right of reply or equivalent remedies for "any natural or legal person, regardless of nationality, whose legitimate interests, in particular but not limited to reputation and good name, have been affected by an assertion of facts in a transmission".
Definitions and next steps
The Parliament did not wholly endorse the Commission's suggested definition of audiovisual media services, opting instead to modify the concepts of "linear services" and "on demand services" in the draft legislation. The former refers to traditional television broadcasting "transmitted... according to a fixed programming schedule", while the latter comprises services such as web TV or video-on-demand -- where the user requests the transmission of a given programme "on an individual basis".
After the Parliament's first reading, it is now the Council's turn. Once its Common Position is adopted early next year - probably based on a preliminary compromise agreed on 13 November 2006 by the Ministers and taking into account EP's amendments -, the draft legislation will return to Parliament for a second reading. Once finally adopted by both the EP and the Council, Member States will have two years to transpose the new directive into national law.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Regional policy
International Fund for Ireland: EP favours continued EU funding, but with new legal basis
2006-12-18 - 13:47
The EU should go on contributing €15 million per year to the International Fund for Ireland (IFI) until it is wound up in 2010, but Parliament should have co-decision powers over this funding, rather than merely being consulted. This was the message that came out of Parliament's plenary vote on a report by Jim Higgins (EPP - ED, IRL), on Wednesday 13 December, which recommends changing the IFI's legal basis. The change, from Treaty Article 308 (a common market catch-all clause) to Article 159, indent 3 (structural funds) would not halt the flow of funds to IFI projects already under way in Ireland. But it would make the co-decision procedure applicable, thus assigning a stronger role to Parliament than Article 308 (which provides for unanimity in the Council and only a consultation of Parliament).
The change in the IFI's legal basis was proposed by the EP Regional Development Committee on 23 November, on the Legal Affairs Committee's advice that the IFI's predominant aim of fostering sustainable economic and social improvement points unequivocally to Article 159 as the only possible legal basis.
The €60 million total proposed for the IFI is in addition to the €200 million which will be allocated through European regional policy to the programme for Peace and Reconciliation (PEACE programme).
The report by Jim Higgins (EPP - ED, IRL), was approved in plenary by a large majority and the vote to change the legal basis was approved by 419 votes in favour to 121 against, with 12 abstentions. Mr Higgins said: "To date the International Fund for Ireland has contributed €803m of funding and has leveraged a further €1.46bn in supporting 5,700 projects and the creation of 55,000 direct and indirect jobs. It has also played a crucial role in easing sectarian tensions and bridging divisions between the two traditions on the island. The guns are now hopefully permanently silent and the economy of Northern Ireland and the Border Counties of the South are beginning to realise their true economic potential. This will be the last time that we will ask the EU for funding for this programme as the International Fund will cease in 2010. We have had many false dawns in the past regarding a permanent political solution in Northern Ireland. However, my Irish colleagues and I are confident that we are on the brink of a lasting solution and that a devolved government will become a reality in the near future."
The European Community has contributed to the International Fund for Ireland (IFI) since 1989, three years after its establishment by an agreement between the governments of the UK and Ireland. At the end of 2006 EU support will represent about 57% of annual contributions, making the EU the major donor to the fund.
The IFI complements the EU programmes for Peace and Reconciliation in Northern Ireland and the Border Region of Ireland ("PEACE I" 1995-1999, "PEACE II3 2000-2006 and "PEACE III" 2007-2013).
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External relations
EP critical of Russian human rights record, hopeful on trade cooperation
2006-12-18 - 13:47
MEPs adopted a resolution on the EU-Russia held in Helsinki on 24 November. The document is critical of human rights abuses in the country, especially in the field of torture and the freedom of expression. At the same time, the House welcomes the agreement on overflight rights in Siberia and urges closer cooperation on energy issues. The joint resolution adopted "stresses the importance of unity and solidarity among the Member States" in its relations with Russia, while at the same time insisting "that the European Union show the necessary solidarity with all Member States, in particular Poland, which is suffering discrimination under Russia's trade policy."
MEPs noted that "the current situation in Russia gives rise to serious concern as regards respect for human rights, democracy, freedom of expression and the rights of civil society and individuals to challenge and hold the authorities accountable for their action." In particular, the Parliament is concerned "about the use of torture in Russian prisons and police stations and in secret detention centres in Chechnya," as well as about the "continuing series of murders of prominent persons, such as Anna Politkovskaya, who oppose the current Russian government." The resolution also "expresses serious concern at the measures implemented by Russia against Georgia" and calls on the Russian authorities to "stop the ongoing repression of ethnic Georgians living in Russia."
At the same time, the House "welcomes the agreement reached at the Summit to phase out the fees Russia charges EU airlines flying over Siberia," which clears one of the last hurdles to EU support for Russia's bid to join the World Trade Organisation (WTO). The resolution also "underlines the strategic importance of cooperation on energy [...] with the objective of avoiding oligopolistic market structures and diversifying the European Union's energy supply."
The debate on the resolution took place during the last plenary in Brussels, on 29 November. The main focus of the discussion was the Russian embargo on Polish meat products, and the recent murders of Anna Politkovskaya and Alexander Litvinenko, both outspoken opponents of Russian President Vladimir Putin.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Transport
Newly issued driving licences in credit-card format from 2013
2006-12-18 - 13:47
As from 2013, all newly issued or replacement driving licences will be in a single EU-wide credit card format, according to legislation given second reading approval by the Parliament. The new format will replace the more than 110 existing different models in the Member States. Member States will be able incorporate a storage medium or microchip into the driving licences. Limited validity will mean the data and photos they contain to be updated and new security features added periodically.
The House backed by a large majority the recommendation drafted by Mathieu GROSCH (EPP-ED, B), which is the fruit of a consensus reached in talks with the Council as a fair compromise between the differing traditions around the EU.
Ten year administrative validity
The new licenses will have a limited administrative validity of ten years, which Member States are free to increase to up to fifteen years. For trucks and buses the license is valid for five years. Member States can choose whether to introduce regular medical exams for drivers. The new directive will harmonise the existing classes of vehicles. For motorcycles a "step-up approach" will become obligatory in all Member States.
The new directive also seeks to combat "driving licence tourism": it says Member States must refuse to issue a driving licence to an applicant whose permit has been restricted, suspended or withdrawn in another Member State.
For caravan owners, the European Commission had originally proposed that a B and E driving licence was required. During negotiations with the other institutions, Parliament succeeded in allowing category B licence holders to tow a trailer with a mass exceeding 750 kg provided the maximum authorised mass of the vehicle combination does not exceed 4,250 kg.
MEPs also successfully fought for the principle of "progressive access" for riding motorcycles. This means that riders must accumulate experience on smaller motorcycles before moving up to larger engines. The age for direct access to the most powerful engines will be raised to 24 years. To improve safety for youngest riders, a theory test for moped drivers will become compulsory.
There will also be EU-wide harmonisation of the rules for training and retraining of driving examiners, setting out basic qualifications, quality assurance and regular retraining programmes.
Finally, Member States will have to ensure that the new format replaces every licence in circulation within 26 years of its entry into force next year, i.e. by 2033. Mr Grosch said: "I regret the length of this period, but I am confident that the changeover will in practice take place sooner".
Mr. Grosch also said that the agreement was reached after difficult negotiations and that it was a substantial step in the right direction, although he admitted that the final result was not fulfilling all expectations of those involved, such as Member States, MEPs and a wide range of interest groups. He also pointed out that "in addition to the necessary harmonisation at EU level, decisions are in accordance with subsidiarity left to more local levels wherever appropriate".
The common position was adopted incorporating five amendments on comitology.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Transport
Cutting car emissions: Euro 5 standards
2006-12-18 - 13:47
Parliament adopted a legislative report in favour of revising the current emission limits for motor vehicles (the Euro 4 standards, which have applied since 1 January 2005), including ozone precursors such as nitrogen oxides and hydrocarbons as well as particles emitted by diesel engines. The new standards (known as Euro 5) will apply from 1 September 2009. The new legislation also requires information on vehicle repairs to be easily available to independent repairers. MEPs adopted the report by 540 votes in favour to 87 against which amends the draft regulation put forward by the Commission under the Clean air for Europe programme (CAFE). They called for the new Euro 5 standard to apply from 1 September 2009 for private cars (M1). Vehicles with a maximum laden weight of more than 2,500 kg and designed to meet specific social needs - to take wheelchairs or to seat seven or more people - and light commercial vehicles (N1) will have until 1 September 2010 to comply. - The transition period for "vehicles designed for specific social needs" (ambulances, transport for disabled persons etc.) is until 2012.
Following transition periods extending up to 1 January 2011 (M1) and 1 January 2012 (N1) respectively, national authorities must refuse to grant EC or national type approval to new vehicles which do not comply with the rules on emissions or fuel consumption. MEPs regarded the 18-month implementation deadline suggested by the Commission - which wanted to introduce Euro 5 standards in mid-2008 - as too early.
Euro 6 standards on the way?
In addition, MEPs are already urging that starting dates be set for the next stage, i.e. Euro 6 standards, something not envisaged in the Commission text. They suggest 1 September 2014 for private cars (M1) and 1 September 2015 for light commercial vehicles (N1). Transition periods would run up to 1 September 2015 and 1 September 2016 respectively; after which date national authorities would refuse to grant type approval and would ban the sale of such vehicles.
Access to vehicle repair information
A contentious point of the regulation is access to information on car repairs. MEPs agreed a compromise stating that manufacturers must give independent operators access to information equivalent to that available to their authorised dealers and repair shops by means of databases. And to promote competition, MEPs say manufacturers should make training manuals available to independent repairers.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Youth
Agreement approved by Parliament to protect children while browsing the Internet
2006-12-18 - 13:47
Parliament approved the agreement reached with Council at second reading on actions to protect children from inappropriate content on the Internet. There was broad support for rapporteur Marielle De SARNEZ (ALDE, FR), who saw her recommendation on the protection of minors and human dignity and the right of reply in relation to the competitiveness of the European audiovisual and information service industry adopted without amendments. The Internet has become one of the most popular means of communication among young people, who have access to it at school, in cybercafés and on mobile telephones. As, for example, there are currently an estimated 260 million Internet pages containing pornographic content, it was considered urgently necessary for the EU to propose a set of measures at EU level to provide at least a minimum degree of protection for the most vulnerable and for minors. So Parliament welcomed a Commission proposal on the possible creation of a new top-level domain named ".KID.eu" (like .com or .org) with content designed for children. This domain could provide a secure Internet area regularly monitored by an independent authority.
Parliament also called Member States upon to launch information campaigns to increase public awareness of the potential dangers of Internet and to distribute information packs concerning tips on "safe surfing", protective filter systems and the use of free hotlines to be introduced in each Member State for registering complaints or reporting harmful content. Ongoing training should be provided for teachers and educators concerning the use of Internet and the dangers of online discussion groups such as forums and chatlines.
Council and Parliament also agreed on the need to instil a greater sense of responsibility into those working in the sector, who should do everything possible to avoid any form of discrimination, prevent the circulation of illegal and harmful content, ensure that it can reported when this occurs and introduce a quality label for service providers. Finally, the proposal seeks to facilitate exercise of the right of reply in all online media, a system which already works satisfactorily in the written press and audiovisual services.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Public health
Prevention of injury and promotion of safety recommendations
2006-12-18 - 13:47
Parliament adopted a non-binding report on a list of recommendations addressed to the Member States on the prevention of injuries and to set out Commission tasks supporting the prevention of injuries as well as the promotion of safety. Approximately 235,000 citizens in the European Union die every year as a result of an accident or violence-related injuries. This amounts to more than 600 fatalities caused by injury per day. Injuries also contribute to social and economic burdens, accounting for about seven million hospital admissions and 65 million medical treatments every year. In order to reduce these burdens, the committee highlights the issues of data collection and data quality, and stresses the importance of promoting safety as well as raising awareness of cost reductions from injury prevention measures.
This recommendation is being proposed in order to help reduce the amount of injuries across the EU, which after cardiovascular diseases, cancer and respiratory diseases, is the fourth most common cause of death in the Member States. Unlike other diseases, however, injuries are preventable and experience shows that when proper measures are introduced the number of accidents and injuries can be reduced considerably.
MEPs call for the Commission to submit a legislative proposal for the establishment of a Community-wide injury surveillance system, for the exchange of information on good practice and for the dissemination of information including precise details of financial implications.
The House points out that People over 65 years of age represent 16% of the total population in the EU, but suffer a disproportionate 40% of fatal injuries; thus the elderly run more than double the risk of encountering a fatal accident, and long bone fractures are the main cause of hospitalisation among the elderly.
Parliament says that Member States should pay particular attention to the social determinants that provoke injuries and insecurity: the biggest difference in injury, mortality and morbidity rates is between poorer and wealthier countries, and between social classes within countries. The gap is growing, due to factors such as increased road traffic, worsening inequalities in terms of income, higher unemployment, decreasing social support, market liberalisation and increased availability of alcohol, and poor regulatory and enforcement mechanisms. The unemployed, ethnic minority groups, migrant workers, refugees, and disabled and homeless people are particularly at risk.
Finally, the House also says that Member States should ensure that insurance companies that have access to injury data provide all relevant data to the Member States in order to facilitate the definition of the mechanisms and places where accidents most frequently occur and use this information to improve prevention.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-024-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Agriculture
EP speaks out for maintaining support to banana producers in outermost regions
2006-12-18 - 13:47
MEPs voted to keep compensatory aid to banana growers linked to their continued production. They also stood up for maintaining rules on producers' organizations, as well as the current system of advance payments. The House called on the Commission to review the policy in 2009, especially if third-country import tariffs change in the meantime. In a consultation report by Jean-Claude FRUTEAU (PES, FR), the Parliament expressed its opinion on the Commission's plans to reform the existing compensatory aid scheme for the banana sector. This scheme is especially important for the Union's outermost regions, which have seen increased competition from Central and South American banana producers.
The Commission had proposed shifting towards producer support by using the Single Payment Scheme (SPS), which would decouple payments from banana production. Members would prefer 40% of the national aid to be dispersed through a crop specific payment, and only 60% to be available through the SPS, keeping incentives for producers to continue cultivation.
For the same reason, MEPs also sought to maintain the community-level rules on producers' organizations, which play a key role in the management of crop specific aid. Mr. Fruteau's report suggests that affiliation to a recognised organisation be mandatory for EU payment recipients, unless their geographical circumstances make this impossible.
The EP also called for the system of advance payments to be maintained, which helps producers tide over the time period until October, when the first payments are made. Finally, the report argues that any changes in tariffs against third countries would necessitate a review of the aid scheme, since a fall in tariffs would need to be compensated for by a larger compensatory aid envelope.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-025-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Employment policy
MEPs give green light to new European Globalisation Fund
2006-12-18 - 13:47
MEPs adopted a legislative report on an agreement between the Parliament and Council on the Commission's proposal to establish a European Globalisation Adjustment Fund (EGF). The agreement will mean that the fund, which will provide up to €500 million each year to help reintegrate into the labour market workers made redundant due to changes in global trade patterns will be able to become operational as of 1 January 2007. In informal negotiations, Council had accepted most of the Employment Committee positions, expressed in the report by Roselyne Bachelot-Narquin (EPP-ED, FR), on the controversial issues a compromise has been reached, which has been adopted by Parliament today with a large majority in favour.
The European Parliament stresses that, notwithstanding the positive effects of globalisation on growth and jobs, it may also have negative consequences for the most vulnerable and least qualified workers in some sectors. Assistance from the EGF should therefore provide solidarity and support for individual workers made redundant as a result of structural changes in world trade patterns. It should not finance the restructuring of companies or sectors - only active labour market measures shall be supported and not passive social protection measures, says the committee. The EGF should also have the aim of stimulating economic growth and creating more jobs in the European Union.
Who is eligible for funding from the EGF?
MEPs want to guarantee that more cases can be supported via the EGF, a view which is included in the final compromise: Assistance should be concentrated on workers made redundant in those areas most adversely affected by economic dislocation due to changes in world trade patterns leading to a serious economic disruption, notably a substantial increase of imports into the EU or a rapid decline of the EU market share in a given sector or a delocalisation to third countries which results in:
- at least 1,000 workers lose their jobs in an company, its suppliers or downstream producers over a period of 4 months (covers the whole EU territory, not only specific regions as foreseen on the original Com proposal)
- at least 1,000 workers particularly in different SMEs lose their job, over a period of 9 months due to a sectoral crisis in a region.
-in small labour markets or in exceptional circumstances an intervention is possible if the redundancies have a serious impact on employment and the local economy, even if the above mentioned conditions are not met.
15 % of the fund's provision will be earmarked for these exceptional circumstances and small labour markets mentioned in point number three , an important point for MEPs who wanted to guarantee more flexibility.
Since economic dislocations are not necessarily concentrated in a single Member State, in exceptional circumstances, Member States may submit joint requests for assistance from the EGF.
What kinds of measures are financed?
Active labour market measures which may be financed via the EGF include:
- job-search assistance, occupational guidance, tailor-made training and re-training including ICT skills and certification of acquired experience, outplacement assistance and entrepreneurship promotion or aid for self-employment;
- special time-limited measures, such as job search allowances, mobility allowances or allowances to individuals participating in lifelong learning and training activities;
- measures to stimulate in particular disadvantaged or older workers, to remain in or return to the labour market.
Where does the money come from?
The Commission proposal says a maximum amount of €500 million per year will be financed through funds that have been under-spent against the other budget ceilings. The Compromise set out some detail on how this should operate.
When will the EGF be up and running?
The EGF can start as soon as the new regulation enters into force, at the end of the present co-decision procedure. Since the compromise has been adopted by the EP's Plenary, only Council has to adopt it now and the procedure can be ended in first reading and the fund can become operational as of January 2007.
Where will more Information be available?
Following a demand by MEPs, the Compromise states, that the Commission will set up an internet site, available in all community languages, to provide information on the EGF, guidance on the submission of applications and updated information on accepted and refused applications.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-024-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-026-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Culture
€10 million for the 2008 European Year of Intercultural Dialogue
2006-12-18 - 13:47
Parliament adopted, without amendment a recommendation for second reading on the Council's common position regarding the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue in 2008. The proposal has the overall objective of promoting intercultural dialogue as a process in which different identities and beliefs coexist. The budget is set at €10 million. The activities in 2008 will be developed around three types of action:
- co-financing (up to 80% of the total cost) of actions aiming at raising awareness of the objectives of the European Year, particularly among young people;
- co-financing (up to 50% of the total cost) of actions of a national scale with a strong European dimension;
- actions on a Community scale, including information and promotion activities and surveys, studies and consultation with national networks and civil society stakeholders to access the preparation for and impact of the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-025-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-027-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Customs
Security, competitiveness and efficiency through e-Customs
2006-12-18 - 13:47
Parliament adopted three co-decision reports all of which aim to revamp the EU customs framework to meet evolving challenges in trade, technology and security. The three reports -- on a modernised EU Customs Code, on a paperless environment for customs and trade, and on the launch of the Customs 2013 action programme -- all share one common denominator (and objective): the development of pan-European electronic customs. New Customs Code and paperless customs
As the European Commission has put it, the present Customs Code "is out of date". An entirely new code must be drafted to accommodate the new electronic environment for customs and trade -- and to address emerging safety threats on the territory of the EU. The modernised code aims, therefore, to do away with outdated procedures developed for a paper-based environment -- procedures, which, as the Commission argues, "increase the risk of fraud, [and] compromise safety and security at the external border".
With that in mind, the new code introduces the principle of electronic declarations and electronic data exchange between customs administrations: with certain exceptions, electronic declarations would become the rule wherever a customs declaration is required. Under a "centralised clearance" system, an authorized economic operator can lodge an electronic declaration from his or her premises prior to the arrival of the goods in question -- and irrespective of the Member State at whose border the goods are entering into or leaving the Union.
MEPs, aside from adopting a number of technical changes to the draft code, adopted an amendment outlining the criteria necessary to meet the status of "customs representative". The latter is a person designated to deal with customs authorities on behalf of any person who chooses to solicit him or her as a representative. The "customs representative" status, MEPs decided, should be "subject to practical standards of competence or professional qualifications", open to all applicants and "recognized in all Member States when it has been registered in the Member State of application". This issue has proved a bone of contention between the institutions, however. As Taxation and Customs Union Commissioner László Kovács noted during a plenary debate yesterday, "it is the Commission's firm opinion that the accreditation of professional customs agents is not a matter for the Customs Code."
Christopher Heaton-Harris (EPP-ED, UK), the rapporteur on paperless environment for customs and trade, sounded a pessimistic note when he said that his particular report -- which backed the adoption of the Commission proposal without any amendments -- is likely to be "stuck" at the Council for a long time. Member States, he noted, are unlikely to put up the money needed to finance its provisions (which are themselves meant to be symbiotic with the Customs Code).
Customs 2013
The EP also approved the Customs 2013 programme -- the successor of Customs 2007 -- which foresees, among others, the development of pan-European electronic customs and the expansion of international customs cooperation with third-country administrations (candidate countries and ENP countries). The six-year programme, aligned with the duration of the financial perspectives, carries a budget of €323.8 million, a large increase from the €157.4 million assigned for Customs 2007. It is expected to finance, among other things, benchmarking activities, seminars, communication and information-exchange systems, and other activities in line with the main objective of the programme -- the creation of an electronic, paper-free customs environment.
The Customs 2013 and Paperless Customs reports are both set for a first-reading agreement. Agreement was not yet reached on the new Customs Code.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-026-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-028-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Budgetary control
Bulgarian and Romanian candidates for the Court of Auditors approved
2006-12-18 - 13:47
Parliament approved both the Bulgarian and Romanian candidates for the Court of Auditors. Parliament voted by secret ballot (in accordance with Rule 162) in favour of the nomination of the Bulgarian Member of the Court of Auditors Nadezhda SANDOLOVA as a Member of the Court of Auditors. Parliament voted 561 votes in favour, 32 against with 38 abstentions.
Parliament also voted in favour by secret ballot on the nomination of the Romanian Member of the Court of Auditors - Ovidiu ISPIR as a Member of the Court of Auditors. Parliament adopted the report with 356 votes in favour, 229 against and 51 abstentions.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-027-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-029-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Women's rights/Equal opportunities
European Institute for Gender Equality to be set up in Vilnius
2006-12-18 - 13:47
The Parliament took a step forward to promote equal opportunities between men and women. It adopted a second-reading report, based on an agreement with the Council and the Commission, which will enable the new European Institute for Gender Equality to start work in 2007. Objectives and location
The Institute's objective is to contribute to and strengthen the promotion of gender equality, including gender mainstreaming in all Community policies and the resulting national policies, and the fight against discrimination based on sex, and to raise EU citizens' awareness of gender equality.
It will have a staff of 15 persons in 2007 (30 in 2013) and an annual budget of approximately €7.5 million (proposed budget for the period 2007-2013: €52.5 million). Following a Council decision of 1 December 2006, the Institute will be based in Vilnius (Lithuania).
The co-rapporteurs, Lissy Gröner (PSE, DE) and Amalia Sartori (EPP-ED, IT), welcomed the agreement. It takes into account tasks the Parliament called for in first reading such as to centre the Institutes activities on analysis and makes sure the Institute can be operational as soon as possible and in any event no later than twelve months after the entry into force of the Regulation.
Restricted Management Board
The Parliament in its first reading opted for a restricted Management Board to ensure an effective Institute. The agreement reached ensures a medium sized Board (18 representatives appointed by the Council plus 1 Member appointed by the Commission.
The agreement also takes on board the Parliament's demand to replace the Bureau by an "Experts' Forum" with members from competent bodies specialised in gender equality issues. Its main task will be to support the Director in the planning of the Institute's activities. Finally, the Parliament wants the nomination procedure of the Director to be open and transparent and to involve the Parliament.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-028-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-030-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Judicial cooperation
A new small claims procedure for cross border cases
2006-12-18 - 13:47
The European Parliament, in a vote on Thursday, 14 December, backed the creation of a European Small Claims Procedure to speed up litigation in cross-border cases. The new procedure would concern claims up to €2,000 and be enforceable in all Member States. The rapporteur Hans-Peter MAYER (EPP-ED, DE), before the vote, called on MEPs to support the European small claims procedure, "a simple, cheap and citizens-friendly procedure." The proposed measure would allow EU citizens to resolve contested claims in a simpler and cheaper way than through existing national systems. It would concern amounts of up to €2000. Unlike the European Payment Order, which concerns uncontested payment claims and which had its second reading vote in the plenary session on Wednesday, the European Small Claims Procedure (ESCP) deals with payments subject to legal controversy in another Member State.
In adopting the first reading report, MEPs approved the scheme, subject to a number of amendments. A notable change is that the procedure should apply only to cross-border cases, rather than be available also for claims within individual Member States as originally proposed by the Commission. This amendment reflects discussions with the Council on what would be acceptable to Member States.
The ESCP will be a written procedure. The Regulation provides for a specific form, available in all EU official languages, to be used to submit a claim under the ESCP. It would also facilitate the recognition and the enforcement of an ESCP judgment in all Member States by eliminating any intermediate measures required by a Member State to enforce the decision. There are some exceptions to the use of the procedure - it would not apply, for instance, to property rights arising from a marriage.
MEPs voted for the Commission and Member States to present an assessment report by 2014 to allow the Regulation to be revised if necessary on matters such as the threshold, court costs and the speed of the procedure. The European Small Claims Procedure is due to enter force in January 2009. An opt-out means it will not apply to Denmark.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-029-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-031-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Adopted texts
2006-12-18 - 13:47
Texts adopted during Strasbourg plenary, 11-14 December, can be accessed via the link hereunder. .
Latest texts adopted
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-030-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-032-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Agenda for 15-18 January 2007
2006-12-18 - 13:47
The agenda for the 15-18 January 2007 Plenary in Strasbourg will shortly be available on our website and can be accessed via the link hereunder. .
Agenda for 15-18 January 2007 (Strasbourg Plenary)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/public/plenSession.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-031-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-024-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-025-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-026-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-027-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-028-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-029-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-030-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-031-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-032-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-FULL DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-FULL DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-024-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-025-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-026-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-027-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-028-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-029-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-030-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-031-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061207BRI01143 ITEM-032-EN DOC XML V0//EN
