Human rights: Fiji, Burma and sexual abuses by UN forces in Liberia and Haiti
Human rights
2006-12-14 - 17:39
At the end of the session MEPs adopted three resolutions on human rights. They condemned the coup in Fiji, called on governments and the United Nations to take tougher action over reported sexual abuse by UN troops in Liberia and Haiti, and criticised the government of Burma for its continuing oppression of its own people.
Coup in Fiji condemned
In a resolution on the situation in Fiji following the overthrow on 5 December 2006 of the democratically elected government, Parliament says the coup showed "contempt for the Fijian constitution and the rule of law, for the people of Fiji and Fiji’s traditional institutions". It adds that that the crisis is crippling Fiji’s economy.
The resolution "strongly condemns the take-over of power from the democratically elected government of Fiji by the Fijian military forces and reiterates its strongest possible opposition to actions that undermine the democratic process". It also demands that the military forces "stand back and return power to the democratically elected government".
Democratic legitimacy of toppled government
Recalling that Fiji held general elections in May 2006, which were deemed credible by international observers including the EU Election Observation Mission, the resolution emphasises that "the coalition government formed by Prime Minister Qarase following the elections has full democratic legitimacy as well as a very large majority in Parliament".
Reconciling ethnic groups
MEPs also stress that "the future of Fiji’s multiethnic society depends on the credibility and legitimacy of democratic institutions on the basis of the principle of equality of human beings regardless of ethnic origin, as supported by all communities" and that "a lasting resolution of the current political crisis can only be achieved through peaceful means, respecting the concerns and interests of all communities". They therefore suggest a ‘truth and reconciliation commission’ be set up in Fiji as a contribution to peaceful coexistence between the country’s two main communities.
Call to suspend some aid and ban those linked to the coup from the EU
Parliament points out that respect for human rights, democratic principles and the rule of law is an essential element of the Cotonou Agreement governing the EU's relations with the ACP States. Moreover, development aid to Fiji worth 23 million euros was restored by the EU in 2004, with the aim of providing equal access to education and training for all ethnic groups. Noting also that the Commonwealth has decided to suspend Fiji’s membership of its decision‑making councils, the resolution issues a call for "the EU Commission and Member States to suspend immediately all non‑humanitarian aid to Fiji, as specified in Article 96 of the Cotonou Partnership Agreement, with the exception of educational programmes, provided that these are implemented by NGOs".
In addition, MEPs want "an immediate travel ban to prevent members of the military forces, their families or any person linked to the coup d’état in Fiji from entering the Member States of the European Union". Lastly, the resolution calls on "all Members of the Pacific Islands Forum and other regional and international actors to exert pressure to resolve the situation and to achieve long-lasting political, economic and social stability in Fiji".
* * *
Sexual abuses by UN forces in Liberia and in Haiti
In a resolution on the reported involvement of United Nations forces in sexual abuse in Liberia and Haiti, Parliament issues a strong condemnation of the situation and calls on the UN and its Member States to ensure that the perpetrators do not escape punishment.
Parliament expresses "its profound shock at the odious crimes attributed to UN personnel, including the trading of sex for food" and "condemns the acts of UN peacekeepers in Haiti and Liberia that have subjected children to rape and prostitution".
Honourable majority of peacekeepers betrayed by abuses of minority
It points out that, under the Statute establishing the International Criminal Court, rape, sexual slavery, enforced prostitution and any form of sexual violence are crimes against humanity and war crimes. It adds that the recent claims concerning children in Haiti and Liberia being subjected to rape and prostitution by UN peacekeepers make this the latest in a sad series of similar scandals.
There are nearly 100,000 UN peacekeepers in the world, and the resolution acknowledges that the vast majority of these serve loyally and honourably, but it says their contributions to peace and security "are undermined by the serious sexual abuses by a small number of individual UN personnel".
Governments and UN must bring perpetrators to justice
Pointing out that UN personnel expelled from the organisation for sexual exploitation are rarely prosecuted in their country of origin, MEPs call on "Member States of the UN sending personnel on peacekeeping missions to follow up all claims of sexual abuse and exploitation, particularly those which concern minors, and to bring those individuals who have committed sexual abuses to court as quickly as possible".
They also call on "the UN Secretary General to carry out further investigations into UN peacekeepers' and humanitarian aid workers' role in sexual exploitation and abuse of children and vulnerable people in order to put in place an effective monitoring system and enforce the UN's zero tolerance policy".
Concern over UN "culture of silence"
The resolution welcomes the UN Secretary General's announcement about a forthcoming strategy to assist victims of sexual exploitation and abuse as well as the use of DNA sampling to prevent further abuses. However, it expresses "serious concern over reports of a 'culture of silence' in some UN missions, stemming from the fear of punishment and retaliation" and therefore "calls on the UN to take all necessary steps to create a working environment enabling staff to report abuses without fear of retaliation".
Unless the UN can urgently put a stop to this behaviour it will have a detrimental impact on the credibility and moral authority of the institution as a whole, say MEPs, and some Member States may reduce the number of their troops at a time when there is a strong need for peace-keeping missions.
The resolution calls on the UN and the EU to support measures to empower women in conflict and post-conflict situations so that they are less vulnerable to sexual exploitation. Lastly, it welcomes the national campaign to combat Sexual Exploitation and Abuse (SEA) launched by the Liberian government and backs President Sirleaf's call to the international community "not to misuse [its] wealth and power to sexually exploit children and women".
* * *
Burma in the dock
In a resolution on Burma, Parliament accuses the country's State Peace and Development Council of continuing "to subject the people of Burma to appalling human rights abuses, such as forced labour, persecution of dissidents, conscription of child soldiers and forced relocation". The EP "condemns the SPDC for its relentless suppression of the Burmese people over 40 years and its total failure to make any significant move towards democracy".
Parliament says the National Convention, whose purpose is to draft a constitution, "lacks any credibility due to the absence of democratically elected representatives, most notably the National League for Democracy (NLD), as well as ethnic groups".
In addition, MEPs deplore "the SPDC's recent closure of five International Committee of the Red Cross field offices" as well as "other measures designed to intimidate humanitarian relief NGOs".
They also strongly condemn "the regime's brutal crackdown on several large ethnic groups", with "some 82,000 people forced to leave their homes in eastern Burma in 2006, bringing the number of internally displaced people within Burma to at least 500,000".
Tougher action needed by Burma's neighbours
Arguing that "Burma's neighbours need to take a more robust stance against the abuses of the military regime in that country", Parliament welcomes the fact-finding mission to Burma by the Malaysian Foreign Minister, Syed Hamid Albar, as a result of the position taken the previous year by the eleventh ASEAN summit, and "trusts that this will now result in tougher measures by ASEAN nations against the military junta in Burma".
The resolution also urges China, India and other countries which continue to supply weaponry and other support to the military junta to desist from this and to join the international community in its efforts to bring about change for the better in Burma.
Parliament welcomes the International Labour Organisation's decision to take its concerns about the SPDC's use of forced labour before the UN Security Council and the International Court of Justice.
Call for tighter and broader EU sanctions
MEPs stress that the EU's targeted sanctions have so far failed to achieve the desired impact. They call on the Council "to ensure that all Member States rigorously apply existing restrictive measures" and also "to expand the scope of the sanctions and to enlarge the list of those targeted, so that it includes all SPDC ministers, deputies, members, supporters and workers, in addition to their family members, and businessmen and other prominent individuals associated with the regime".
They insist that all aid destined for Burma must be delivered through genuine non-governmental organisations and must reach the people for whom it is intended, with the least possible involvement of the SPDC.
Lastly, Parliament calls on the UN Security Council "to pass a binding resolution requiring the restoration of democracy in Burma and the release of all political prisoners" (estimated to number over 1100), including Aung San Suu Kyi, who has spent 10 out of the last 16 years under house arrest, an illegal measure that the military junta extends every year.
20061208IPR01274 Full text of resolutions
-//EP//TEXT TA 20061214 TOC NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
