MEPs debate the Finnish Presidency and European Council with PM Vanhanen
Institutions
2006-12-18 - 14:06
As the last plenary of the year, Parliament held a debate on the outcome of the European Council summit held on 14 and 15 December in Brussels. Prime Minister Vanhanen gave an overview of the Finnish Presidency and spelt out the conclusions of the summit which focussed on further enlargement and progress on justice and home affairs. Many MEPs wished outgoing EP President Josep Borrell and outgoing EPP-ED group President Hans-Gert Poettering all the best in their future roles.
Opening the debate, Prime Minister Vanhanen said: "It is a pleasure for me to be here once again to talk with you in my capacity as President of the European Council. The meeting of the European Council during Finland’s Presidency was held in Brussels on 14 and 15 December. Today I would like to report to you on the results of our meeting. As Finland’s six-month Council Presidency draws to a close, I also want to tell you what Finland has done to move the Union forward over the past half year.
Last Thursday at the European Council we offered Josep Borrell our sincere thanks for all that he has done as President of Parliament, now that his term of office is drawing to a close. I would like to thank him here once again for his dedicated efforts for the good of Europe. Mr President, it has been a pleasure working with you. We have achieved a great many good results, for which I owe you many thanks. Your work has been much appreciated."
I also want to thank the European Parliament for all its support and hard work. Together, we have chalked up some significant achievements. The EU legislative framework on chemicals, the Reach Regulation, has finally been adopted. Consumers and business have both been waiting for this. We also managed to get the Services Directive adopted, thus creating the world’s largest market in services. And the seventh Framework Programme for Research lays the foundations for Europe's future competitiveness."
At the start of the Finnish Presidency, I said that the European Parliament was clearly becoming the place where thorny, complex problems were tackled and sound European solutions were found. That is still my firm belief and today I want to thank Parliament for its good cooperation and express my appreciation for its work. In an increasingly politicised Europe, Parliament is more important than ever.
The European Council conducted a thorough and wide-ranging discussion on the EU’s policy on enlargement, in line with the mandate given to it by the June European Council. If there is one basic point that bears repeating, it is that the Union’s enlargement policy has been a huge success. The Union has succeeded in uniting Europe and overcoming the divisions of the Cold War. Today, the EU is a proud and close union of 25 Member States – 27 from the beginning of next year. It is a pleasure to welcome Bulgaria and Romania to our European family.
Turkey’s membership was not on the agenda for the European Council. The decisions concerning Turkey’s accession process were taken at the General Affairs and External Relations Council preceding the European Council meeting. The EU is capable of making decisions. During its Presidency, Finland tried to find solutions that would lead to implementation of the Protocol to the Ankara Agreement and direct trade with north Cyprus. However, we were unsuccessful and so we were forced to take measures with regard to Turkey. The situation was clear: Turkey did not honour its commitments and that has consequences. But I want to stress that Turkey’s future is in the European Union. Turkey’s accession process did not grind to a halt during the Finnish Presidency, nor was it shunted into a siding. And there was no question of the much predicted derailment. The process may have slowed down for a while but the final destination is unchanged.
The outcome of the European Council is that the Union is still open to new members. Enlargement will continue and those applicants that meet the conditions set by the Union will be able to join. This prospect of membership – the knowledge that the Union is open to new members – is essential to stability in Europe; it encourages reform in neighbouring countries, as they progress along the European path. This incentive must not be withdrawn. One of the objectives the Finnish Presidency set itself was to keep the EU's enlargement policy open – not to close the door on deserving applicants. We succeeded. An open Union growing in strength: that is our future.
On the basis of the discussions at the European Council we can say clearly that the Western Balkans' membership prospects are real. The region's future clearly lies in the EU. That is of fundamental importance for us. At the same time, though, we have to make sure our enlargement policy is properly delineated. The corollary to openness is rigorous application of the conditions. There are no short-cuts to EU membership. Membership is possible only when the membership criteria have been met.
It was important that there was no discussion of the limits to enlargement. There is simply no place for them. No artificial limits should be set. The proper limits are based not on geography but on values. The construction of Europe is a work in progress while there are still democratic black holes like Belarus so close by. A disgrace to Europe. There should not be any such places left in Europe. At the European Council, I presented an assessment of the situation regarding the Constitutional Treaty. During our Presidency, we held systematic discussions with all Member States concerning the Constitutional Treaty. I shan’t go into detail on the Member States’ positions, as we are bound by the confidential nature of the talks but I do want to give you an outline of the picture that emerged in the course of the consultations.
The first thing to mention is the change in atmosphere that took place during our Presidency. When it started, people were still in a bit of a dream world. No one really wanted to give it active consideration. Now people in the Member States have started to think actively about the future and many take the view that the Constitutional Treaty was actually a well thought-out and rather effective package. But the dilemma is this: the treaty cannot be put before the Member States that rejected it in exactly the same form as before and yet, for all that, it is a well-balanced package. Upsetting the balance would cause more problems than it would solve. For that reason there is a broad consensus that restarting negotiations from scratch, as if there had been no agreement, is not an option. The institutional provisions in the Constitutional Treaty in particular are the result of long negotiation and hard thinking. It is difficult to reopen the negotiations without creating new problems. Furthermore, it is my own personal opinion that picking the treaty apart would be no more than an apparent solution at best. For instance we cannot separate Part I from Part III: the competences of the Union and of the Member States need to be clearly defined. And then Part II of the Constitutional Treaty sets out the fundamental values on which the Union is based. I don’t see how we could disregard those.
So far, 16 Member States have ratified the Constitutional Treaty. At the start of the New Year, that number will grow to 18, with Bulgaria and Romania. However, this is not a question that can be resolved by force of numbers. The Constitutional Treaty will not enter into force unless it is endorsed by all 27 Member States. It would seem to make sense to try and find a solution before 2009 when the next elections to the European Parliament are held and a new Commission is appointed. But the fact remains that the Constitutional Treaty is still on hold and we will be handing the baton on to Germany. We are looking to the German Presidency to take this difficult issue forward. At the same time, though, it is important that we use whatever practical means we can to push ahead with European cooperation. Justice and home affairs are one particularly important example. Our citizens expect concrete action to improve security and justice.
But justice and home affairs is beset by a serious problem . The need for unanimity prevents genuine progress from being made on police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters. And that kind of cooperation is important to our citizens. They are entitled to expect more effective joint action in improving security and combating crime. At present, however, decisions on cooperation are either watered down or not made at all, as we saw just recently with regard to the transfer of sentenced persons. The need for unanimity in justice and home affairs is a real barrier that stops us from making genuine progress. However, we do have a procedure that would enable us to make decisions on justice and home affairs more effectively. That procedure is the “passerelle”, provided for by Article 42, which allows us to decide, unanimously, to switch to qualified-majority voting. The Finnish Presidency was very eager to make use of this possibility but at the September meeting of the Justice and Home Affairs Ministers in Tampere it became clear that a number of Member States are opposed to it. And so that avenue is closed to us. That is why I welcome the fact that, in spite of everything, the European Council sent an unequivocal message that more effective decision-making on justice and home affairs is important, along with the principles set out in the Constitutional Treaty, and that means switching to qualified majority voting. That is something of a breakthrough and we should welcome it. Future Presidencies should honour that decision.
In this connection, I would say that, if there was one thing that I could change in the Union here and now – speaking as President of the Council – it would be to increase the number of decisions taken by qualified majority. It is without question the most effective, the fairest and indeed the best way of making good decisions. The unanimity requirement does not serve European common interest at all well in relation to any but the most critical of matters.
The European Council held in-depth discussions on the Union's policy on migration. In a spirit of solidarity, we all remember the problems that the Mediterranean Member States faced in the summer. The Finnish Presidency actively addressed the challenge of illegal immigration and the matter was discussed at the informal summit in Lahti in October. Now, at the December meeting of the European Council, we agreed on a comprehensive approach to both legal and illegal migration and we noted what a complex issue this is. Immigration is not just, and not even primarily, a question of better border supervision. The really crucial things are events in the country of departure, transit and an orderly immigration policy, which the EU so badly needs on account of its own aging population. Europe is not an island shut off from the outside world.
The European Council also confirmed the important results of the informal summit in Lahti. We all agree that Europe needs a more focused innovation policy. We cannot maintain our current level of prosperity unless we stay genuinely competitive and cultivate our skills as the basis for success. During the Finnish Presidency, innovation was put at the very centre of competition policy. Promoting innovation must be an integral part of the EU’s competition strategy. Now that the groundwork has been done, it is for the spring European Council to formulate some forward-looking innovation-policy guidelines.
Another essential task, if we are to safeguard sustainable economic growth and secure our competitive position, is to agree on common energy policy goals and engage in wide-ranging, global cooperation to manage climate change. These themes have attracted a growing amount of attention during the Finnish Presidency. At the same time, they were among the most important areas of cooperation discussed this autumn with Russia, the United States and our Asian partners.
The European Council’s conclusions on energy and climate issues demonstrate that more consistent progress is now being made. The conclusions prepare the ground for the German Presidency and the spring summit at which these issues will be high on the agenda.
On Friday, I received some direct feedback from the press. They thought that the European Council was boring, the dullest of all time, that the decisions lacked drama and that there were no last-minute solutions hammered out in the early hours of the morning. If it is dull for decisions to be taken in an orderly fashion and on schedule, then yes, I have to say that I am dull and proud of it. Europe needs concrete results, not contrived political drama.
I am convinced that a Europe of results is the best way of moving the Union forwards. We need practical solutions that make a difference to our citizens. Those are the foundations we have to lay if we want to develop the Union’s legitimacy, if we want to build major structures like the Constitutional Treaty.
There are 13 days left until the end of the Finnish Presidency. Naturally, we will remain on duty until the last minute. During the Presidency, one of the main priorities has been to strengthen the unity of the EU. We will not make much of an impression in the world if we cannot present a more united front in our external relations.
The early part of Finland’s Presidency was marked by a serious crisis in the Middle East, culminating in a serious conflict in Lebanon. I am proud to say that the EU took a strong and united position on the Lebanese crisis. It acted decisively to implement the resolutions passed by the UN Security Council and, most crucially, it was able to mobilise troops, which made for a sufficiently strong UN operation in Lebanon. The summer was a testing time but the Union came through it with flying colours. And I would like to say thank you once again to all the Member States for the support the Presidency received in dealing with this matter.
It is essential for the EU to be united and resolute in its external relations and to use a wide range of instruments to work for a better world. Since enlargement the Union has moved into the leading position in the world on a number of counts. We must take full advantage of this. During our Presidency, we have also done a great deal to improve the coherence of development policy, for instance: an issue of primary importance to a significant global actor like the EU.
One of Finland’s priorities was to strengthen the EU's policy towards Russia . Here too, the practical importance of a united policy is very much in evidence. At the informal summit in Lahti, we had a good discussion with the Russian President, Mr Putin and the EU succeeded in speaking with one voice to Russia. Russia is clearly an important partner for the EU. That much can be seen from a quick look at any map. Russia is important for the EU, we are bound together by many ties but it is fair to say that certain trends in Russia give us cause for concern. I am not altogether sure that Russia is heading in the right direction. We need to see a firmer commitment to democracy, the rule of law and the market economy. We do not want Russia to go in an authoritarian direction. We are fully entitled to be concerned at the way things are going in Russia.
Russia is an acid test of the EU’s unity. Finland would like to have arrived at a consensus on starting negotiations with Russia on a comprehensive new agreement. For reasons you already know, that consensus was beyond reach. I think the new agreement provides an excellent illustration of the problem we face: we need a strong joint agreement as the main basis for cooperation between us, and to provide a lasting foundation for trade and energy cooperation. If no common agreement is possible, then I am afraid the short-termist fall-back option is a network of bilateral agreements that would enable Russia to treat different Member States in different ways. Some will get good agreements, some will get bad ones and some may get no agreement at all. And yet a united EU is self-evidently important enough to Russia as a partner for it to be able, as a single entity, to negotiate a decent agreement. Just how united is Europe if we are competing amongst ourselves to see who can get the best conditions? That is not what European solidarity is about.
Presidencies start with high ambitions but real life brings us all back down to earth. We have achieved a great deal but some crucial matters have been left unresolved. Finland worked hard for a decision on amending the Working Time Directive and I think we got pretty close to achieving it. But it wasn't enough. The problem has not gone away of course and I wish subsequent Presidencies success in finding a solution to this issue. I am rather sad that this is the last time I will be representing the Finnish Presidency at a plenary session of Parliament. I have some splendid memories of good cooperation with Parliament and I would like to thank you all for the support you have given Finland in its endeavours. I believe that Europe’s future lies in unity. A united Europe where border fences are an increasingly rare sight. I am particularly pleased that we achieved a result on Schengen enlargement. That is the kind of progress Europe’s citizens expect from us as decision-makers. Once again, I offer my sincerest thanks to the European Parliament for its excellent cooperation."
European Commission President
Commission President José Manuel BARROSO said last weekend's European Council had demonstrated that the EU could move forward through a "Europe of consensus and progress". He congratulated the Finnish presidency on "holding fast to a Europe of results, concentrating on delivery".
A key requirement in this had been the partnership of Council, Commission and Parliament. In the past year, said Mr Barroso, there had been a move "away from seeing the EU as a zero-sum game" towards seeing it as a "win-win situation for everybody". Examples of such progress were the services directive, enlargement, energy policy, REACH, the 7th framework programme and the new Schengen system. "We have seen the three institutions more focused on results and less on Brussels turf wars".
Various lessons had been drawn. Firstly, the renewed consensus on enlargement recognised that the strategic need for enlargement must be balanced with the EU's integration capacity. "With the right preparation, enlargement is a win-win situation", he stressed. Secondly, on migration, in particular following the autumn's migration crisis, Europe's leaders had acknowledged that "it is not enough to manage the situation, it must be tackled at source". Given the need for more efficient decision-making in justice and home affairs, he regretted that some Member States opposed wider use of the passerelle clause.
Among other topics, the Commission president pointed to four quarters of significant jobs growth this year, which highlighted the value of economic reform. On energy and climate change, where the Commission is finalising its policy proposals, he believed "Europe's citizens will not thank the EU for timidity in this area".
Finally, Mr Barroso said he had the impression there was a "gathering momentum and will" by the Member States to work on the Constitution and he emphasised that "the Europe of the future cannot be built with the tools and instruments of the past".
Political group speakers
Hans-Gert POETTERING , the outgoing German leader of the EPP-ED group, first congratulated the Finnish presidency on its "famous successes such as REACH, the services directive and the 7th framework programme", and added the EP could be proud of its leading role in passing this legislation.
Turning to external affairs, he highlighted the EU's "difficult relations with Russia", saying while they had a difficult partnership, it must remain a partnership. Human rights were of great concern in this context. But above all, there must be "no bilateral accords": the whole EU must be involved in any agreements. On Turkey too, partnership and friendly relations were crucial. "But Turkey must deliver on its commitments".
On the Constitution, his group wanted a result before the next European elections and he hoped the EU's scheduled declaration in March 2007 would show the way forward.
Lastly, on immigration, he stressed that we "cannot accept death and poverty at our doors". However, a key part of the solution was to ensure "that people have a future in their own countries".
Martin SCHULZ (DE), for the Socialist group, believed that "given the circumstances, the Finnish Presidency has done a good job". On its watch, the EU had recognised both "its responsibility for pursing enlargement" and the fact that there could be "no more enlargement without reform". Indeed, "the people's expectations of Europe could only be achieved with constitutional reform".
Another message to emerge from the last six months was that "Europe needs a migration policy which is not just about restrictions. We need migration on this continent and we need immigration". But "if we want to direct immigration, we need the relevant instruments" - in other words, greater use of the passerelle in justice and home affairs. In this sense, therefore, last weekend's European Council had been "a summit of lost opportunities".
Reviewing the legislative achievements of the last half year, Mr Schulz highlighted the services directive, in which Parliament had played its role, "taking a destructive neo-liberal concept and turned it into a social market piece of legislation", as well as REACH, where a "reasonable compromise" between industrial and environmental concerns had been found.
For the Liberals, Graham WATSON (UK) thanked the Finnish presidency for ensuring that the Council had taken the overwhelming majority of its decisions in public over the last six months. He hope the Germany presidency would continue this policy.
Among the presidency's achievements, he listed REACH, the services directive, next year's budget and the accession of Romania and Bulgaria. He also saluted its efforts to use the footbridge/passerelle clause for justice and home affairs and called on German Chancellor Angela Merkel to do more on this front under the her country's presidency, saying " Europa muss handlungsfähig sein " (Europe must have the means to act).
On migration, he believed there was "too much accent on security and too little on the humanitarian issues". He welcomed the new emphasis on development, saying it was "not enough to have a rapid enhancement of Frontex" (the EU's border patrol agency).
Among the summit's conclusions he wished to highlight paragraph 5, which made a "strong statement that enlargement has been a success". There was "a need for the EU's leaders to tell our people that", he said.
On behalf of the UEN group, Irish Member Brian CROWLEY said the Finnish presidency's success had been due to "the four Cs: consistency, coordination, cooperation and consensus". However, unlike previous speakers he warned against use of the passerelle for JHA affairs, saying "if there is no agreement between Member States, there can be no action".
He welcomed the EU's "solidarity" vis-à-vis Russia over the export ban on Polish food products, saying the Member States must not give in. On immigration, he supported those who stressed the need to "look at the core reasons why people are running away" from their countries. The genocide in Darfur was an example of "a failure by the international community to react". In 2007, we must say "never again".
Monica FRASSONI (IT) for the Greens/EFA group welcomed the "generous efforts" made by the Finnish Presidency on immigration, climate change and the Constitutional Treaty. However, Ms Frassoni disagreed with the Finnish government's views on nuclear energy and the construction of a new nuclear plant in Finland. "On immigration, much more was agreed at Tampere during the last Finnish Presidency, " she said. Ms Frassoni said that her group could not agree with the outcome on the Services Directive and more should have been done on institutional reform. As to relations with Russia, Ms Frassoni stressed the importance of reducing dependency and the importance of re-launching investment in renewable energy sources. She thanked Mr Pottering and President Borrell for their co-operation.
For the GUE/NGL group, Sylvia-Yvonne KAUFMANN (DE) thanked President Borrell, Julian Priestley and Mr Poettering. She pointed out that her group could not agree with the outcome of both the Services Directive and REACH. Referring to Mr Schulz, Ms Kaufmann said "The Services Directive is nothing to crow about, the EU has not turned away from economic liberalism." Ms Kaufmann said that the Nice Treaty was not an appropriate basis for the EU to function effectively and tough institutional reforms would be needed during the German Presidency. "Social and wage dumping would only serve to lose the interest of Europeans, more should be done on social justice, she concluded."
Nigel FARAGE (UK), speaking for the IND/DEM group, said that the Finnish Presidency "had passed the test". The Finnish Parliament had also ratified the European Constitution, despite, "in a recent opinion poll only one-in-four saying they were in favour in Finland". The Constitution, he said, may be dead "but the contents are not, improving EU decision making would be mean more power for the EU". The Finnish Presidency's motto had been "to carry on regardless" with the German Presidency coming back with a new Treaty, "but in Britain this would not wash, the voice of the people will be heard."
Koenraad DILLEN (BE), a non-attached MEP, said that he too could not support the consensus of the larger groups. Mr Dillen said that negotiations with Turkey should be stopped. Referring to a fictional TV programme shown in Belgium on the independence of Flanders, he said that the Prime Minister of Luxembourg had said the Flemish independence would be "unacceptable to Europe". Mr Dillen disagreed and said that the Flemish people should have the democratic right to vote on its independence.
British and Irish speakers
Richard Corbett (PES, UK), described as "eccentric" Mr Farage's view that the Presidency was wrong to look for a solution to the constitutional crisis. Mr Farage seemed interested only in the "no" votes, despite the fact that 18 countries, and more people, have said "yes" to the constitution, he said, adding that any compromise must take account of the large majority that had said yes.
"But which text?", Avril Doyle (EPP-ED, IL), asked the Presidency, pointing out that the draft constitution had already been ratified by EU 18 Member States. "Do we now wait for a new one?" she asked.
Charles Tannock (EPP-ED, UK) congratulated the Presidency for its work on the EU accession of Bulgaria and Romania, and on relations with Russia. He also endorsed the suspension of 8 chapters in the accession talks with Turkey, saying that more must be done for Cyprus. Accession negotiations with the Balkans should be a priority for the EU's German Presidency, and do not require a constitution, he added.
PM Vanhanen response to the debate
Summing up for the Council, Mr Vanhanen rejected Mr Farage's charge that the EU plans to "carry on regardless" by saying that "it's not about more powers". On the contrary, he said, "politics is about giving those who have power the instruments to use it", and without quality majority voting, "we don't have the instruments at our disposal".
Mr Vanhanen echoed the view of Françoise Grossetête (EPP - ED, France), that EP contributions to major proposals such as the REACH chemical regulation had made "2006 the year of the European Parliament".
Looking ahead to 2007, Mr Vanhanen cited as major challenges: reaching decision on the European Institute of Technology, enlargement negotiations with the Western Balkans (which, he said, "should proceed in parallel with institutional reform"), and the need for a decision on the fate of the constitution in time for the 2009 elections.
He concluded by noting that Finland's experience in cross-party coalition-building at national level had proven very useful in similar exercises at EU level.
Commission President Barroso response to the debate
Summing up for the Commission, President Barroso noted that this would be the last EU Presidency with 25 Member States, and thanked Parliament for its support in ensuring that the Commissioners for Bulgaria and Romania could take office on time.
Replying to questions about EU relations with Russia, President Barroso set out his "doctrine" that the EU must avoid the twin risks of "business as usual" and confrontation, and instead seek constructive, positive engagement, particularly on energy issues. Russia "needs a stable partner as much as we need a stable supplier". But the EU must stand firm on principles, and notably human rights - "this is not negotiable", he said, adding that solidarity among EU Member States "has to be a cornerstone of our foreign relations".
20061214IPR01533 European Council conclusions 14-15 December 2006
EN
1
LINK
http://www.consilium.europa.eu/ueDocs/cms_Data/docs/pressData/en/ec/92202.pdf
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
