Parliament's mid-term review
Institutions
2006-12-26 - 08:01
In June 2004 people from 25 countries across the European Union elected 732 Members of the European Parliament to represent them at a European level. As the Parliament plays a crucial role in the decision making process in European Union affairs, this mandate brought with it substantial responsibilty.
We have now reached the mid-way point of the 2004-2009 Parliamentary term. It is a good time to look back over what the Parliament has been doing over the last two and a half years. This is the purpose of this focus - to present the debates, issues and controversies over the first part of the term. It begins with an introduction by Josep Borrell who was Parliament's President during this period.
Josep Borrell writes:
Thank your for your interest in the European Parliament’s activities. Two and half years ago you elected your MEPs. Today, quite rightly, you want to know what they have been doing. This focus aims to answer that question.
There is no denying that the EU’s constitutional project has suffered a breakdown. As a result, a debate on the future of Europe has been launched in all of the EU’s Member States. And come the European elections in 2009, a constitutional treaty, by whatever name, will have to be put to the electorate.
But it is wrong to claim that the European Union has come to a standstill. It continues to function, to look for ways to improve the lives of European citizens and to assert itself on the international stage.
From this focus and the website more generally you will see that the EU is making progress, and that the European Parliament is playing its full part.
The EU is making progress on consumer protection and public health. The REACH package will make it the only place in the world to have comprehensive legislation on chemical substances. Its airline blacklist is enhancing passenger safety. By improving the quality of bathing water it is providing protection against pollution. And the list goes on.
It is making progress on liberalising the internal market, while safeguarding workers’ rights. Indeed, it was the European Parliament that managed to find the necessary compromise on the hugely controversial Services Directive, demonstrating the ability of elected representatives from the 15 ‘old’ and 10 ‘new’ Member States to rise above the initial conflicts.
It is making progress on the international stage. Observers and troops from EU Member States are present in all parts of the world where international stability is under threat. Increasingly, the EU is playing the role of mediator.
And the European Parliament is contributing to this effort. Since July 2004 it has sent 33 delegations to 26 countries. In many of those countries EU delegations played a key role in ensuring that elections went ahead peacefully. Moreover, the European Parliament has received many Heads of State and established a dialogue with them.
The European Parliament is here to serve you, to serve the cause of democracy throughout the world and to serve future generations. I hope you find much to interest you in the focus and articles on this site.
Josep Borrell Fontelles
20061219FCS01663
Euro-elections 2004: the stage is set
Parliament's President Josep Borrell The sixth legislative term of the European Parliament opened on 20 July 2004 with 732 directly-elected MEPs from 25 EU members. All in all, 163 political parties, up from 114 prior to enlargement, were represented. Twenty official languages were now in use. Voter turnout had been 46% across the EU.
Politically, Parliament remained dominated by the centre-right EPP-ED and the centre-left PES, together accounting for a (stable) 64% of Parliament's membership, though the former slightly extended its lead over the latter as the largest group in Parliament. Also represented were the "Liberal and Democrat" ALDE group, the Greens, the European United Left (GUE/NGL), the Union for Europe of the Nations (UEN) and the Independence and Democracy Group.
A record 60% of the membership was composed of new members. This was a new, different and, in many ways, unpredictable parliament. It would have to represent the citizens of greatly expanded European Union in a period of widespread political uncertainty, a worrying global environment and, as time would show, growing fractiousness among voters about the direction of the Union. 2004 European elections
Making Europe work: Governance and Democracy
MEPs make their feelings clear on the Constitution Appointment of the new Commission
The new Parliament immediately asserted its role as democratic overseer of the executive, holding in-depth hearings of all the incoming nominee commissioners. Following these hearings, it expressed doubts as to the suitability of three nominees, either for a post in the Commission, for the designated portfolio, or both. One of these cases, that of Mr Rocco Buttiglione, made headlines across Europe. The President-elect of the Commission, Mr Barroso withdrew his proposal and came back with a different proposal meeting Parliament's concerns.
The "Future of Europe": the Constitutional Debate
The changing fortunes of the Constitutional Treaty profoundly marked the first half-legislature.
Parliament had some concerns about the text but decisively supported the draft Constitutional Treaty in a vote on 12 January 2005 (500 MEP voted yes). A majority (18) of EU members subsequently ratified the text, but the "no" votes in France and the Netherlands set the agenda, posing serious questions not only as to the future of the Constitution, but also the capacity of European Institutions to address the concerns of citizens about the direction and working of the Union.
It therefore launched a series of initiatives to address the issues head-on : numerous events, including public meetings across Europe, nationally televised youth debates and debates in Parliament with several European leaders. Parliament also realised it had to work harder to make a reality of the citizens' "right to know" what it does in their name. It therefore undertook major efforts to become more open and accessible through a completely revamped website, an innovative WebTV project and a visitors' centre in Brussels.
Making a Parliament of 25 states work
Parliament has proved the pessimists wrong by showing that a body integrating members from 25 countries using 20 languages can function effectively. Moreover, members from the new countries moved swiftly into positions of authority and influence, including among their number three vice-presidents of Parliament, four committee chairs, six delegation chairs and many rapporteurs on legislative and other reports.
Enlarging the European Union
On 13 April 2005, the European Parliament voted in favour of admitting Romania and Bulgaria to the European Union. On 26 September 2006, it confirmed the accession date of 1 January 2007, after a debate in which citizens’ concerns were extensively aired and MEPs pointed out that the EU can take measures should the new Member States be amiss in some specific areas, such as the fight against corruption and organised crime.
In a vote on 15 December 2004, the European Parliament supported the opening of accession negotiations with Turkey - 407 members voted in favour, 262 were against and 29 abstained. In successive votes, most recently on 13 December 2006, Parliament has generally continued to support Turkey's road to accession, although in the latest vote it agreed with the Commission proposal to suspend part of the negotiations because of Turkey's continued refusal to open its borders to ships and planes from Cyprus. Parliament has also spoken out when other problems have arisen. For example, in September, Parliament backed rapporteur Camiel Eurlings' expression of concern on human rights, the position of minorities, the situation of women, and numerous other issues.
Europe's place in the world - the world's place in Europe
Liberia's President Ellen Johnson Sirleaf A stage for world leaders
International events played a considerable part in shaping the first half-legislature, and world leaders look increasingly to the European Parliament as an interlocutor in a globalised world where the EU is expected to live up to its responsibilities. Among others, the following made official visits to the European Parliament: President Victor Yushchenko of Ukraine, President Evo Morales of Bolivia, President Ellen Sirleaf Johnson of Liberia, President Pervez Musharraf of Pakistan, President Mahmood Abbas of the Palestinian Authority, Prime Minister Faoud Siniora of Lebanon, President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo of the Philippines, the Emir of Qatar and President Mikhail Saakashvili of Georgia. Thabo Mbeki of South Africa, Hamid Karzai of Afghanistan and Ricardo Lagos of Chile have also visited the Parliament.
In December, Aliaksandr Milinkevich recieved the Sakharov Prize for freedom of thought from Parliament's President Borrell.
Parliamentary diplomacy and support for democracy
As well as receiving eminent guests, Parliament has maintained an intensive programme of parliamentary diplomacy outside the European Union. The President himself has conducted numerous official visits to countries of strategic importance to the Union, being received for example by the highest political authorities in India and China.
The often violent and tragic events in the Middle East have preoccupied and concerned the European Parliament. The region is one where the Parliament has a clear role as an even-handed broker, most notably thanks to its involvement in the Euromed Parliamentary Assembly.
As violence increased in the Palestinian Territories and a horrific conflict erupted in southern Lebanon and northern Israel, Parliament on 1 August 2006 was one of the first major international institutional players to call for an immediate ceasefire.
In the latter part of summer 2006, President Borrell visited Lebanon, following which Lebanese Prime Minister Siniora visited Strasbourg to address the European Parliament on the situation in his country. In very practical terms the Parliament moreover rapidly agreed a substantial aid and reconstruction package to Lebanon.
Financial instruments
Europe is the world's foremost donor of external aid. The financial instruments used to deliver this aid are therefore crucial. In October 2004, the Commission put forward radical overhaul of EU programmes, replacing over 30 legislative instruments with six. Parliament agreed with the idea of simplification but insisted on retaining separate instruments for developing countries and for the promotion of democracy and human rights (the latter used to finance projects in third countries even without the consent of the local authorities), in order to ring-fence these political priorities. After two years of negotiations with the Member states, MEPs successfully concluded an agreement with the Council reflecting their main demands in this regard. The deal, which covers the financing instrument for development co-operation for 2007-2013, was approved in plenary in December. Another key point for MEPs is that Parliament preserved its co-decision powers, which the Commission had sought to bring into question.
EuroMed- read more President Borrell in Lebanon
A privileged forum: the big issue Parliament
Increasingly, the European Parliament became the place where Europe's big issues are played out and the big themes aired for a Europe-wide public. Mention has been made of the succession of world leaders queuing to take the Parliament stage, but some EU leaders have been no less keen to avail themselves of the opportunity to debate with Europe's elected assembly.
Enquiries by Parliament: CIA “Rendition” Flights
European public opinion was deeply concerned at the emergence in late 2005 of the alleged existence of secret prisons on EU territory and secret rendition flights from European airports used by the CIA to detain and transfer individuals it suspected of terrorist activity.
Parliament reacted by creating on 18 January 2006 a temporary committee “on the alleged use of European countries by the CIA for the transport and illegal detention of prisoners.” This committee, led by chairman Carlos Coelho and rapporteur Claudio Fava, is due to report at the beginning of 2007. It has spent 2006 digging deep into the affair, holding numerous hearings with witnesses (including ex-detainees) and experts, undertaking fact-finding missions across Europe and in the US, studying a mass of documents and drawing on a wide variety of sources, often of a confidential nature. Its findings will be adopted by Parliament in February 2007.
Enquiries by Parliament Equitable Life insurance scandal
Parliament also reacted to another Europe-wide scandal by creating a special investigative body, this time a temporary committee of inquiry, with a remit to unearth the facts, failings and the responsibilities behind the collapse of the Equitable Life insurance company, which deprived thousands of Europeans of their savings. This committee will also report in early 2007.
Terrorism
The horrors of terrorism visited Europe and its citizens around the world in the last two years, uniting Europeans in grief and determination to defeat extremism and violence. The Parliament's commemoration of the victims of terrorism in March 2005 and 2006, on the anniversary of the Madrid attacks, took on a particular poignancy as youngsters from various nationalities took part in a ceremony affirming a spirit of resistance and solidarity.
CIA "rendition" flights Equitable life
Legislation: the heart of the Parliament's activities
Road accidents claim thousands of lives a year Parliament’s core business is to legislate, and its array of parliamentary committees have been no slouches in exercising the Institution’s powers, now extending almost entirely across the gamut of EU responsibilities, on behalf of the electorate.
Maybe partly because of a realisation that the Parliament is no pushover, a feature of the sixth legislature so far has been a marked drop in the legislative initiatives put forward by the Commission. A sharp dose of reality, administered by Parliament on the Port Services directive, has taught the Commission that legislative activism for its own sake won’t wash and that public opinion, expressed through the Parliament, is ignored at its peril.
Parliament has also taught Council a lesson or two in the course of the legislature, showing an ability to forge clear positions and build political compromises in a manner apparently beyond its co-legislator. This deal-making capacity has allowed Parliament to shape legislation to its agenda and pull the Council in its wake, most noticeably in two of the hottest cases: REACH and the Services directive.
The examples below are necessarily only a small part of Parliament's work.
Help for victims of motor accidents: Liability in the use of motor vehicles
This legislation, adopted in January 2005 under the leadership of rapporteur Manuel Medina Ortega, will affect millions of European citizens: drivers and potential victims of accidents, as well as insurers. It will make it easier for drivers to obtain insurance and will improve the protection of accident victims. For victims, it raises the minimum cover from €350,000 to €1 million.
People moving across borders will be able to take their car with them without insurance problems when they move for temporary stays as students or in their professional lives. It will also be easier for them to buy and sell motor vehicles abroad.
Professional qualifications
As a result of this legislation, adopted under the guidance of Stefano Zappalà:
Professionals can provide their services abroad, gaining experience and making their expertise more widely available.
Red tape will be cut since recognition is now automatic.
Consumers will benefit from greater choice while benefiting from national safeguards (such as professional indemnity insurance).
Professional organisations are guaranteed a greater say in the future development of the system.
The Directive is a good example of "better lawmaking" replacing 15 sectoral laws. It is also essential to the Internal Market, creating a system which makes, for the first time, the free movement of professionals with in Europe really automatic.
Pollution caused by ships
Under the directive, ship-source discharges of polluting substances committed with "intent, recklessly or by serious negligence" will be regarded as criminal offences. Under EP pressure led by Corien Wortmann-Kool, provision is also made for a feasibility study on the setting up of a European coastguard dedicated to pollution prevention and response
Pollution at sea Safe motoring
Legislation on the Internet, working time, REACH, software
Software patents was a big issue Safer use of the internet
The aim of this programme is to promote safer use of the internet (in particular for children) and to fight against illegal and unwanted content. The legislative work was led by Edith Mastenbroek who guided the Parliament to agreement with the Council on this dossier in September 2005.
Working Time in the EU
Huge publicity surrounded the progress of working time legislation through Parliament. Guided by its rapporteur, Alejandro Cercas, and in contrast to the positions of both Commission and Council, Parliament voted on 11 May 2005 to end the "opt-out" in the directive whereby workers can be obliged to work over 48 hours a week. The ball sent back decisively into Council’s court has regrettably not returned since, as Council seems unable to act with the clarity of purpose shown by the Parliament on this issue.
Software patents
In another high-profile procedure on 6 July 2005, 648 members of Parliament out of 680 voting rejected the Common position of the Council to introduce a system of patents for computer software, considering the case for this measure not proven and amid concerns that such a move would stifle innovation, particularly among small players, in an economic area which is vital for Europe's economic competitiveness. Parliament's vote marks the first rejection of a Council position in the second reading of a codecision procedure and will have a major impact on European economic life. The rapporteur was Michel Rocard.
Carcinogenic Phtalates banned
Rapporteur Antonios Trakatellis led Parliament obtained a total ban on the use of the six substances known as phtalates, which research shows to be carcinogenic, in the manufacture of children's toys.
Safer Chemicals in the EU: REACH
MEPs adopted on 13 December 2006 with a clear majority, after three years of discussions with the Commission and Member States, the REACH regulation on chemicals. One of the biggest pieces of legislation in the EU's history, REACH will set up a system for the registration, evaluation and authorisation of thousands of chemical substances.
REACH will improve the chemicals' risk management by forcing manufacturers and importers to register all the chemical substances produced or imported above a quantity of 1 tonne per year. For most hazardous substances, manufacturers will have to submit a substitution plan to replace them with safer alternatives. REACH will improve the protection of the health of citizens and the environment. It will enter into force 1 June 2007. REACH in full
Legislation on Services, battle over Port services, Airline blacklist
The Services Directive should improve mobility The Services Directive
This dossier, which seeks to open up cross-border trade in services, probably exceeded even REACH as a political hot potato as a result of its demonisation in many sectors of public opinion. It set Parliament and rapporteur Evelyne Gebhardt a similar challenge, once again prompting critics to comment that a satisfactory deal would be beyond its reach. But, Parliament displayed the same pragmatic toughness needed to find a way, in November 2006, to adopt a text acceptable across mainstream political opinion. Once more, Council simply signed up to Parliament’s offer, leaving the way clear for Parliament to conclude the legislation at the end of 2006.
Opening up Europe's ports : The Port Services Directive
January 2006 saw one of the more bizarre episodes in Parliament’s legislative history. Apparently unchastened by the unhappy fate of previous attempts to legislate in this field, the Commission had once again tabled legislation seeking to liberalise the provision of services in European ports. The first reading was held in Parliament on 18 January 2006, and provoked dock workers from across Europe to descend in large numbers on Strasbourg to display their feelings in a lively, but peaceful protest. In the vote inside, rapporteur Georg Jarzembowski led Parliament to throw out the Commission’s proposals by a massive majority.
Protection against Optical radiation
Rapporteur Csaba Őry led the way to the final adoption on 14 February 2006 of new legislation to protect European workers from exposure to harmful optical (light) radiation. However, Parliament spoke for the people, not to mention the emblematic Bavarian barmaids who featured prominently in European newspapers at this time, in excluding from the scope of the legislation the effects of the sun, wisely judging this to be a matter more appropriately handled by member state governments, more familiar with local meteorological conditions.
Data protection and retention
Parliament’s pragmatism also manifested itself in the sixth legislature in the fight against terrorism. Recognising Parliament is a serious partner to do business with, the UK Presidency involved it as a full and equal co-legislator in the highly sensitive field of justice and home affairs, on legislation on data retention. The deal was sealed after an accelerated procedure on 15 December 2005, with Parliament building in safeguards to protect the civil liberties of EU citizens. The procedure was not without controversy and though a large majority supported the legislation, the rapporteur, Alexander Nuno Alvaro, withdrew his name in protest against the final outcome.
Passenger Name Recognition
Parliament was less accommodating with Council on the subject of Passenger Name Records (personal information relating to passengers flying to the USA passed to US authorities). This legislation, which Parliament felt infringed on individual liberties and where Parliament had not been co-legislator, was legally challenged by Parliament in the Court of Justice, with the Court ruling in Parliament’s favour in May 2006. New arrangements were in place on 6 October 2006.
Airline Blacklist
After a summer of tragedy in the skies on 2005 the Parliament pushed for measures to improve the safety of Europe's skies. In March this year 93 airlines were banned from flying in the EU after pressure from the European Parliament. The planes banned were deemed not to be up to the EU's stringent safety standards. Services Directive signed into law Port Services: an overview Optical readiation Data protection Airline blacklist 2004-2006: a full round up
EN
1
PHOTO
20061219PHT01657.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/elections2004/ep-election/sites/en/index.html
EN
3
PHOTO
20051214PHT03753.jpg
EN
4
PHOTO
20061220PHT01683.jpg
EN
5
LINK
/intcoop/empa/default.htm
EN
7
PHOTO
20060706PHT09657.jpg
EN
10
PHOTO
20050819PHT00675.jpg
EN
13
PHOTO
20061220PHT01687.jpg
EN
15
PHOTO
20061116PHT12812.jpg
EN
21
LINK
/news/expert/tous_les_thematic_note/default/default_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060919STO10783 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061218IPR01606 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060920BKG10848 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060901IPR10226 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060629STO09354 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061213IPR01493 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061215STO01567 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060124BKG04626 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060209IPR05134 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061005STO11399 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060727STO09976 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
