2007: Opportunity, a Birthday, a Constitution, a new President...
Institutions
2007-01-03 - 09:03
As the EU celebrates its 50th birthday this year, hard questions about its future will be voiced in the debate over the Constitution. How to proceed will be a key part of 2007. This year is also the "Year of equal opportunities for all" where increasing the involvement of marginalised groups in society is the main aim. In January MEPs elect a new President - key places on Parliament's Committees are also being voted. Action on energy and roaming charges for mobiles will also be seen this year.
MEPs, including the new members from Bulgaria and Romania, begin their year with a series of elections to decide key posts in the Parliament as it reaches the half way point through its term in office.
On 16 January they will elect a new President, replacing Josep Borrell whose term will come to an end, along with 14 Vice-Presidents for the second half of the term. A week later Parliament's 20 Committee's and 2 Subcommittees will elect Chairs and Vice Chairs.
The EU turns 50
On 25 March the EU marks 50 years since the signing of the Treaty of Rome which founded the then "European Community": In half a century it has gone from 6 to 27 countries with more knocking at the door. The world has also moved on, the "coal and steel community" as it was first based on is slowly giving way to renewable fuels and Europe has been reunited after the end of the Cold War. The anniversary will be marked by a serious of events across Europe.
The European Constitution: a period of reflection draws to a close
This year could be the one when tough decisions need to be taken about the future of the European Constitution. In June Germany will round of its six months EU Presidency (before handing over to Portugal) with proposals how to take forward the institutional reforms that were foreseen by the Constitution.
The Constitutional Treaty was elaborated by a Convention including national parliamentarians, government representatives, EU Commissioners and MEPs in 2002 and 2003 and was approved by the heads of state and government in June 2004. It failed to be ratified however due to a rejection of the text in popular referendums in France and the Netherlands in 2005. EU leaders subsequently called for a reflection phase to bring their ideas about the future of Europe better into tune with citizens.
2007 - A year of equal opportunities for all
This year is the European "Year of Equal Opportunities for all" - the aim of which is to improve people's knowledge of their rights and to tackle discrimination in society. The year is divided into four main themes: improving people's rights, increasing the representation of marginalised groups in society, recognising diversity as a plus not a minus and promoting respect for minorities. If you want to take part, see the first link under this article.
International women's day
Within the framework of the EU's 50th anniversary the Parliament's Committee on women's rights is organising a special hearing: "1957-2007: The European Union and the advancement of women" on international woman's day .
Measures on climate change
This year could be a key one for measures to tackle climate change. The issue is a main topic for the meeting of EU leaders in the spring - MEPs have already signalled their intentions by calling for a 20% improvement in energy efficiency by 2020. This will go hand in hand with a 25% increase in renewable energy. The European Commission is expected to announce changes to its important emissions trading scheme as well.
Roaming charges for mobile phones
If you have ever made or received a telephone call while abroad you will know that the charges can be enormous. Since it involves more than one country this issue can be difficult to tackle at a national level. MEPs have already voiced their support for lower charges in this area and supported and encouraged plans by the European Commission for a new regulation to try and reduce charges. In spring Parliament will organise a Hearing on the issue and consider proposed legislation in this field.
Maritime Transport
Also in spring Parliament will consider ways of updating the "ERIKA" legislation on safety at sea. The aim of the original laws was to prevent a repeat of the ERIKA and "Prestige" oil spills which devastated the French and Spanish coasts.
Also this year...
Immigration issues, negotiations on a new partnership agreement with Russia, reform of the EU's wine market: these are just three other issues that also lie ahead this year.
20061220STO01669 European Year of Equal Opportunities for All (2007) Political groups in the Parliament Committee on Women's Rights and Gender Equality International Roaming charges: an obstacle to consumers travelling abroad A cleaner, greener future for EU energy policy?
EN
1
PHOTO
20061220PHT01696.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/employment_social/equality2007/index_en.htm
EN
3
LINK
/groups/default_en.htm
EN
4
LINK
/activities/expert/committees/presentation.do?committee=1250&language=EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060510STO08018 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061208IPR01269 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
