January Plenary session: 15-18 January
Institutions
2007-01-22 - 17:25
MEPs gathered for the first Plenary session of 2007 to vote themselves a new President, 14 Vice Presidents as well as 6 Quaestors who look after their internal affairs. The session also saw German Chancellor Angela Merkel set out her vision for Europe as Berlin takes over the 6 month rotating EU Presidency. Later in the week MEPs also discussed a series of reports on rail travellers rights and safety on Europe's railways.
In addition to this road safety was on the agenda with MEPs considering a mid-term review of the EU's road safety programme. The international arms trade and the case of the 6 medics sentenced to death in Libya for allegedly infecting children with HIV was also discussed.
20070122FCS02268
Borrell bids farewell as Bulgarian/Romanian MEPs join
German Chancellor Angela Merkel and Parliament's President Poettering The first Strasbourg session of the year saw MEPs formally welcome new colleagues from the EU's two newest members - Bulgaria and Romania - to the Chamber. Parliament's President Borrell expressed his "great pleasure and emotion" in welcoming them on his last full day as President. He said Parliament is "better known and more widely recognised today" and pointed to the legislative record and international election observation missions under his term of office.
After their national flags were carried through the Chamber, the 18 MEPs from Bulgaria and 35 from Romania formally took their seats. As President Borrell noted, their presence takes the number of MEPs to 785 from 27 countries representing 177 different political parties. "Enthusiasm" for Europe The Bulgarian and Romanian deputies have been appointed by their national parliaments. Elections will be held in both countries within a few months to allow the citizens to choose their representatives. President Borrell contrasted the "enthusiasm" for Europe in these countries with the "euro scepticism in our countries and capitals". The new MEPs joined the whole house in a minute's silence for the two victims of a bomb attack at Madrid airport over Christmas by the Basque separatist group ETA. Borrell bids farewell In farewell remarks to MEPs President Borrell singled out the growing profile of the Parliament as worthy of note. On the legislative front he noted the adoption of directives on Services and Software patents as particularly important - as was the Reach chemicals regulation. He said that without Parliament's cooperation, agreement could not have been reached. Internally he singled out the deal over MEPs' pay and conditions - the "common statute"' for members - as an important step forward in increasing transparency. On the European Parliament's role in investigating illegal activity he spoke of the committee MEPs had set up to investigate allegations of secret CIA flights involving terror suspects being flown in and out of Europe's airports. Human rights a "core identity" On the Parliament's role internationally President Borrell spoke of the election observation missions to 26 countries that had taken place under his watch. These include such places as Ukraine, Palestine, Afghanistan, Congo and Venezuela. On Parliament's annual Sakharov prize for freedom of thought he said human rights was one of the "core elements of Parliament's identity". Turning to the Constitution he noted that while MEPs had backed the Treaty they must now turn their attention to finding a solution for "crisis" the EU faces. On energy policy he said he was "convinced that Europe can find a new reason for its existence focused around the inseparable issues energy and environment". Ending on a personal note he was "deeply honoured" to have been President of European Parliament for two and a half years and he wished the next President every success
Borrell bids goodbye Welcome to Bulgarian / Romanian MEPs
Tuesday in Plenary: President and Vice-presidential elections
Internal voting in Parliament Tuesday was an exceptional day for the European Parliament, gathered for its plenary session in Strasbourg. The day was devoted to the election of Parliament's new President, 14 Vice-Presidents and 6 Quaestors. The votes opened the second two-and-a-half-year part of the parliamentary term. Hans-Gert Poettering was elected the 26th president of the European Parliament.
The previous President, Spanish Socialist Josep Borrell, ended his term on Monday. On Tuesday, the sitting opened under the chairmanship of the oldest MEP, Giovanni Berlinguer, an Italian Socialist born in 1924. He announced the start of the election procedure. Election of the President German Christian Democrat Hans-Gert Poettering was elected in a first-round ballot after getting 450 votes of the 689 cast. In his first presidential speech he promised to work for a united Europe where all nations, small or big ones, have their say. He went on to say that "the dignity of man, respect of law, and solidarity of the European peoples will be the principles of my engagement”. He also expressed the hope that the House will "judge his work in a fair and objective way." Three other candidates stood for the post: Jens-Peter Bonde, Danish, from the Independence and Democracy Group: 46 votes Francis Wurtz, French, European United Left / Nordic Green Left: 48 votes Monica Frassoni, Italian, for the Greens /European Free Alliance: 145 votes Election of the Vice-Presidents One of the President's first tasks was to preside over the election of the 14 Vice Presidents. As there were 14 candidates their election was a formality - however a secret ballot still took place to determine their order of precedence. This is the order of precedence of the 14 elected Vice-Presidents: 703 votes were cast of which 696 were valid and 7 were blank / spoiled: 1) Rodi Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou (EPP-ED, GR): 322 2) Alejo Vidal-Quadras (EPP-ED, ES): 300 3) Gérard Onesta (Greens/EFA, FR): 285 4) Edward Mcmillan-Scott (EPP-ED, UK): 274 5) Mario Mauro (EPP-ED, IT): 262 6) Miguel Angel Martínez Martínez (PSE, ES): 260 7) Luigi Cocilovo (ALDE, IT): 234 8) Mechtild Rothe (PES, DE): 217 9) Luisa Morgantini (GUE/NGL, IT): 207 10) Pierre Moscovici (PES, FR): 207 11) Manuel António dos Santos (PES, PT): 193 12) Diana Wallis (ALDE, UK): 192 13) Marek Siwiec (PES, PL): 180 14) Adam Bielan (UEN, PL): 128 Election of the Quaestors Since the number of candidates for the post of Quaestor was the same as the number of posts (6), the President declared all six elected by acclamation. James Nicholson (EPP-ED, UK) - 334 Astrid Lulling (EPP-ED, LU) - 298 Mia de Vits (PES, BE) - 285 Ingo Friedrich (EPP-ED, DE) - 280 Szabolcs Fazakas (PES, HU) - 267 Jan Mulder (ALDE, NL) - 265 For more information on the roles of the President, Vice-Presidents and Quaestors check out the links below. Hans-Gert Poettering elected President The President's role Political bodies of the Parliament
Wednesday Plenary: Chancellor Merkel sets out her European vision
German Chancellor Angela Merkel and Parliament's President Poettering Germany's Chancellor Angela Merkel used her address to MEPs at the start of her countries Presidency of the EU to restate her commitment to European values like "tolerance" and "diversity". She also said that installing a roadmap for the Constitution to "move forward towards completion" was a priority. Wednesday also saw MEPs debate arms exports, road safety and the case of the Bulgarian nurses and a Palestinian doctor given death sentences in Libya for allegedly infecting children with HIV.
"Europe is a continent of tolerance" Chancellor Merkel began her remarks by reminding MEPs that he had spent the first 35 years of her life outside the EU in East Germany. However, she said she preferred seeing this "unparallel historic success" from the inside. On her priorities for the 6 months ahead she also stressed action to boost jobs and growth in the EU as part of the "Lisbon Strategy". She also stated that foreign policy challenges like Kosovo, the Middle East and the Iranian Nuclear programme would be priorities. MEPs reactions MEPs welcomed the pro-European nature of her remarks. For the main parties: the European People's Party stressed the need for the EU to work more effectively - a clear endorsement the need for Treaty reform. The Socialist PSE group reiterated that real freedom could only come with freedom from social threats. For the Liberal ALDE the issue was one of open markets that could ensure a proper supply of EU energy. The Union of Europe for the nations (UEN) said they were "alarmed" at bilateral energy deal between EU countries and Russia whilst the Greens urged that any progress on the Constitution should not be "secret huddles in smoke filled rooms". For Chancellor Merkel's speech in full and more MEPs reactions see the first link below. In the afternoon, the MEPs debated a report aiming at cutting road fatalities by 20,000 a year by 2010, the situation of Bulgarian nurses and a Palestinian doctor facing death penalty in Libya as well as arms exports. Votes on these reports will be held today and analysis will be published in the "Press" service area of our website soon after. You can follow all the action from Strasbourg by clicking on the link below.
Thursday Plenary: rail travel, medics in Libya, road safety, gender equality
Railways featured on Thursday Strasbourg; protecting the rights of rail passengers and improving access to Europe's railways were at the heart of a series of rail initiatives adopted by MEPs yesterday. Separately, MEPs united to condemned death sentences on 5 Bulgarian nurses and 1 Palestinian doctor accused of infecting children with HIV in Libya, called for tougher rules on arms exports and moves to cut road deaths. They also called for more women to be represented at senior levels in the Parliament.
Rail: MEPs support compensation for delays, more accessible trains The report on railway passenger's rights adopted by MEPs recommends more information and more accessibility for rail travellers. This would include assistance to people with reduced mobility and removing any obstacles that make getting on and off trains awkward. Special areas for prams, bikes and sports equipment should be made available says the report. MEPs also support moves towards compensation fro delayed travellers. Also included in the "3rd railway package" are proposals to increase safety requirements for train crews and support for opening up international passenger services to competition by 2010. However, no date was set for liberalising national rail services - a move support by Parliament's transport committee - but not by a majority of Members. MEPs also want all train crews to have safety certification whereas EU transport ministers want just drivers to hold this certificate. Given these differences, the railway package is now expected to go to "conciliation" procedure where representatives of the Parliament and EU members will attempt to find a compromise. MEPs condemn death sentences on medics in Libya In a resolution passed by a huge majority, MEPs united to condemn the death sentences passed on 5 Bulgarians nurses and 1 Palestinian doctor. They were convicted of infecting 400 children with the AIDS virus in a Benghazi hospital in 1999. They have always claimed their innocence and their supporters say they are being made scapegoats for failures in Libya's health system. The Parliament's resolution expresses "full solidarity with the victims" and calls on Tripoli to annul the sentences. MEPs seek tougher rules on Arms trade Parliament adopted an annual report on the implementation of the EU Code of Conduct on Arms Exports. The own-initiative report by Raül Romeva of the Green group calls for the currently voluntary code to become legally binding. The report urges EU members "to keep under constant review the human rights situation in arms importing countries," and to "agree on a list of countries involved in armed conflicts to which arms exports should be banned in principle." It calls for the continuation of the arms embargo against China "until there is a clear and lasting improvement in the situation regarding human rights and social and political freedoms", and demands stronger EU support for an international Arms Trade Treaty. Along with the US and China, the EU is the world's largest exporter of arms. Cutting road fatalities by 20,000 a year On average 40,000 people die a year on the roads of the European Union. Halving this figure by 2010 is the gaol of the EU's "Road Safety Action programme". However, according to a report of Transport Committee there is a lack progress thus far. The report calls for enforcing the existing legislation and makes a series of recommendations, e.g.:
an EU wide zero alcohol limit for new drivers,
harmonising road signs in Europe,
promoting new technologies like seat belt reminders, alcohol interlocks and speed limitation systems. Getting more women into the work of the Parliament A report adopted yesterday by MEPs calls for more women to be represented within the administration of the Parliament. In the Parliament itself the number of female MEPs has risen from just over 17% after the first direct elections in 1979 to 30.4% in 2007 The report adopted yesterday by Anna Záborská of the European People's Party suggests the following approach:
having one specially trained official per committee,
providing the committees with indicators, data and statistics,
allocating budget resources 3rd railway package Medics in Libya Arms trade Road Safety Gender mainstreaming
EN
1
PHOTO
20070117PHT02132.jpg
EN
4
PHOTO
20070117PHT02118.jpg
EN
6
LINK
/parliament/public/staticDisplay.do?id=45&pageRank=2&language=EN
EN
7
LINK
/parliament/public/staticDisplay.do?id=45&pageRank=7&language=EN
EN
8
PHOTO
20070117PHT02134.jpg
EN
9
PHOTO
20070118PHT02215.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070112IPR01904 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070112IPR01903 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070115IPR01953 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070112IPR01912 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070112IPR01910 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070112IPR01911 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070112IPR01913 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070112IPR01916 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
