Third rail package: no agreement between EP and Council
Transport
2007-01-18 - 14:17
The House voted at second reading on the "third rail package" - three separate reports on opening up rail networks to competition, minimum rights for passengers and a European licence for train drivers. Competition will now be introduced for international rail services but not for domestic railways. On other issues, large differences remain between the EP and the Council, and this legislation is now expected to go to conciliation.
In a report drafted by Georg Jarzembowski (EPP-ED, DE), the Transport Committee had called for domestic railways to be opened up to competition by 2017. However, this position did not receive sufficient support in the vote by the full Parliament and therefore no liberalisation can be expected on this front in the foreseeable future. Regarding competition in international railways, Parliament voted to accept the date of 2010 contained in the Council's common position.
Minimum rights for all railway passengers
In a report by Dirk Sterckx (ALDE, BE) on minimum rights for rail passengers, the House voted to extend proposals on international passengers' rights and obligations to domestic rail traffic, arguing that "ordinary rail passengers should not be left out in the cold". This demand conflicts with the Council's position. Sterckx said that there was no point in drawing up a regulation which applied only to the 5% rail passengers who use international train services. European citizens should, in the event of problems, be entitled to certain minimum rights.
The matters regulated by this proposal include information for passengers, liability in the event of death or injury and assistance to persons with reduced mobility. The House is also in favour of a system of compensation for delays: 25% of the fare for a delay of 60 minutes or more and 50% for a delay of 120 minutes or more, but only if the operator can be held responsible for the delay. Furthermore, rail operators must ensure that stations, platforms and means of transport are accessible, by eliminating all obstacles to boarding, disembarkation and remaining on board. And in future all trains should provide a specially designated area of the train for baby carriages, bicycles and sports equipment.
Towards a European licence for train drivers
A report on certification of train drivers, drafted by Gilles Savary (PES, FR), was also adopted. Whereas the Council wishes only train drivers to be covered by the directive, Parliament says that other crew members performing safety-related tasks should be in possession of a certificate attesting that they meet minimum requirements relating to medical fitness, basic education and general professional skills.
20070112IPR01912 Development of the Community's railways Certification of train drivers operating locomotives and trains on the railway system in the Community International rail passengers' rights and obligations
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=241532
EN
2
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=241512
EN
3
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=241522
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
