Implementation of gender mainstreaming in the work of EP committees
Women's rights/Equal opportunities
2007-01-18 - 13:41
The implementation of gender mainstreaming in the work of EP committee is examined in a report put forward by the Women's Rights Committee. The report points out that, the number of female MEPs has steadily increased over the years, from 17.5% in 1979 to 30.33% in 2004 and 30.45 % including Romanian and Bulgarian MEPs.
However, within Parliament's administration women were under-represented in positions of responsibility in bodies responsible for taking political decisions.
The own-initiative report drafted by Anna Záborská (EPP-ED, SK) stresses that "gender mainstreaming will lead to positive developments for both women and men" and that "gender mainstreaming cannot replace specific policies which aim to redress situations resulting from gender inequality". Gender mainstreaming is to make sure that a the goal of gender equality is central to all activates.
The majority of committees express views in favour of gender mainstreaming, but most committees have established their future political priorities without including any mainstreaming strategy.
The report stresses the important role the political groups can play to encourage and support women and make it possible for them to participate fully in public life by implementing and evaluating gender mainstreaming in their programmes and activities and by encouraging women to become more involved in European Parliament elections and national elections. MEPs call on political parties across Europe "to provide for the introduction of a compulsory quota system on their lists for any collective body." The report also stresses the importance of the mandate of the Parliament's High-Level Group on Gender Equality and calls on the group to continue promoting priorities on gender mainstreaming.
The report finally gives a number of proposals, for example to adopt within the Parliament's administration a gender mainstreaming strategy with specific targets in Community policies, the creation of a network of committee secretariats officials, continue training of officials in gender mainstreaming, appropriate tools to committees to gain a sound understanding of gender mainstreaming and equality training for MEPs before next parliamentary term.
20070112IPR01916 Equality between men and women: Gender mainstreaming in the work of the committees
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5262082
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
