Hoon tells MEPs: EU enlargement is a success story
External relations
United Kingdom
2007-01-23 - 20:02
UK Minister for Europe Geoff Hoon - enlargement has been a success story
"The EU needs its success stories. At a time when the Union must reconnect to its citizens and show the practical benefits of European cooperation, enlargement should be displayed as one of the EU’s greatest achievements. " This was the message of the UK Minister for Europe Geoff Hoon in his opening address to the European Parliament Foreign Affairs Committee on 23 January in Brussels.
Speaking on why enlargement of the EU was necessary, Mr Hoon said: "I sincerely believe that enlargement is not only a major success, but an essential component in fulfilling our commitment to stability, prosperity and justice in our neighbourhood… The foundation of the EU’s extraordinary “soft power”, the reason why more than any other international organisation it has transformed the world around it, has been the prospect of membership. In the case of Turkey, Croatia, or the Western Balkans offering them anything else at this stage would be to go back on our word. For other countries, if we want to encourage them down the right road – which is in their interests and ours – we should not rule out the ultimate destination. "
No universal agreement on benefits
Sounding a note of caution as to other Member States' views on enlargement, the Minister said: "I recognise that the UK’s strong support for enlargement of the Union is not universally shared. I recognise concerns that the EU has expanded too fast, that we need time to absorb the new members. Public support in many of the older Member states has dipped. There are certainly fears about migration and crime."
Turkey
Mr Hoon spoke strongly in favour of eventual Turkish membership of the EU: " The strategic case for Turkish membership is at least as compelling as it is for any other country, in fact probably more so. It has shown that it can deliver real successes, working with us, on tackling terrorism, organised crime, illegal migration and trafficking. And, perhaps most of all, at a time when some people are peddling the idea of an inevitable clash of civilisations it is an immensely powerful symbol that European values can be Muslim values and vice-versa." Nevertheless, there were still many problems to be solved, Mr Hoon said: " The challenge now is for Turkey to address areas of continuing concern such as freedom of expression, where we strongly support Commissioner Rehn’s view that Article 301 should be amended or repealed."
Further enlargement
In response to a question from Charles Tannock MEP (Conservative, EPP-ED, UK) on the southern caucuses, Minister Hoon said that it was important that the so-called "frozen conflicts should not melt." These regions are potential "flash-points" with passions running high not least over relations with Russia. Mr Hoon did not regard the European Neighbourhood Programme (ENP) as "a stepping stone to membership", but the door was open to Ukraine for full membership as was the case for "all European nations."
Co-operation with EP committee on extraordinary renditions
Responding to questions from Baroness Ludford (Liberal Democrat, ALDE, UK) on the adoption by the report by the Temporary Committee on the alleged use of European countries by the CIA for the transport and illegal detention of prisoners, Mr Hoon said that he regretted that the issue had become "personal". No Minister would ever mislead the House of Commons, a thorough investigation had taken place when Jack Straw was the Foreign Secretary and the full details had been set out to the UK Parliament, he said. Mr Hoon stated that he had received advice not to give evidence to the temporary committee but out of respect for the committee and the European Parliament he had done so.
Support for the EU in the UK
Finally, questioned by Gary Titley (Labour, PES, UK) on how to better sell enlargement to the people, Mr Hoon said that the EU was at its most popular when there was debate about it. The EU, he stated had been at its most popular during both the 1975 UK referendum and at the time of wide debate on the ratification of the Maastricht Treaty in the early 1990s. "It was important to spell out the benefits of enlargement and not take popular support for granted."
20070122IPR02306 All UK MEPs by region Minister for Europe Geoff Hoon on Foreign and Commonwealth Office website
EN
1
PHOTO
20061130PHT00844.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/members/public/geoSearch/zoneList.do;jsessionid=DE9F10EED2C7D5F3737CDB55B6B97549.node1?country=GB&language=EN
EN
3
LINK
http://www.fco.gov.uk/servlet/Front?pagename=OpenMarket/Xcelerate/ShowPage&c=Page&cid=1145893934089
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
