We do not support terrorist groups, says Pakistani Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz
External relations
2007-01-30 - 14:37
In a discussion with MEPs, Pakistani Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz maintained that his country is a functioning democracy, and denied any government support for terrorist groups on the border with Afghanistan. He also highlighted the huge problems stemming from the numerous refugee camps in that area, and reaffirmed that the Kashmir dispute needed to be solved by involving all stakeholders.
Noting signs of progress on the domestic front--such as the increasing role of women in public life--Mr Aziz declared that "Pakistan is a functioning democracy, with an active opposition, a free press and free and fair elections." MEP Ana Gomes (PES, PT) asked whether President Pervez Musharraf intended retaining his dual roles of President as well as Chief of the Armed Forces. Mr Aziz replied that "President Musharraf is Chief of the Army and President according to laws passed by Parliament." He insisted that "we must all learn to respect the laws of every country...they are sacred."
Ms Gomes also inquired why the trial of the former leader of the Balochistan National Party, Akhtar Mengal, was being held in secret. The Prime Minister replied that "Mr Mengal is being tried under our laws, and has access to legal counsel," and that "we are having the trial in a secure environment for his security."
Pakistan's borders: Iran, Kashmir and Afghanistan
Geoffrey Van Orden (EPP-ED, UK) and others asked about the recent reports that the Taliban had set up its headquarters in Quetta, in North-Western Pakistan, with at least tacit support from the Pakistani armed forces. Mr Aziz rejected these claims, saying "we dismiss any allegation of institutional support for terrorist groups." He explained, however, that Quetta has 600 000 Afghans living in refugee camps, which may be "safe havens for some elements out of Afghanistan" as well as fertile recruiting grounds for terrorism.
He therefore outlined his government's actions, which include installing biometric systems at some border crossings, as well as plans to "selectively fence off some parts of the border." With respect to Afghanistan in general, Mr Aziz said that any strategy needs to have three main thrusts: returning the approximately 3 million Afghan refugees from Pakistan, curbing poppy production to break the "drugs-terrorism nexus" and a "type of Marshall plan for reconstruction."
MEP Janusz Onyszkiewicz (ALDE, PL) asked what Pakistan was doing to curb the proliferation of nuclear weapons. Mr Aziz replied that Pakistan does not promote proliferation, and that in his view, "any country that is a signatory to the NPT [non-proliferation treaty] should obey by its rules."
Finally, on the protracted conflict between India and Pakistan over Kashmir, Mr Aziz said that the only possible solution lay in diplomatic negotiations that would involve all parties concerned: India, Pakistan, and the Kashmiri people. He said there were some encouraging signs, such as proposals for the demilitarization of the region, but also admitted that a final resolution was still not in sight for the short term.
2007-01-30 Committee on Foreign Affairs In the Chair: Elmar Brok EPP-ED DE
20070129IPR02492 Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf in the EP (September 2006): EP Press Release
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060908IPR10492 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
