Parliament seeks to facilitate free movement and mobility of workers
Free movement of persons
2006-12-05 - 18:47
Opening up all EU labour markets to workers from anywhere in the European Union is an important aim for the European Parliament, which has addressed this issue in several reports, especially during 2006, the European Year of Workers' Mobility. Working in new countries and/or sectors gives workers new skills and additional experience, benefiting both them and their employers. Reskilling is also vital in a globalised and restructuring economic environment. To facilitate labour mobility, restrictions on the free movement of workers from Central and East European EU Member States to the EU 15 need to be lifted, workers temporarily posted to another EU Member State must be adequately protected, and transferring supplementary pension rights from one Member State to another needs to be made easier.
The free movement of workers is one of the four fundamental freedoms enshrined in the EC Treaty (along with that of goods, services and capital). It has existed since 1957. Although much has been done to facilitate free movement, mobility remains very low. About 1.5% of EU-25 citizens live and work in a Member State other than their country of origin – a proportion that has hardly changed in the last 30 years. In 2003, 8.2% of the EU’s total employed labour force had moved to another job after one year. Workers in the EU stay in the same job for an average of 10.6 years, compared to 6.7 years in the US. (Source: labour force survey 2003, Eurostat, European Commission).
20061201TMN00890
Transitional arrangements for workers from the new Member States
Free movement is not yet available to all EU workers. The 15 "old" Member States are entitled to restrict the access to their labour markets of workers from eight of the "new" Member States of Central and Eastern Europe which joined the EU in 2004 (all except Cyprus and Malta) for up to seven years (until 2011). In practice, this means that workers from most new Member States need work permits to get jobs in the old ones.
In May 2006 the 15 "old" Member States had to decide whether they wanted to lift these transitional labour market access restrictions or extend them until 2009.
The European Parliament has no formal power to decide Member States' labour mobility policy, but, in a resolution adopted on 5 April 2006, in the run-up to the May 2006 decision, it did call on them "to abolish the transitional measures in force, given that there are no signs of strain on the labour markets of the Member States which have opted for openness without restrictions and that the fears of massive migration have proved groundless". Parliament stressed that the free movement of workers is one of the four fundamental freedoms of the EC Treaty, as well as an expression of solidarity between old and new Member States.
At the moment, eight Member States (Finland, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal, Spain, Sweden and the UK) are totally open to workers from the 10 countries that joined in 2004. Two Member States, Germany and Austria, will not lift the restrictions. Other pre-2004 Member States have retained certain restrictions, but may remove them gradually before the 2011 deadline. Transitional arrangements restricting the free movement of workers: EP procedure file
Getting a better deal for workers posted abroad in the EU
Parliament also debated a far more technical dossier, the Directive on the posting of workers. Members of the European Parliament are concerned that this directive (which has been adopted already in 1993) is not being implemented properly in some Member States and is therefore failing to achieve its aims. They call for urgent action by the Commission and Member States to change this situation. So far, however, they are not asking for changes in the Directive.
The Directive applies to companies that send employees to work temporarily in a Member State other than the one under whose laws they are employed. It seeks to guarantee the free movement of persons and services while ensuring that posted employees benefit from certain minimum protective provisions of the Member State in which they are working.
Following the deletion by Parliament of Articles 24 and 25 (on the posting of workers) from the proposed services directive, the Commission has drawn up guidelines on the interpretation of European Court of Justice case law on posting of workers. MEPs welcome this move, but are concerned that in some cases the Commission goes beyond the Court's judgements and ask for corrections. Application of Directive 96/71/EC on the posting of workers: EP procedure file
Portability of supplementary pension rights
In spring 2006, Parliament started debating a proposal for a directive dealing with supplementary pension schemes covering the risks of old age. This proposal aims to help workers to exercise their rights to occupational mobility within Member States and to free movement among them, by reducing the obstacles created by certain rules governing supplementary pension schemes in the Member States. Parliament's first reading of this dossier is not expected before the beginning of 2007. Supplementary pension schemes and workers mobility: EP procedure file
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5312942
EN
2
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5312992&noticeType=null&language=en
EN
3
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5283092
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 TMN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 TMN DOC XML V0//EN
