Prevention of overweight, obesity and chronic diseases
Public health
2007-02-01 - 13:18
Parliament adopted an own-initiative on the prevention of overweight, obesity and chronic diseases with 620 votes in favour, 24 against and 14 abstentions. The House welcomes the Commission's commitment to healthy eating (in quantative and qualitative terms) and physical activity, and the fight against obesity and major diet related diseases and calls for this to be regarded henceforth as a political priority of the European Union and its Member States.
A report prepared by the United Kingdom’s National Audit Office in 2001 estimated that obesity in England alone accounted for 18 million days of sickness absence and 30,000 premature deaths, corresponding to an annual direct health care cost of at least GBP 500 million. The wider costs to the economy, which include lower productivity and lost output, were estimated at a further GBP 2 billion per year. The 2004 report from the United Kingdom’s Chief Medical Officer on the impact of physical activity and its relationship to health estimated the cost of physical inactivity at GBP 8.2 billion annually (including both the health care cost and the wider cost to the economy, such as days lost from work). In Ireland, the direct cost of treating obesity was estimated at some €70 million in 2002.
The European Parliament advises all the Member States to recognise obesity officially as a chronic disease in order to prevent obese people from being stigmatised and discriminated in any way; and to ensure that they have access to appropriate treatment under their national health systems.
Schools are key
The House points out that school is the place where children spend most of their time and that the school environment and, especially school canteens, must therefore encourage young children to develop their tastes, to promote regular physical activity and a healthy lifestyle, particularly in order to deal with the decreasing time allocated to physical education in schools in the EU. The report calls therefore on the Commission to develop mechanisms to promote best practice in schools which take account of the most effective initiatives educating children about healthy eating and, providing food based on high nutritional standards.
MEPs call on Member States to provide sufficient funds for school catering in order to allow schools to serve freshly produced meals, preferably from organic or regional agriculture and to encourage healthy dietary habits from an early age.
The House takes a strong interest in the food signposting systems put in place in several Member States by food companies, retailers or public bodies in order to simplify nutrition messages, recognises the value of such signposting systems as well as healthy-choice logos when they are favoured by consumers and easy to use. MEPs recall that research confirms that schemes which indicate levels of nutrients via an interpretative element are the most helpful to consumers in choosing healthier options. The European Parliament calls on the Commission to draw on this experience and research to develop and introduce an EU-wide front-of-pack nutrition labelling scheme and points out that a consistent message to consumers demand a certain degree of harmonisation in this area and that such messages must be scientifically based.
Concern over decline in nutritional value of fruit and vegetables
The House is concerned about reports that the nutritional content of fruit and vegetables produced in Europe has fallen over the last decades and calls on Commission and Council to take the necessary steps in the 2008 Common Agricultural Policy review in order to consider food nutritive value an important criterion and to enhance quality food production and healthy nutrition incentives in the framework of rural development policies.
MEPs believe that product reformulation is a powerful tool for reducing the intake of fat, sugar and salt in our diets and welcomes the steps taken by a few manufacturers and retailers to move in this direction. The House calls on the Commission, Member States, manufacturers, retailers and caterers to step up efforts to ensure reduced fat, sugar and salt levels in foods. Finally, MEPs call on manufacturers to use product reformulation not just to launch new, sometimes more expensive brands, but to prioritise cutting fat, sugar and salt in existing everyday brands.
20070130IPR02601 Promoting healthy diets and physical activity: a European dimension for the prevention of overweight, obesity and chronic diseases
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5386462
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
