European Parliament: fighting for farmers and fishermen
Agriculture
2006-12-05 - 13:50
Although the European Parliament has only a limited say in farm and fisheries policy (it must be consulted on most proposed legislation in these areas, but its opinion is not binding), MEPs have helped to shape Community policy.
In this legislature, MEPs focused on the proposals to reform the common market organisation of sugar, fighting for a less drastic reduction in intervention prices, and suggesting a restructuring fund to help affected farmers. It has also begun its consideration of a Commission communication on the reform of the wine market, where it is likely to oppose the Commission's suggestion of grubbing up vineyards to help balance supply and demand. The EP also called for stronger animal welfare rules across the sector, and has secured aid for farmers affected by bird 'flu.
In the fisheries sector, MEPs have been advocating a standard fisheries agreement, to replace the EU's wide variety of treaties with third countries. The House has also pushed for a comprehensive management plan for the Mediterranean. Parliament has called for more aid, training and programmes to protect vulnerable coastal fishing communities, and has taken the initiative of calling for more active protection measures for fragile fish stocks, such as eel.
20061201TMN00910
Sugar and wine reform: not as bitter as they might have been
During this legislature, MEPs have sought to limit the economic damage that European Commission proposals to reform the EU common markets in wine and sugar could do to EU farmers.
Although it took up the EP's suggestion of setting up a restructuring fund for farmers affected, the EU Council of Ministers reached a political agreement in November 2005 on a 36% reduction in the price of white sugar, without first obtaining the European Parliament's opinion. This caused uproar in the House. MEPs insisted that prices be cut by no more than 30%, argued for alternative uses for sugar, e.g. in biofuels, and called for stricter monitoring of EU sugar imports.
The Commission's proposal to provide grubbing-up aid to wine-growers who choose to leave the sector before it is liberalised also angered MEPs, who see it as capitulating to the influx of cheap New World wines and destroying part of the EU's cultural heritage. Instead, they suggest stepping up investment in marketing and labelling schemes, and enforcing and promoting strict quality standards for European wines. At the time of writing, the EP's first report on this proposal was scheduled for a plenary vote in February 2007, and the Commission's legislative proposal was not expected to be published until April 2007 at the earliest.
The EP has also spoken out strongly against introducing "voluntary modulation" of direct farm support payments (i.e. giving Member States the option of paying less from their national coffers to their farmers). In November 2006, the EP rejected a proposal to set up such a voluntary modulation scheme for 20% of direct payments, citing fears of a re-nationalization of the CAP and distortions of competition among Member States.
Improving animal welfare
The European Parliament is sensitive to concerns that stringent new EU animal welfare rules and labelling requirements could "lead to a decline in the competitiveness of Community production," and to "animal protection dumping" by third countries. For this reason, in its October 2006 report on a proposed Community Action Plan on the Protection and Welfare of Animals, it calls on the European Commission to submit plans for "animal protection labelling", in addition to voluntary private labels, and also to make a stronger case for animal protection in World Trade Organisation negotiations.
Finally, the House has actively sought improvements in animal welfare. A recent report called for more stringent EU animal protection rules, not just for farm animals but to govern animal testing, animal fights and fur imports, as well. The EP also sought to modify Commission proposals on improving rules on the welfare of chickens kept for meat production, for instance by outlawing beak-trimming and castration practices.
Avian flu: supporting fowl and farmers
When fears about avian 'flu led to a sharp drop in poultry and egg consumption in autumn 2005, MEPs backed a European Commission plan to compensate not only farmers directly affected by the virus (e.g. for culling stocks), but also those suffering from related "serious disturbances" on EU markets. They convinced the Council of Ministers of the need for equal co-financing by the EU and Member States of full compensation for both High Pathogenic and Low Pathogenic Avian Influenza, as well as for Community financing (100%) of the costs of supplying emergency vaccination materials.
Fisheries agreements and Mediterranean policy
Because of the international nature of the modern fishing industry, MEPs have devoted much of its time to external matters. The Parliament has routinely been consulted on fisheries agreements well after they have been signed and taken effect. The EP now has an inter-institutional agreement with the European Commission's fisheries Directorate-General which ensures that the Parliament is routinely informed of the state of negotiations. The House has also supported the idea of slowly replacing fisheries agreements with fisheries partnership agreements, which should facilitate the use of the EU financial contributions to third countries for developing local fisheries sectors.
The EP has also pushed for a comprehensive policy for the entire Mediterranean. In April 2005, Parliament backed proposals that many harmful fishing practices, such as deep-sea trawling (which entails dragging nets directly over the seabed, resulting in the destruction of ecosystems) be severely curtailed in the region. On 21 November 2006 in Brussels EU fisheries ministers reached a political agreement on fishery management measures in the Mediterranean. This agreement covers, inter alia, net mesh sizes, the minimum size of fish caught, minimum depths for the use of fishing gear and measures to protect sensitive habitats.
Saving European fish stocks and European fishermen
The Parliament has also shown great concern for the long-term health of fish stocks in and around Europe. It has, for instance, convinced the Commission of the urgent need to set up national management plans for protecting eel stocks. Members have also supported maintaining the strict rules governing the removal of shark fins on board fishing boats, a practice that results in many shark carcasses thrown overboard.
At the same time, the EP has been calling for more support to the fishing sector, where workers, and especially artisan and coastal fishermen, have been hard hit by fuel price rises, dwindling fish stocks and foreign competition. In this vein, it has consistently argued that small vessels be eligible for EU funds to modernize their engines, not least because of the safety implications of outdated fishing boats.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 TMN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 TMN DOC XML V0//EN
