MEPs vote in favour of a universal moratorium on the death penalty and condemn Saddam execution
Human rights
2007-02-01 - 14:05
MEPs adopted a joint resolution with 591 votes in favour, 45 against and 31 abstentions on the initiative in favour of a universal moratorium on the death penalty. The resolution says that Parliament is deeply concerned by the fact that national laws still exist, or have been reintroduced, in dozens of countries around the world, providing for the death penalty and the execution of thousands of human beings each year.
Parliament condemned the execution of Saddam Hussein and the media's exploitation of his hanging and deplores the way it was carried out.
The resolution was put forward by the EPP-ED, PES, ALDE, Greens/EFA and GUE/NGL groups. At the same time, the trend towards the worldwide abolition of the death penalty continues; the resolution welcomes, in this regard, the complete abolition of the death penalty in Liberia, Mexico, the Philippines and Moldova during the past years and the rejection by the Peruvian Congress of the draft law on the introduction into legislation of the death penalty for crimes of terrorism.
The resolution reiterates the Parliament's long-standing position against the death penalty in all cases and under all circumstances and expresses once more its conviction that the abolition of the death penalty contributes to the enhancement of human dignity and to the progressive development of human rights. The resolution calls for a worldwide moratorium on executions to be established immediately and unconditionally through a relevant resolution of the current United Nations General Assembly, whose actual implementation the UN Secretary-General should be able to monitor. The resolution strongly supports the initiative of the Italian Chamber of Deputies and Government backed by the EU Council, the Commission and the Council of Europe. The resolution asks the EU Presidency to take appropriate action as a matter of urgency to ensure that such a resolution is urgently submitted to the current UN General Assembly. The resolution also asks the EU Presidency and the Commission to keep Parliament informed of the results achieved in the current UN General Assembly on a universal moratorium on the death penalty.
The resolution urges the EU institutions and the Member States to make every endeavour in the political and diplomatic spheres to ensure the success of this resolution within the current UN General Assembly. Finally, the resolution strongly urges all EU Member States to ratify without delay the Second Optional Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), aiming at the complete abolition of the death penalty.
20070130IPR02600 Joint motion for a resolution on the initiative in favour of a universal moratorium on the death penalty The EU and the abolition of the death penalty
EN
2
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/comm/external_relations/human_rights/adp/index.htm
-//EP//TEXT MOTION P6-RC-2007-0032 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
