MEPs make sure EU regional aid will boost sustainable development
Regional policy
2006-12-05 - 11:28
In July 2006, the European Parliament gave the green light to the EU regional aid package for 2007 to 2013 after ensuring that in future, structural and cohesion fund spending in EU Member States does more to promote sustainable development and improved access for disabled people. MEPs adopted five separate reports that define the objectives, the financial resources available and the criteria for their allocation in the enlarged EU. Around €308 billion (at 2004 prices) - or 35.7 per cent of the total EU budget - will be available, on time, from 1 January 2007. MEPs also secured an extra €300 million for cross-border co-operation. The structural funds aim to reduce inequalities among EU regions.
More growth and more jobs for all cities and regions of the European Union: this is the aim of European regional aid policy for 2007-2013. Over 80% of the total budget will be allocated to the aim of reducing development disparities among EU regions. In the remaining regions, about 16% of funding will be concentrated to support innovation, sustainable development, better accessibility and training projects. Finally, another 2.5% are available for cross-border, transnational and interregional co-operation.
20061201TMN00900
General Regulation
The first report adopted by the EP sets the general operational rules of the three EU structural funds - the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF), the European Social Fund (ESF) and the Cohesion Fund - which are based on the principle of shared management between the Union and the Member States and regions.
Although the EP only has assent powers over the general regulation (i.e. it can accept or reject the package but not impose amendments), MEPs successfully negotiated with the EU's Austrian and UK presidencies to have many of their demands taken on board by the Council, including:
a greater role for environmental protection, and in particular sustainable development, in the management of structural and cohesion funds ;
a specific statement that Structural and Cohesion Funds should support the improvement and promotion of accessibility for people with disabilities;
a provision that any other appropriate body representing civil society, environmental partners, NGOs and bodies responsible for promoting equality between men and women may take part in the structural funds partnership negotiations.
European Regional Development Fund (ERDF)
For the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF), The European Parliament has "co-decision" powers, which means that it decides with the Council which project areas should come within the scope of the fund. The Council took on board the MEPs' key concerns about VAT and housing:
Parliament obtained a provision that non-recoverable VAT would be eligible for this fund in all Member States (the Commission had originally proposed that it be eligible only for the European Social Fund, and the Council had wanted it to be eligible for the ERDF, ESF and Cohesion Fund, but only in those Member States whose GDP did not exceed 85% of the EU average GDP),
EP amendments that made housing expenditure for social housing renovation aimed at saving energy and protecting the environment eligible for ERDF funding were finally taken up in the Council's common position. (The Commission had proposed to make housing ineligible for ERDF funding, and the Council had wanted to make it eligible only in Member States whose GDP did not exceed 85% of the average EU GDP).
The ERDF regulation defines the fund's role and scope in promoting public and private investment. The ERDF will support programmes addressing regional development, economic change, enhanced competitiveness and territorial co-operation throughout the EU. Its funding priorities include research, innovation, environmental protection and risk prevention, while infrastructure investment retains an important role, especially in the least-developed regions.
European Social Fund (ESF)
For the regulation on the European Social Fund (ESF), Parliament approved the Council common position in its second reading report. The Council had incorporated many of the EP's first reading amendments in its common position text. MEPs strengthened the provisions on combating social exclusion, on non-discrimination and gender equality, and on the social integration of disabled people and inactive people, especially long-term unemployed young people. ESF spending will be guided by the European Employment Strategy and will focus on four key areas: increasing adaptability of workers and enterprises, enhancing access to employment and participation in the labour market, reinforcing social inclusion by combating discrimination and facilitating access to the labour market for disadvantaged people, and promoting partnership for reform in the fields of employment and social inclusion.
Cohesion Fund
For the Cohesion Fund, Parliament backed with a large majority the budget increase proposed by the Commission from €18 billion (for 2000-2006) to €61.59 billion for 2007-2013.
The Cohesion Fund helps fund environmental and trans-European transport network projects. It applies to Member States with a Gross National Income (GNI) of less than 90% of the Community average (i.e. the new Member States, Greece and Portugal - Spain will continue to be eligible on a transitional basis). In the new period, the Fund will contribute alongside the ERDF to multi-annual investment programmes managed in a decentralised way, rather than being subject to individual project approval by the Commission.
European territorial cooperation
As part of the deal on the 2007-2013 financial perspective (see separate note), MEPs secured a further €300 million extra for territorial cohesion. They asked that €200 million be allocated to the trans-national area and the remaining €100 million should be given to inter-regional cooperation. Cross-border, transnational and/or inter-regional co-operation will by facilitated by a new European Grouping of Territorial Co-operation (EGTC). This new objective, proposed by the Commission, builds on the experience of the Interreg (interregional cooperation) initiative.
Next steps
Following the adoption of the texts by the European Parliament in July 2006, the funds can be used on time from 1 January 2007. National reference frameworks and operational plans negotiated between the Commission and individual Member States lay out in more detail how the money will be spent. Structural and Cohesion funding by Member State 2007-2013 (click on "Annex")
EN
1
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/regional_policy/sources/docoffic/official/reports/interim4_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 TMN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 TMN DOC XML V0//EN
