Parliament makes itself felt on the international stage
External relations
2006-12-07 - 11:22
The European Parliament is increasingly making its influence felt in EU foreign policy. Its approval is required for any enlargement of the Union, and it is a driving force behind the EU's new Neighbourhood policy, which aims to build stability and security with its new neighbours. It also ensures that human rights are protected by the EU's external economic and trade agreements and fosters democracy worldwide, by sending election observers to budding democracies.
20061201TMN00882
Enlarging the Union
Enlarging the Union
Enlarging the Union is arguably the most effective way for the EU to spread democracy, prosperity, respect for human rights and the rule of law. Parliament plays a key role in encouraging candidate countries to meet EU accession criteria, and they know that ultimately, it is the Parliament that must approve their accession. For example, Parliament's reports on the progress made by Bulgaria and Romania were very influential in persuading Romania, in particular, to change course. Like the Commission and the Council, Parliament has the right to seek a postponement of accession, but chose not to exercise it in this case.
Turkey
EU accession negotiations with Turkey began on 3 October 2005. Yet Turkey's slow progress in adopting EU laws and standards, a prerequisite for membership, has prompted growing concern among MEPs. In a September 2006 resolution Parliament expressed regret at the "slowing down of the reform process over the last year [...] in the areas of freedom of expression, religious and minority rights, civil-military relations, law enforcement on the ground, women's rights, trade union rights, cultural rights and the swift and correct enforcement of court rulings by State services".
Faced with Turkey's continued refusal to allow Cypriot ships and aircraft into the country, Parliament postponed ratifying an extension of Turkey's EU association agreement to the ten Member States that joined in 2004, which include Cyprus. But MEPs also felt that the EU should show good faith, and in March 2006 called on its governments "to reach an agreement on the trade facilitation regulation concerning the northern part of Cyprus", so as to end the economic and political isolation of the Turkish community in northern Cyprus
Croatia and Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
Croatia 's EU accession negotiations began in October 2005. In March 2006, Parliament noted that Croatia met the necessary political criteria, but still faced major judicial reform challenges. MEPs also cited the need for more efforts to promote "the sustainable return of refugees" and step up regional co-operation to resolve border conflicts.
EU leaders accepted the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (FYROM) as a candidate in December 2005, but no date was set for starting negotiations. In March 2006, Parliament noted that FYROM had made satisfactory progress in complying with EU laws and standards, but was concerned about delays in the areas of the free movement of goods, intellectual property law, competition policy and financial control.
Other Western Balkan countries
Albania , Bosnia-Herzegovina, Montenegrin and Serbia all have a "European perspective" said EU government leaders in June 2003. Parliament fully endorses this view and stressed in its March 2006 resolution that the ultimate goal is EU Membership. To this end, EU policy should focus on "the development of an efficient state administration and judiciary, the establishment of modern, non-segregational education systems, and, finally, the promotion of social and economic inclusion measures for returning refugees" it said.
Promoting human rights and democracy
Parliament sought to beef up human rights clauses in EU agreements with third countries. These clauses have suspensive effect in the event of serious human rights violations. Parliament highlights human rights abuses worldwide in its evaluation of the EU's annual human rights report, and has passed many resolutions condemning human rights violations, inter alia in Guantánamo Bay, Tibet, Kashmir, Burma, Western Sahara, Tunisia, Vojvodina and Kazakhstan. It has also consistently opposed various plans to lift the arms embargo on China.
EIDHR
Parliament helped shape the European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights , a new financing instrument to promote these values worldwide. It replaces the European Initiative for Democracy and Human Rights (EIDHR) which expires at the end of 2006.
Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly
The Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly (EMPA) represents the European Parliament, EU national parliaments and the parliaments of the 10 Mediterranean partner countries (Algeria, Egypt, Israel, Lebanon, Jordan, Morocco, Palestinian Authority, Syria, Tunisia and Turkey). Its assent is required for association agreements concluded under the Euromed partnership, and draws up advisory opinions in all its policy areas. The EMPA was among the first to call for an immediate ceasefire during the Lebanon conflict in summer 2006.
Sakharov prize
Every year, the European Parliament awards the Sakharov Prize for "Freedom of Thought" (a certificate and cheque for €50,000) to exceptional individuals or organisations fighting against oppression, intolerance and injustice. In 2006, the prize went to Belarus opposition leader Alexander Milinkevich, in 2005, to the Cuban opposition movement "Damas de Blanco" (Women in White), the Nigerian human rights lawyer Hauwa Ibrahim and the international organisation Reporters without Borders, and in 2004 to the Belorussian Association of Journalists.
Election observation missions and the work of delegations
Parliament promoted democracy in practice by sending 31 election observation missions to 24 countries, including in Ukraine (2004), in the Palestinian territories (2005), and in the Democratic Republic of Congo (2006). Having EP observers helps to ensure that elections are conducted freely and fairly - and also ensures that any abuses are brought to the attention of the world press.
Development: eradicate poverty first
In development policy, the European Parliament has given priority to fighting poverty and promoting good governance, democracy and human rights. These aims are reflected in an action plan agreed with the Council and the Commission in December 2005 called "The European consensus on development".
In a resolution of 6 April 2006, Parliament urges the Commission and the Member States to establish an international system of blacklisting to prevent banks from lending large sums of money to corrupt regimes or individuals representing a government. The African Union estimates that corruption accounts for 25% of Africa's annual GDP - around $148 billion.
To tackle serious public health problems in developing countries, and notably the spread of AIDS, the EP has also backed exports of generic medicines to these countries. In December 2005, it backed a regulation that sets out conditions for granting licences to manufacture patented medicines in Europe for export to developing countries.
The ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly, which twice a year brings together representatives of the 77 African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) countries and their 77 MEP counterparts helped to establish the Cotonou agreement, which is the basis for ACP-EU co-operation. The Assembly has commented on many development issues, including the programming of the 10th European Development Fund (EDF) for 2008-2013.
Finally, as development policy is one of the few area s of external relations in which the EP co-decides with the Council, MEPs have been keen to preserve their powers with respect to decisions on geographic and aid programmes . The Commission wished to take these alone after seeking the opinion of an expert committee ("comitology" procedure) but a n agreement was reached with the Council which safeguarded Parliament's rights and this was approved at the EP's December 2006 plenary session.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 TMN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 TMN DOC XML V0//EN
