Petitions: Parliament at the service of citizens
Citizens' rights
2006-12-05 - 13:42
European citizens were concerned about issues such as the Lyon - Turin high-speed rail link, an urban planning law in Valencia, the confiscation of vehicles in Greece or the M30 motorway in Madrid. Petitions to the European Parliament drew the attention of EU institutions to these issues and in several instances, the support of MEPs helped to find a solution to the problems raised.
Since the beginning of the Parliamentary term, the EP Committee on Petitions has received an average of three complaints a day from citizens. Although almost one-third were inadmissible because they did not concern an area of activity of the EU, the committee's consideration of these petitions in many cases resulted in a solution which was satisfactory for the petitioners. In fact, it was mostly the MEPs' insistence that ensured compliance with EU law in the Member States or led to reviews of decisions by EU institutions.
Many petitions highlighted difficulties associated with the application of existing EU directives, notably in the areas of the environment, social security, recognition of qualifications and other aspects of the functioning of the EU single market. Generally, they revealed difficulties encountered by citizens with the way in which EU legislation is transposed into national law or in with incorrect interpretations of the responsibilities of the EU.
Occasionally, fact-finding missions are organised in order to evaluate petitioners' grievances in situ. Such visits take place only once the problem has been duly discussed in committee and the objectives of the mission have been precisely established. Thus, early in the current Parliamentary term, delegations were sent to Valencia and Madrid (Spain), Pistoia and Turin (Italy), Edinburgh and London (United Kingdom), Warsaw and Poznan (Poland) and Malta.
The financial crisis which affected the Equitable Life insurance company is without doubt the highest profile case considered by the Committee on Petitions since 2004. MEPs decided to establish a temporary committee of inquiry following the petitions from affected policyholders claiming that the British regulatory authorities had failed to comply with their obligations under EU financial directives: it is therefore the subject of a separate sheet .
20061201TMN00904
Urban planning law in Valencia
Several petitions, signed by more than 15 000 people, protested against an urban planning law adopted by the autonomous region of Valencia in Spain. The Committee on Petitions sent two fact-finding missions which led Parliament to adopt a resolution in this regard.
The petitioners had complained of serious violations of the rights of property owners. The law, known under the acronym LRAU, established an obligation to develop all plots classed as fit for property development (' urbanizable ') by the local authorities. Owners were obliged to cede 10 percent of their land for public development use without compensation. Moreover, the law established an obligation to contribute either in cash or in land towards the construction costs of all infrastructure throughout the development zone to the tune of 65% of the maximum considered necessary.
The committee's work helped prompt the Commission to initiate infringement proceedings against Spain for failing to implement the European directive on public tenders.
High-speed rail link Lyon - Turin
Concerns about the environmental and health impact of the construction of the Lyon - Turin high-speed rail link were put to the European Parliament by the citizens of the Val di Susa, with the support of their local authorities. A delegation from the EP Committee on Petitions visited the area twice. During the second visit, MEPs encouraged the Italian authorities to carry out more detailed impact assessment studies for the project. Once completed, these assessments were considered during a joint meeting of the EP committees on petitions and transport respectively, in the presence of European transport Commissioner Jacques Barrot. Parliamentary committee work on this issue was still under way at the time of writing.
Confiscation of vehicles in Greece
Several petitions reported many irregularities in Greece following the seizure of vehicles by the authorities. The customs services had confiscated vehicles registered abroad because they suspected the owners of having imported them and using them illegally in Greece. The owners had then been prosecuted and fined substantial amounts.
The Committee on Petitions devoted a great deal of time to the issue. However, despite repeated complaints to various judicial authorities in Greece, a judgment of the European Court of Justice and action by the European Commission against the Greece, the Greek authorities failed to solve the problem. Consequently, the European Parliament adopted a resolution formally denouncing the attitude of the Greek authorities in this case and calling on them to compensate the victims.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 TMN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 TMN DOC XML V0//EN
