2007-2013 financial perspective: a 'realistic' budget for the EU
Budget
2006-12-06 - 19:41
The European Union "financial perspectives" i.e. the,budget, for 2007 to 2013, will total € 864.4 billion. After two years' tough negotiations with the EU Council of Ministers, in April 2006 the European Parliament managed to obtain € 4 billion more than the EU Member States had been prepared to spend. MEPs had long sought to increase the EU budget substantially, to match the EU's ambitions. However, faced with the inflexibility of the Member States and the risk of a major crisis if the financial perspectives were not adopted on time, they opted for a "realistic" agreement, focusing their efforts on those policy areas that they deemed most important.
In the end, MEPs managed to land increases for a whole series of headings, enabling the funding of specific projects such as the Trans European networks (an additional € 500 million), research and innovation (700 million) and continuous training (400 million). The € 400 million obtained for the Erasmus programme will allow a substantially larger number of students to benefit from the programme. Parliament also managed to increase substantially the budget for foreign policy (1 billion) and to improve the funding of consumer protection (500 million), structural funds (300 million) and the environment (100 million).
However, Parliament's big regret will remain the difference between the theoretical objectives and the financial "reality": whereas the Lisbon agenda aimed to make the EU a leader in growth and competitiveness, the funding of policies pursuing these strategic objectives fails to do justice to the stated objectives.
20061201TMN00878
Negotiations off to a bad start
A first warning shot was fired in January 2004 when there still was no draft text on the table: six Member States signed a letter stating their intention to set a ceiling for Community expenditure at 1% of gross national income for the next financial perspectives period (2007 to 2013). In other words, these countries considered that the EU should not have more than € 750 billion to finance its policies over seven years.
A month later, Romano Prodi presented a "realistic" but somewhat unenthusiastic Commission proposal for the future financial perspectives. The Commission President unveiled a package, of just over € 1000 billion, to give the EU the means to "build a common future". In other words, Europe should invest first and foremost in competitiveness and growth, as is reflected in the Lisbon agenda figures.
Shortly after the European elections of June 2004, the European Parliament appointed a temporary committee to carry out an in-depth assessment of the Commission proposal and to establish the European Parliament's position. For nine months, MEPs studied the political and strategic aspects of the financial perspectives. On 18 May 2005, their work led to the adoption of a report in plenary stating that the EU should be allocated a budget of at least € 975 billion to enable it to achieve its objectives during 2007 to 2013.
Impasse at the summit
With the Commission and Parliament positions known, it was now up to the Council of Ministers to lay its cards on the table. Despite the efforts of the Luxembourg Presidency, the June 2005 summit ended in failure: it was a stalemate between France not wanting to renegotiate the funds allocated to the Common Agricultural Policy agreed in 2002 and the UK steadfastly defending its Community budget rebate obtained by Margaret Thatcher in the 1980s.
Six months later, in the early hours of 17 December 2005, EU heads of state and government agreed a budget of € 862.3 billion. This represented € 22 billion less than the compromise proposed by Luxembourg in June 2005 and € 110 billion less than that proposed by the European Parliament. The keystone of this agreement was a "revision clause" requiring the institutions to "clean up" the EU budget by 2008-9,. In other words, agricultural spending and compensation, the principal obstacles to an agreement between the governments, would be reviewed at later date.
It was not until April 2006 that Parliament, the Council and the Commission finally agreed on a figure which was only € 4 billion greater than that proposed by the Member States five months earlier. This "inter-institutional agreement" was needed because the financial perspectives are not provided for in the current treaties....
Structure of the financial perspectives in brief
The desire to link budgetary programming and European political ambitions is reflected in the structure of the financial perspectives for 2007 to 2013 which purport to be resolutely forward-looking. While under the agenda 2000 (the financial perspectives for 2000 to 2006) there were seven headings, the Community budget for 2007 to 2013 now focuses on five major categories of expenditure reflecting Europe's intention to boost growth and competitiveness, but also to establish a real presence in the world arena and to fashion a European citizenship.
The new headings are as follows:
1. Heading 1 (sustainable growth) is subdivided into two distinct but interlinked components: competitiveness for growth and employment (heading 1a) covers expenditure on research and innovation, education and training, EU networks, social policy, the internal market and associated policies. Heading 1b (cohesion for growth and employment) aims to support the convergence of the Member States and of the least developed regions, the EU strategy for sustainable development outside the least prosperous regions as well as interregional cooperation.
2. Heading 2 (preservation and management of natural resources) covers the common agricultural and fisheries policies, rural development and environmental measures, notably Natura 2000.
3. The new Heading 3 (citizenship, freedom, security and justice) reflects the increasing importance of, and the new tasks assigned to the Union, in the areas of justice and home affairs, border protection, immigration and asylum policy, public health and consumer protection, culture and youth, information and dialogue with the citizens.
4. Heading 4 (the European Union as a global partner) covers the EU's foreign policy.
5. Heading 5 (administration) covers administrative expenditure for all institutions, pensions and the European schools.
N.B.: all the amounts indicated here refer to commitment appropriations. The financial perspectives in numbers
EN
1
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/budget/prior_future/fin_framework_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 TMN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 TMN DOC XML V0//EN
