Future of Europe: building public confidence in European integration
Institutions
2006-12-07 - 18:04
On 29 May and 1 June 2005 respectively, France and the Netherlands rejected the Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe in referenda, after 10 Member States had previously voted in favour of the text. The French and Dutch "no" votes put the ratification process on hold and other EU countries suspended the procedure. The European Parliament responded by launching a Europe-wide debate on ways to build public trust in the European integration process. In a resolution approved in January 2006, MEPs called for a constitution by 2009 to ensure the Union can function democratically, at the same time stressing the need to involve all European citizens in the process of building Europe's future.
20061201TMN00876
EP prescribes public debate to pave the way for reform
MEPs confirmed their endorsement of the Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe in a resolution adopted in January 2006. Parliament sees comprehensive institutional reform as necessary to ensure that an enlarged EU functions properly, and believes that the Nice Treaty is not an appropriate basis for pursuing the integration process. MEPs also argued that no further enlargement, after the accession of Romania and Bulgaria, should be allowed without a new constitutional settlement.
The European Parliament wants to play a leading role in this public debate on the future of Europe. The House will monitor the whole process and summarise the proposals put forward during the debates. MEPs want the European Council to take account of the results of this debate, and by the second half of 2007, to take a clear decision on the way forward.
Responding to the decision by the European Council in June 2005 to set in train a period of reflection, the EP called for a series of initiatives to bridge the gap between the EU institutions and the public. MEPs proposed that, to increase public participation, the European debate should focus on common topics and have clear political goals. As part of the process, MEPs called for a number of conferences and meetings to be held at local and national levels, as a way of advancing the debate on the future of the EU. These are called citizens' fora and parliamentary fora.
Going local
MEPs called on EU Member States to help involve citizens in preparing the way for reform, by holding a large number of Citizens' Fora, i.e. public meetings and media debates, at national and local level. MEPs say these debates need to be structured around specific topics to deliver clear results. They should involve political parties, employers' and employees' representatives, civil society, the academic community and the media.
Between March and May 2006, 14 Citizens' Fora were held as pilot projects in five EU Member States. The conclusions of these meetings were sent to the June 2006 European Council. Since then, the experiment has been repeated in several different countries and is still under way.
Going national
Alongside the debate with civil society, the EP re-launched the dialogue with the EU's national parliaments. The first inter-Parliamentary Forum on the future of Europe was held on 8 and 9 May 2006 in Brussels and co-chaired by EP President Josep Borrell and Austrian Nationalrat President Andreas Khol. All participants agreed that national Parliaments must be more extensively involved in the EU decision-making process, particularly when evaluating the application of the subsidiarity and proportionality principles.
A majority of inter-Parliamentary Forum speakers called for institutional reforms to make the Union work better, while stressing that citizens' concerns need to be addressed. The majority also agreed on the need to continue the dialogue among the European and national parliaments. MEPs admitted that deeper analysis was necessary to allow more proposals to be put forward during the first semester of 2007. The second inter-Parliamentary Forum on the future of Europe was scheduled for 4 and 5 December 2006, in Brussels, under the EU's Finnish Presidency.
First EP report on the debate on the future of Europe
In June 2006, the Parliament made a preliminary assessment of the results of the first citizens' and parliamentary fora and approved a new resolution on the next steps in the period of reflection. In the text, MEPs regretted that the debate on the future of Europe had not taken off in all Member States. More dialogue with citizens is needed, particularly in those countries that have not ratified the Constitution and are likely to hold referenda on it, they said.
Parliament confirmed its view that the period of reflection should be extended until mid-2007, to allow proposals to be developed with a view to reaching a constitutional settlement before next European elections. It also reiterated its opposition to any piecemeal implementation of the draft Constitution. Nevertheless, MEPs proposed that some reforms intended to improve the democratic profile of EU's institutional procedures be implemented under the terms of the existing treaties. Specifically, they called for more transparency in the proceedings of the Council of Ministers, the use of the 'passerelle' clause in the field of justice and home affairs (to apply the codecision procedure in this field too) and the creation of a form of citizens' legislative initiative.
A clear road map for further dialogue
In the resolution approved in June 2006, MEPs called on the European Commission to present a road map to the Council to help prepare a political timetable for pursuing the debate. They also called on the European Council to put forward a clear proposal on how to proceed with the Constitutional Treaty by the second half of 2007. Finally, they proposed that the Commission present a study on the costs incurred since the Constitutional Treaty will not enter into force on 1 November 2006.
As of 11 December 2006, 16 countries, representing a majority of the EU Member States and of EU citizens, have ratified the Constitution. Declaration 30 annexed to the Treaty Establishing a Constitution for Europe, states that "if 2 years after the signature of the Treaty Establishing a Constitution for Europe, four fifths of the Member States have ratified and one or more Member States have encountered difficulties with proceeding with ratification, the matter will be referred to the European Council"'.
The Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe was signed on 29 October 2004 by the Heads of State and Government of the 25 Member States and the three candidate countries and unanimously adopted by them on 18 June of the same year. The Treaty can enter into force only if it is ratified by each of the signatory countries, in accordance with its own constitutional procedures. EP Resolution of June 2006 on the next steps for the period of reflection: procedure Resolution of January 2006 on the period of reflection: procedure file
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5344032
EN
2
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5261822
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 TMN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 TMN DOC XML V0//EN
