Brussels Wednesday Plenary: Romania's President, climate change
Institutions
2007-02-01 - 11:05
"We're back in Europe" Romania's Traian Basescu tells MEPs
MEPs began the two day session with an address by Romanian President Traian Bﾄピescu, just weeks after his country joined the EU. This was followed by a debate on climate change between MEPs, the European Commission and the Council of Ministers. Later, MEPs voted to endorse the membership list of Parliament's committees, allowing them to elect chairmen and vice-chairs.
In his opening remarks Parliament's President welcomed Romania into the EU. He noted that "it has taken 60 years for Romania to return to the bosom of Europe" and that the EU is "politically and culturally strengthened" by Bucharest's membership.
"Romania...a breath of fresh air"
"We're back in Europe" was the upbeat message from Romanian President Traian Bﾄピescu. He said that since the fall of Communism his countrymen "could speak freely".
Mr Bﾄピescu made a plea for greater solidarity and understanding between citizens of Western and Eastern Europe. He said that while the Parliament had bridged east and west "certain people still have misgivings about accepting Eastern European citizens as equals". He said Europe must overcome these "nationalist tendencies" and called for restrictions on Romanian workers travelling abroad to be lifted. "Romania can be a breath of fresh air" to the Union he told MEPs.
Tribute to Hrant Dink
Later, Mr Poettering paid tribute to Hrant Dink - a recently murdered prominent Turkish journalist of Armenian descent. Mr Dink had written about aspects of Turkey's history that had infuriated nationalists.
"The message from science is clear: climate change is happening"
On climate change, Stavros Dimas the European Commissioner for the Environment said "the message from science is clear: climate change is happening". He cited the warm winter being experienced by Europe as one indicator. He told MEPs that now was the time to put Europe on to a "more secure low carbon future".
Mr Dimas said the Commission's January Communication on Climate Change would achieve the EU's objective of limiting global warming to two degrees Celsius above pre-industrial levels. He also said it would allow international negotiations to move
On behalf of the EU Presidency, German Environment Minister Sigmar Gabriel raised the issue of how to improve the lives of the 2 billion people in the world who do not have access to electricity whilst protecting the climate. He said that high technology areas like Europe would have to take the lead.
"What is the role of Europe?"
Peter Liese of the German European People's Party said that "energy and access to energy and protection of the climate are the two main challenges that mankind faces in the 21st century" while Italian Socialist Guido Sacconi said the EU must be "coherent on legislation, emmissions trading, aviation, reduction of CO2 for automobiles and all the other things we are considering".
Concluding the debate Mr Gabriel posed a rhetorical question to MEPs: "what is the role of Europe if China is the workbench of the world, India the service provider, Russian the petrol pump and Brazil the farmer?" The answer: Europeans have to be the technicians and engineers.
Thursday Plenary
President of Bulgaria Georgi Parvanov will address the House. MEPs will vote on a report aimed at promoting healthy diets and physical activity.
They will also vote on a joint resolution in favour of a universal moratorium on the death penalty.
20070201STO02642 Traian Bﾄピescu - address in full Opening of the Plenary session Briefing - 31 January - 1 February 2007 - Brussels Watch the Plenary live
EN
1
PHOTO
20070201PHT02654.jpg
EN
5
LINK
/eplive/public/freetext_page_direct/20061120FTX00012-2101/default_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070130IPR02598 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070130IPR02597 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070116BRI01971 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
