Post-Briefing - Strasbourg - 12-15 February 2007
2007-02-19 - 12:58
Poettering - priority is dialogue for partnership and tolerance
In his keynote inaugural speech to the House, in the presence of Chancellor Angela Merkel, President-in-Office of the EU Council and Commission President José Manuel Barroso, MEPs and all former Presidents of the European Parliament, Hans-Gert Poettering , President of the European Parliament outlined his priorities for his two and half year term. The President highlighted the defence of Europe’s values – for a citizens’ Europe, the implementing reforms – for democracy and the parliamentary system and encouraging a dialogue of cultures – for partnership and tolerance.
CIA activities in Europe: European Parliament adopts final report deploring passivity from some Member Stat es
In the debate on Wednesday, 14 February 2007, on the final report on alleged illegal CIA activities in Europe, MEPs expressed a variety of opinions with some condemning the CIA and EU Member State governments whilst others called the report anti-American propaganda based on speculative media reports. Over one thousand CIA-operated flights used European airspace from 2001 to 2005 and temporary secret detention facilities "may have been located at US military bases" in Europe, says the final report adopted on Wednesday, 14 February 2007 by 382 in favour to 256 against and 74 abstentions.
Lisbon Strategy: MEPs urge action on labour market, innovation and energy
Parliament welcomes the efforts made by the Commission and the Member States to make the Lisbon Strategy a success, and sets out, in a resolution adopted on 14 February, MEPs' expectations of the spring meeting of EU Heads of State or Government, which is mainly devoted to economic affairs. The Lisbon Strategy, first adopted by EU leaders in 2000, is a package of measures aimed at improving the performance of European economies.
Major recycling operation for Europe's waste policy
Parliament mounted an assault on Europe's growing waste mountain when it beefed up the new framework directive on waste proposed by the European Commission. Despite existing legislation, more waste is being produced every year. MEPs want the upward curve to be halted in 2012 and waste production to start declining from 2020.
Passenger Name Records / SWIFT - MEPs stress improvements needed on data transfer to US
In adopting a joint resolution on the SWIFT case, the Passenger Name Records (PNR) agreement and transatlantic dialogue on these issues, MEPs stressed that, during the last few years, several agreements prompted by US requirements were adopted without any involvement of the European Parliament.
Climate change: tougher targets needed, say MEPs
In a resolution on climate change, Parliament calls for a range of clear and binding measures to tackle the problem in the medium and long-term. The resolution is the EP's response to the Commission's paper "Limiting Global Climate Change to 2 degrees Celsius - the way ahead for 2020 and beyond", published in January. Tackling climate change is on the agenda of the EU's spring summit and is a priority of the German Council presidency.
Better geographical data: conciliation agreement approved by EP on INSPIRE
Europe needs better map-based information to support its policies, especially on the environment. A new database designed to achieve this - known as INSPIRE -should be in place by early 2009. Parliament and the Council struck a deal which was approved by MEPs which will enable data to be shared across the EU, without undermining high quality services in the Member States.
Darfur: MEPs want to set a date for deployment of a United Nations supported peacekeeping force
In a joint resolution adopted by MEPs, the EP calls on the United Nations, even in the absence of consent or agreement from the Sudanese Government, to clearly set a date for deployment of a United-Nations-supported peacekeeping force to secure humanitarian aid corridors. A no-fly zone over the region and sanctions are proposed while China's role in Darfur is criticised.
More common action needed on fighting international terrorism, says European Parliament
MEPs think the most serious external threat to the EU lies in radical Islamic terrorist groups. They therefore call on the Council to step up the fight against such actors by agreeing on a common definition, increasing resources and power to relevant bodies such as Europol, the EU Anti-Terrorism Coordinator and the International Criminal Court.
Women's rights in Turkey: MEPs say improvements still needed
Turkey's legal framework on women's rights "has in general been satisfactory, but its substantive implementation remains flawed", says the European Parliament in its second report on women's role in social, economic and political life in Turkey. The report emphasises that respecting human rights, including women’s rights, is a condition sine qua non for Turkey's membership of the EU.
MEPs want to five voice to small shareholders
By approving the report by Klaus-Heiner Lehne (EPP-ED, DE), MEPs backed the Commission's proposal to ensure that all shareholders of a EU listed company are able to cast their votes at the firm's general meetings, no matter where they reside. According to the Commission, EU-citizens holding shares in a listed company situated in another Member State often face problems when exercising their voting rights.
Radio Spectrum - Towards a sustainable approach
An unlicensed model, tradable rights and standards regarding the service and technology neutrality, within a very clear framework, are the key principals for a future European policy on radio spectrum, says the European Parliament in an own-initiative report drafted by Fiona HALL (ALDE, UK) and almost unanimously adopted.
Improving economy is an opportunity to reform and invest for the future
Europe should take advantage of the present improvement in economic growth to make the changes and investment needed to enhance its potential growth rates for the longer term, so as to be able to generate more employment. This is the key message of a report on the EU’s Broad Economic Policy Guidelines.
MEPs praise the European Investment Bank
After a debate with the President of the European Investment Bank, Philippe Maystadt, MEPs adopted a report on Thursday, 15 February 2007 a report which is, in general, strongly supportive of the Bank’s work. However, MEPs are nevertheless presenting some suggestions for improvement, such as greater consistency in the EIB’s external mandate, a new environmental framework and the involvement of civil society organisations in developing social standards.
Call for action to soften economic impact of rising energy prices
Europe should act now to prevent increasing energy prices damaging Europe’s economy, according to MEPs. Parliament adopted a report on Thursday which says that if no action is taken, Europe’s dependency on energy imports will rise from 50 per cent today to 71 per cent in 2030. They call for a massive investment in energy infrastructure and supply and new measures to improve energy-efficiency.
Easier travel between EU and Russia
The European Parliament adopted two reports on facilitating the movement of people between Russia and the EU. This is the first serious attempt to put flesh on the agreement reached by the two sides, at the St Petersburg Summit in 2003, to strengthen their relationship by creating a common area of freedom, security and justice.
Cautious approach to reforming the wine sector, say MEPs
Cautious, carefully-managed reform is needed to restore the vitality of the EU wine sector, says a report adopted by the European Parliament with 484 votes in favour to 129 against and 24 abstentions. It recommends retaining distillation measures for now, empowering Member States to restrict grubbing-up of vines, and liberalising planting rights only gradually. It also advocates strict labelling rules and maintaining current regulations on acceptable winemaking practices.
Parliament rejects voluntary modulation proposal for a second time
A European Commission proposal that would have allowed Member States to divert some Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) direct farm payments to rural development spending was almost unanimously rejected by the European Parliament with 89 votes in favour, 584 votes against and 19 abstentions. The Commission must now decide if it will withdrawal its proposal. The Council will take the final decision on this issue as the Parliament's view is non-binding.
Redouble the efforts against illegal fishing, says European Parliament
MEPs adopted an own-initiative report on the implementation of the EU action plan against illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing. The report points out that the Green Paper on a new maritime policy could serve as a framework for cooperation on the basis of which the fight against illegal fishing might be more effective. The House also asks the Commission to publish blacklists of fishing vessels and to consider the idea of establishing an EU coastguard.
Human rights: Tibet, Iraq refugees, Guinea
At the end of the week's session, Parliament adopted three resolutions on human rights topics. MEPs called for a resumption of the dialogue between the Chinese government and the Dalai Lama, they highlighted the need to help the huge number of refugees inside and outside Iraq and they condemned the violent repression by the Guinean government of protests against its misrule.
Link to texts adopted 12-15 February 2007, click here :
Link to Draft Agenda Strasbourg plenary 12-15 March 2007, click here : 20070208BRI02878
EN
1
A
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
2
A
/sides/indexPartSession.do?reference=2007-03&language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Poettering - priority is dialogue for partnership and tolerance
2007-02-19 - 12:58
In his keynote inaugural speech, Hans-Gert Poettering, President of the European Parliament outlined his priorities for his two and half year term. The President highlighted the defence of Europe’s values – for a citizens’ Europe, the implementing reforms – for democracy and the parliamentary system and encouraging a dialogue of cultures – for partnership and tolerance. Addressing Chancellor Angela Merkel, President-in-Office of the EU Council and Commission President José Manuel Barroso, MEPs and all former Presidents of the European Parliament, Mr Poettering said: "Electing a new President every two and a half years has been the tradition of the European Parliament since its first direct elections in June 1979. By historical standards two and a half years is a short time. Let us not forget, however, that one President of the European Parliament lives through five European Council Presidencies – in this case Germany, followed by Portugal, Slovenia, France and the Czech Republic. This makes clear the responsibility borne by our Parliament, particularly at this time when the task of uniting Europe has come a long way, but is not yet complete and indeed, given the current failure of the constitutional process in France and the Netherlands, is still in danger. The European Parliament is aware of this responsibility, so cannot allow itself to be outdone by anybody when it comes to completing this task of unifying our continent!"
The greatest success, Mr Poettering stated, has been overcoming the division of Europe. But shared values have prevailed. The accession to the European Union of the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Slovakia and Slovenia – and of Cyprus and Malta – on 1 May 2004, and of Bulgaria and Romania on 1 January this year, together with the reunification of Germany on 3 October 1990, remain for him the miracle of this generation. We all have, he said, reason to be extremely happy about this, now as always.
"It is our job to serve the citizens of the European Union. Europeans should be proud of what they have achieved by their labours over the centuries in terms of values, freedom, law and democracy. It has been a long haul. We know that our European roots lie in Greek philosophy, Roman law, the Judeo-Christian heritage, the Enlightenment – in other words, our shared European culture. But there have also been tragic European civil wars, and in the 20th century the totalitarian ideologies, with their disdain for humanity, and then, in 1945, the courage of the founding fathers in following the path of forgiveness and reconciliation, in building a new, better, more peaceful, shared Europe. We should still remember this today, and rediscover the things that are common to us all. The great French European Jacques Delors spoke, in the tradition of Robert Schuman, of the ‘European soul’. The great Polish European Władysław Bartoszewski once said: ‘Europe means above all else freedom of the individual and human rights – both political and economic’. They were both right. "
European Values
European values, Mr Poettering said, have their fundamental roots in the dignity of the individual. In such, there is respect for the other as well as making a commitment and thus building a system based on responsibility and solidarity. In practical political activities, he continued, we should always serve the dignity of the individual, and he encouraged all of us to defend human dignity and human rights throughout the world.
Continuing, he stated:
"• We want partnership with a Russia that is democratic and capable of action. That is why we expect the Russian authorities to make discernible efforts to ensure that the murderers of Ana Politkovskaya, who did so much for press freedom in her country, receive fitting punishment.
• We shall never forget that without the United States of America neither National Socialism nor Soviet communism could have been vanquished. But we also say to our American friends that ‘Guantanamo’ is not reconcilable with our European principles of the rule of law.
• We protect human life. If anyone, for example the President of a nation with a great history of civilisation, denies the Holocaust, we will counter that claim with determination, in order to ensure that the horror of a new holocaust is not visited upon us.
• We are convinced that the people of Israel and Palestine are linked by their common human dignity. We therefore support equally the right of Israel to exist and the right of the Palestinian people to live in a State of their own.
• We are on the side of those who are fighting peacefully for freedom and democracy. Hence our solidarity with the Sakharov Prize winner Alexander Milinkevich and his fellow fighters for a free and democratic Belarus without fear and oppression. The same solidarity goes to our other Sakharov Prize winners, ‘Las Damas de Blanco’ (The Ladies in White) in Cuba and Aung San Suu Kyi in Burma/Myanmar.
• We defend human dignity and human rights. We, the European Parliament, are utterly convinced that the death penalty is irreconcilable with these. I urge us all, the institutions of the European Union and the Member States, to stand up for the abolition of the death penalty in the forum of the United Nations. "
• The need for security also includes the task of providing employment and social protection in a rapidly changing world. We cannot make ourselves safe from globalisation. We must construct a cushion by strengthening our competitiveness while retaining the European social model.
• It includes not just talking about the dramatic change in climate, but taking the necessary measures – together with our partners in the world – and enforcing them with determination, before it is too late.
• A common energy supply is one aspect of security.
• Another aspect of security is a common immigration policy that takes as much account of human rights as of the need for integration in our society. We must not allow people to go on dying in the waters of the Mediterranean.
• We cannot find the security we seek in a world that is going up in flames, lives in poverty, is under social pressure, is disordered and in which the natural environment continues to be destroyed.
Importance of the media
On the importance of the media, Mr Poettering said that without the media Europe cannot be conveyed to the public. He specifically thanked the correspondents and journalists in Strasbourg for their fair and objective reporting. But he appealed to the national media, particularly the television channels, whether private or public, to play their part in relations with the European public. It is no longer appropriate to the times, he said, to portray the European Union only from a national perspective. Mr Poettering asked the national broadcasting corporations to open their studios to European themes and to invite Members of the European Parliament there as guests in that context.
Mr Poettering stressed the need for a new pact between the citizens of Europe and their political institutions in the European Union. ‘Citizens’ Europe’ and the credibility of the European institutions are conditional upon each other. The ‘Better Lawmaking’ programme can make a contribution to this if it achieves more democratic oversight, transparency in the Council, reliable transposition into national law, social, environmental, economic and administrative impact assessment, and simplification of the legal texts. When planning a piece of European legislation, he stated, we should always ask ourselves: Does it serve people and the environment? Is it necessary in the light of the subsidiarity principle? Does it help to make us more competitive? Does it reduce red tape and costs? Only if these questions can be answered in the affirmative should we go into action as legislators in the European Parliament.
We, the European Parliament, he stated, should not only be at pains to represent citizens’ interests. We should also show our respect for the dedication of European citizens who by their work are raising Europe’s profile – in Europe and in the world. We should introduce a European Parliament award for that. And why should we not also pay particular honour to commitment on the part of young people to the European idea? High-ranking European awards have had such a good effect on public awareness, why do we not create awards for the younger generation, for young Europeans who are showing particular dedication to the European ideal?
Constitutional Treaty
On the Constitutional Treaty, Mr Poettering stated that without doubt, the European Parliament stands by this Treaty.. We want to help, he continued, to ensure that the substance of the Constitutional Treaty, including the chapter on values, becomes a legal and political reality. The consensus arrived at here in the European Parliament on the services directive and on the limits of the European Union’s ability to enlarge is a constructive response to people’s concerns. The ‘Declaration on the Future of Europe’ scheduled for 25 March 2007 in Berlin could be another important milestone on this road. Its core should be: commitment to our values and to the necessary reforms; an undertaking to rise jointly to the challenges of the future, a commitment to solidarity among the nations of Europe and to the supremacy of law as the basis for our actions. No country, no nation of the European Union is to be left alone with its problems. But this also rules out national selfishness. Anyone who only serves the interests of his own country will ultimately squander these as well, because he will destroy the solidarity necessary for the defence of those interests.
President Poettering stated his intention to help to ensure that under the German Council Presidency a road map and a mandate are agreed at the summit in Brussels on 21 and 22 June, as the outcome of which full implementation of the substantive core of the European Constitution will be in place by the next European Parliament elections in 2009. He reminded the House that the Constitutional Treaty was signed by all 27 governments, but of course the results pf the referenda have to be respected.
But regardless of that: If a change of government in a country of the European Union calls into question what has been agreed, not only is society split in that nation, but our continent, which is already quite complicated enough, is increasingly incapacitated. We must, he said, commit to our European legal principles: pacta sunt servanda – treaties are to be honoured.
The will to implement these necessary reforms, he stressed, must be strong and determined. And these reforms must be carried through in such a way that the nations of the European Union are not driven apart, but brought together. We must insist, he said, that the European Parliament must be appropriately involved in the work.
The European Parliament, Mr Poettering stated, must also be prepared to reform their own house. In the first instance that will make great demands on every one of us, for example in terms of being present for votes and important debates. A lot remains to be done here. That is why on Thursday, the day after tomorrow, Mr Poettering will be submitting a proposal to the group chairmen for a comprehensive reform of the working of the European Parliament. Against this background, the Conference of Presidents has set up a working party on improving our work. He asked all colleagues to start work and to present the results as soon as they possibly can.
Dialogue between religions and cultures
Europe’s future is dependent to a great extent on successful coexistence among cultures and religions within the European Union and between the European Union and our neighbours, first and foremost in the Arab and Islamic world.
Mr Poettering stated that we must do our part to ensure that dialogue among cultures and religions is the hallmark of Europe. "We live in the continent of the three great cultures and religions – the Christian, the Jewish and the Islamic. And we have fellow citizens who come from one of the world’s other great cultures and who are at home in the world’s other religions. We as the European Parliament must encourage and support examples of European civil society that are dedicated to dialogue between cultures.
This dialogue must be grounded in tolerance and truth. Tolerance does not mean accepting anything and everything. Tolerance means respecting the convictions of the other while maintaining one’s one, and thus coexisting peacefully. On one of my many visits to Arab countries, I was asked by a senior Islamic dignitary how Muslims live in Europe. My answer was that they are often not sufficiently integrated, but that they can live out their own beliefs and have their own mosques and places of prayer. The question I asked in reply was whether it was true that in his country a Muslim man or woman could be punished with death if he or she converted to the Christian faith. The fact that I received no answer was answer enough."
Mr Poettering stated that it is his intention to visit the European Union’s neighbouring Arab states and, when visiting European Union countries, to try to have talks with ethnic minorities, particularly their younger members. In the Euro-Mediterranean Assembly we have, he said, an important parliamentary institution for dialogue with the Middle East, including Israel and the Arab world. We must, he said, use this institution effectively for peace, partnership and, if possible, friendship. As soon as circumstances permit, he stated that he shall visit Israel, Palestine and Lebanon. Mr Poettering expressed his gratitude for the invitation he received to address the Israeli Parliament, the Knesset. In inviting speakers to address the European Parliament, we should, he said, place the emphasis on the Dialogue of Cultures.
Helmut Kohl, honorary citizen of the European Union, once said to me, ‘We haven’t got much time. The world we live in is not prepared to wait for us to solve our internal problems’. He is right. I would like to add: failure to act, indifference, would be the greatest wrong we could commit.
Noting that at the end of his term of office, a new European Parliament will be elected, Mr Poettering stated that convincing work and positive aspects about Europe being highlighted in the national capitals as well, then the turnout for the European Parliament elections will go up again. It should be our ambition to achieve this, he stated.
In conclusion, Mr Poettering stated that our goals are great and so are the expectations vested in us. We set out to fulfil them. In this task I would like to represent you all in such a way that the dignity of the European Parliament, the unity of our continent of Europe and the effectiveness of the European Union are strengthened. I ask you for your help, thank you for your confidence and hope that together we can achieve our goals.
Chancellor Angela Merkel, President-in-Office of the EU Council
Council President-in-Office Angela Merkel began by highlighting Mr Poettering's long service as an MEP. "You have lived through the rise of the European Parliament", she said, and "the history of the Parliament is a success story". She congratulated the EP on its role in the REACH chemicals regulation, the services directive and the financial perspective.
"You represent nearly half a billion citizens" she pointed out, in a Europe which faces issues such as peace and security, social protection and competition in a globalised world. It was thus important "not to lose sight of the big picture", namely the role of the EU in the world.
This led her to speak of the European constitution, which she said was "crucial for the effectiveness of an EU of 27 Member States". She mentioned her presidency's already announced "roadmap" for the constitution, saying it was important at the next European elections in 2009 "for the public to know what they are voting for".
Turning to the upcoming EU summit of 8-9 March, the Chancellor described climate change and energy as top priorities. The aim must be "by 2020 to cut CO2 emissions by 30%". Progress to create "a highly performing internal market" was also essential, although discussions would be "difficult". The German presidency would insist on agreement on "specific quantified targets" in this area.
Relations with Russia
On relations with Russia, she hoped negotiations on a cooperation agreement would lead to progress by May.
Mrs Merkel said the EU's "Better regulation" programme needed Parliament's support and here too she wanted to see "quantified goals". She played down the fears of some that "less regulation means less social protection". "That is not what we want", she stressed. Improvements in regulation were needed "in the interests of the citizens".
The conference on the future of Europe, on 23-25 March, would deal with external policy, security and defence. In this connection, she welcomed the Mr Poettering's reference to intercultural dialogue as a policy priority of the EP.
Indeed, on the world stage - and Mrs Merkel referred specifically to the problems of Iraq and Israel-Palestine - Europe could exert influence partly because of its success in overcoming its own historical problems, which she described as "one of the miracles of our time".
"With our experience, with our prosperity, we can make our contribution to turning the world into a more peaceful place", were her concluding words.
European Commission President José Manuel Barroso
Mr Barroso opened by saying "This year we celebrate what the EU has achieved over the last 50 years". During this time, the Parliament had "come more and more to embody European democracy." In choosing Mr Poettering as president, he told MEPs, "you have elected a President whose experience and commitment to our common European project is second to none".
The Commission president went on to say "Our European values underline the essence of the Europe we want". In particular, "Cultural and religious pluralism is a strong European value" and he welcomed Mr Poettering's emphasis on inter-cultural and religious dialogue.
He added "We intend to make next year's Year of Inter-Cultural Dialogue the platform for this dialogue", continuing "the Commission has long pursued a dialogue with religions, churches and communities of conviction."
Religious communities would have the ear of the EU institutions, he stressed, reminding his audience that "I invited last year the President of the European Council to participate in a meeting with religious and church leaders. I welcome the agreement to hold a summit in May this year, with the three Presidents of the European political institutions and leaders of the main religions and churches".
Mr Barroso said the planned Declaration on the future of Europe, to be signed in Berlin on 25 March, represents "a confirmation of what the EU is for, and its mission statement "for the twenty first century. He wanted it to focus on "the goals of our common project" and help find a consensus for an institutional settlement.
He stressed that Europeans want to "see the European Union addressing globalisation, promoting economic growth and jobs, showing solidarity, tackling climate change, bringing security to its citizens, defending our values and interests worldwide".
To do this, "we need to preserve and develop institutional partnership", said the president. He believed that "cooperation between Parliament, Council and Commission was working well". Examples were the successes on services, REACH and the financial perspective.
Constitutional Treaty
Turning to the constitution, Mr Barroso said "The resolution of the debate on the future of Europe is not a sideshow - a more efficient and democratic European Union goes to the heart of our ability to deliver policies." And "As I often say, we cannot build tomorrow's Europe with yesterday's tools".
He repeated his call to the Member States to find a solution to the constitutional treaty, pointing out that "all governments signed the treaty". This meant two things: "First, Member States recognised that the Union needed to solve common problems". Secondly, it implied "a responsibility towards the other Member States, towards European Institutions and European citizens….. to be constructive and active in the search to find a common solution". "We do not need declarations of intentions but what we need is commitment."
He looked forward to working closely with President Poettering and with the Council "to deliver real reform in Europe".
Political group speakers
"We must stop all the disheartening declarations about Europe", said Joseph DAUL (EPP-ED, FR) "My group fully agrees to the vision of a Europe which is both strong and open to the world and at the same time close to the citizens and at their service", said Mr Daul. Recalling past successes of European integration, he noted that "Europe has changed the course of history", by bringing "increased prosperity for our countries and our people, and guaranteeing peace on our continent". The benefits are omnipresent, and it would take "bad faith" to deny them, he added.
Mr Daul noted that citizens expect Europe to provide more freedom and security, better job prospects, protection of the right to enjoy the fruits of their labour, and the will to stand up for Europe's common values. He also stressed that a common European approach is needed to meet challenges such as ensuring the security of energy supply, combating climate change, building a world-leading R&D capability, and achieving sustainable agriculture and food production.
Mr Daul stressed the need for dialogue among cultures and among religions, both for mutual enrichment and to combat racism, intolerance, exclusion and xenophobia.
Europe also needs a common strategy on globalisation, which strives to combine free competition, high employment rates and full social protection, he added.
Summing up, Mr Daul noted that the 25 March Declaration on the future of Europe would be an opportunity to renew the Union's commitment to its ideas. "Courage and shared conviction will get us out of the morass", he said, noting that "ours is a Europe of shared spiritual values" and that "what unites us higher humanity".
"Europe is a positive idea, which my group supports" echoed Martin SCHULZ (PES, DE), contrasting its inter-cultural and economic co-operation, and territorial integration, with the "dark hatred and repression around our borders". Yet the EU's institutional reform needs to succeed, he said, because "if we are thrown back onto Nice, we shall see more than a treaty foundering". At the same time, we face daily challenges, he added because Europe's citizens expect us to "take a decision and act".
Addressing himself to Chancellor Merkel, Mr Schulz described the Council as a "prime example of the lack of continuity", that makes it difficult to act. By way of example, he cited the difficulty of getting agreement on binding environment protection targets.
Mr Schulz looked forward to "progress on social Europe" - which he described as his group's "core business" - during the second half of Parliament's mandate. Communism in eastern Europe had been defeated not by the USA, but by the peoples of Europe's own new democracies, he concluded.
Graham WATSON (ALDE, UK) said Hans-Gert Poettering brings a rare sense of perspective to the President's post, thanks to the extensive experience he has acquired since 1979, noted ALDE Chairman Graham Watson. In this time, the common market has been enhanced with a single market, a single currency and policies in justice and home affairs, foreign and security arrangements and now energy.
Yet since 1979 there has been a profound change in what the EU is all about, he continued. The Union is no longer about peace and security of food supply, but about the three big challenges of "rapid world population growth and migration, energy resources and climate change, and internationally organised crime linked to terrorism". So far, the drive to build the EU had come from within, but increasingly, it comes from beyond our borders and the response of our institutions has been uncertain, he continued, adding that "There is a malaise affecting our Union which has led to squabbling between the Member States, who, in the name of preserving national sovereignty, are too often giving free rein to global anarchy", said Mr Watson, adding that "squabbling among our institutions turns our citizens cold, like different denominations of the church arguing about substantiation rather than asking why nobody comes to church any more". Given this malaise, it is the European Parliament that must become the dynamo of European integration, affirmed Mr Watson. Citizens must be able to look to "a House resurgent and outspoken, holding the Council and the Member States to account when their action against terrorism rides roughshod over the rights we cherish, forging consensus on the single market in services or on consumer protection measures, and working with national parliaments to scrutinise the executive". Noting "ideology has surpassed nationality as the main determinant of voting behaviour", Mr Watson looked forward to the possibility that Parliament might one day gain a right of initiative or the right to propose the President of the Commission.
Addressing himself to Chancellor Merkel, Mr Watson said that "qualified majority voting in Council and co-decision with the European Parliament as a co-decision is now needed in all areas of policy-making, if the checks and balances of democracy are to work at European level." Summing up, Mr Watson urged Chancellor Merkel and President Barroso "to muster the collective courage to take our Union forward as a true democracy, to create what Winston Churchill called in 1945 "a wider patriotism and a common citizenship for the distraught people of this turbulent and powerful continent".
Brian CROWLEY (UEN, IE), speaking for the UEN group, began his speech in Irish and said that he welcomed President Poettering's experience and that the President had large support within the House. Mr Crowley welcomed the presence of Chancellor Merkel and President Barroso and said that this respect should be reciprocated. Sometimes, he said, the European Parliament would have to disagree with Member State governments.
The European Parliament, he said, should be the voice of reason, peace and vision and above all a "voice for the voiceless". Mr Crowley welcomed President Poettering's initiative to introduce an award for young people's contributions to Europe. He also stressed the importance of the USA in supporting Europe in its time of difficulties. Finally, Mr Crowley stressed the importance of the EU engaging fully in the Middle East.
Monica FRASSONI (IT), speaking for the Greens/EFA group, said Europe had to make specific choices. "Europe must agree a way out for the Constitutional Treaty", she said. The European Parliament must be able "to co-decide" in all areas. Ms Frassoni stressed the importance of the defence of human rights at the individual level. She underlined the need to reduce energy dependence which meant tough negotiations with the Russian President. The EU needed to examine CIA activities, data transfer requirements and codes of conduct for arms exports. Finally, Ms Frassoni stressed the need to examine the issue of the seat of the European Parliament as well as making the Parliament ecologically sustainable.
For the GUE/NGL group, Francis WURTZ ( FR) spoke of the need to defend the European social model. He called for the Parliament to reject the proposed liberalisation of the postal services sector. "An in-depth debate is needed to engage with citizens so that Europe can progress", he said. He welcomed President Poettering's commitment to visit the Middle East and the President's engagement on the dialogue of cultures. Mr Wurtz called for an ending to the embargo on the Hamas Palestinian government.
Jens-Peter BONDE (IND/DEM, DK) highlighted the huge amount of legislation in national law now emanating from Brussels and the number of rules and regulations produced and called for greater openness and transparency. He had no confidence in the "summit knows best" approach rather than listening to the direct voices of the people. He wanted "no more treaties which are not subject to referenda throughout the Member States."
Bruno GOLLNISCH (ITS, FR) spoke of four crucial points from European history: Greek philosophy, Roman Law, Judeo Christian religion and the Enlightenment. He asked, "which European values are we being loyal and faithful to today? Christianity of hedonism? Does the European Union work on the clear lines of Greek philosophy and the direct participation of its citizens or are we constructing an onerous centralised structure? Do we have the precision of Roman Law or produce a "squillion" verbose texts? Is public debate respected?" He urged a return to the true roots of Europe.
Irena BELOHORSKÁ (NI, SK) asked for greater consideration to be given in the future to the needs of the smaller political groups and to the smaller countries. She also highlighted the need for a closer look at the Parliament's staffing requirements in terms of appropriate qualifications.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Passenger Name Records//SWIFT - MEPs stress improvements needed on data transfer to US
2007-02-19 - 12:58
In adopting a joint resolution on the SWIFT case, the Passenger Name Records (PNR) agreement and transatlantic dialogue on these issues, MEPs stressed that, during the last few years, several agreements prompted by US requirements were adopted without any involvement of the European Parliament. Agreements on PNR, SWIFT and the existence of the US Automated Targeting System (ATS), have led to a situation of legal uncertainty with regard to the necessary data protection guarantees for data sharing and transfer between the EU and the US for the purposes of ensuring public security and, in particular, preventing and fighting terrorism. The House welcomes the fact that the US administration has recently taken note of these reservations and that it will seek to improve the situation with the following steps:
(a) the establishment of privacy officers and/or an independent privacy agency within the federal administration, who are to undertake privacy assessments of all initiatives that could potentially impinge on privacy;
(b) setting up a mechanism to guarantee US citizens a right of appeal in the event of incorrect use of their data;
MEPs believe, however, that these improvements are insufficient as regards data protection for EU citizens and that it would be warmly welcomed if the 1974 Privacy Act could also apply to EU citizens on a reciprocity basis in order for them to have access to their data, including rectification and modification, as well as having access to a legal redress mechanism and to an independent data protection authority.
The House insists that in matters of data protection the agreements should strive to achieve a high level of protection as regards risks of abuse and should be supplemented with binding principles at EU level as regards the protection of data for security purposes (third pillar).
MEPs believe that it is necessary to define with the US a common and shared framework to safeguard the necessary guarantees that are needed in the special EU-US partnership in the fight against terrorism, which could also deal with all aspects concerning the free movement of persons between the EU and the US.
As regards the negotiation of the long-term PNR agreement
MEPs stress that, in addition to the points already adopted by Parliament in September, a future long-term PNR agreement should be founded on the following principles:
(a) evidence-based policy-making: a thorough evaluation must be carried out before a new agreement is concluded; the question of the effectiveness of the current agreement (and the previous one) should be addressed, as should the issue of the costs and competitiveness of European airline companies; the evaluation must address the implementation of the undertakings and the matter of PNR data in ATS;
(b) transfers of PNR must be based on a clear purpose limitation principle;
(c) justification and proportionality: it would seem that in practice, for law enforcement and security purposes, APIS data are more than sufficient; these data are already collected in Europe in accordance with Council Regulation (EEC) 2299/89, and may therefore be exchanged with the US under a comparable regime; behaviour data in the PNR seem to be of limited use, as they cannot be identified if not linked to APIS; the justification for the general transfer of PNR data is therefore not satisfactory;
(d) a future agreement must be based on an adequacy finding with regard to the protection of personal data; from the European side, it is clear that rules for the protection of personal data in the third pillar are urgently needed, as well as global standards covering all categories of personal data;
(e) there must be a regular evaluation of the programme's data protection adequacy and effectiveness, involving the EP and, if possible, the US Congress; an annual evaluation must be part of any future agreement; the evaluation report must be made public, and must be submitted to the European Parliament;
(f) alternative solutions, such as the Electronic Travel Authorisations within a Visa Waiver Programme, instead of the transfer of PNR by airline companies, must equally comply with European data protection standards;
(g) the conditions currently laid down in the US undertakings must become an integral part of the agreement and must be legally binding; a future agreement must have more democratic legitimacy, with full involvement of the European Parliament and/or ratification by national parliaments;
(h) in any case, a future agreement must be based on the PUSH system and the PULL system should no longer be acceptable given that PUSH should already have been introduced under the previous agreement, as soon as it was technically feasible;
(i) passengers should be informed of the transfer of PNR records and have access to their data, including rectifying and modifying them, as well as having legal recourse to a legal mechanism or to an independent data protection authority;
As regards the access to SWIFT data
Parliament considers it very worrying that this situation, in breach of the ECHR and the Charter of Fundamental Rights, as well as of the Treaties and secondary law (Directive 95/46 and Regulation 45/2001), has not been strongly criticised at an earlier stage either by the ECB or by the Group of 10 Central Banks that oversee SWIFT's activities, and that it is only recently that European banks and their customers have been made aware of the situation through press reports;
The House strongly regrets the fact that, several months after these matters came to light, the Council has not yet taken a stance on this subject affecting so many citizens, consumers and enterprises, and that only seven out of 27 Member States have responded to the questionnaire sent by the Commission to obtain clarifications on respect for national and Community data protection laws. The House repeats its concerns as regards the current system of supervision of SWIFT whose responsibility belongs to the Group of 10 Central Banks, with oversight by the ECB, but without formal competence; calls on the Council and the ECB to reflect together on the way to improve this system so as to ensure proper functioning of the alert process with full consequences in terms of action to be taken.
MEPs endorse the opinion expressed by the EDPS on the role of the ECB and calls on the ECB:
– as SWIFT overseer, to explore solutions in order to ensure compliance with data protection rules and to ensure that rules on confidentiality do not prevent information from being supplied in good time to the relevant authorities;
– as user of the SWIFTNet-Fin, to explore solutions to bring its payment operations into compliance with data protection legislation, and to prepare a report on measures taken no later than April 2007;
– as policymaker, to ensure, in cooperation with central banks and financial institutions, that European payment systems, including the updated system for wholesale payments "TARGET2", are fully compliant with European data protection law; calls for the ECB to provide the European Parliament with the assessment of such compliance;
MEPs believe that the EU and the US are fundamental and loyal allies in the fight against terrorism and that this legislative framework should therefore be the basis for the negotiation of a possible international agreement, based on the assumption that SWIFT as a Belgian company is subject to Belgian law and is consequently responsible for the treatment of data in accordance with Article 4(1) of Directive 95/46. The House points out that the natural consequence would be for SWIFT to be obliged to stop its current practice of mirroring all data concerning EU citizens and enterprises in its US site or to move its alternative database site outside US jurisdiction.
Parliament draws attention to the fact that SWIFT provides services elsewhere than in Europe and in the US and therefore considers that any measure adopted should take into account the global aspect of SWIFT's services. Finally, the House calls on the Commission, which has competence both on data protection and on payment systems legislation, to analyse the potential for economic and business espionage stemming from the current design of payment systems in the broadest sense, thus including, in particular, messaging providers, and to report on ways of tackling the problem.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Justice and home affairs
CIA activities in Europe: European Parliament adopts final report deploring passivity from some Member States
2007-02-19 - 12:58
Over one thousand CIA-operated flights used European airspace from 2001 to 2005 and temporary secret detention facilities "may have been located at US military bases" in Europe, says the European Parliament in its final report on illegal CIA activities in Europe, adopted on Wednesday, 14 February 2007. The report, which deplores the passivity of some Member States in the face of illegal CIA operations, as well as the lack of co-operation from the EU Council of Ministers, was approved by a majority of 382 against 256 with 74 abstentions.
According to the text - originally drafted by the Parliament's Temporary Committee on the alleged use of European countries by the CIA for illegal activities (TDIP) - European countries have been "turning a blind eye" to flights operated by the CIA which, "on some occasions, were being used for extraordinary rendition or the illegal transportation of detainees." In some cases, the report goes on to say, "temporary secret detention facilities in European countries may have been located at US military bases". "There may have been a lack of control" over such bases by European host countries, it adds. "Secret detention facilities", it explains, can also include places where somebody is held incommunicado, such as "hotel rooms," as in the case of Khaled El-Masri in Skopje.
With the above in mind, the EP "expects the Council to put pressure on all the governments concerned to give full and thorough information to the Council and the Commission and, where necessary, to start hearings and commission an independent investigation without delay," (the text of the earlier committee report "expected" the Council "to start hearings and commission an independent investigation without delay, as foreseen in Article 7 and, where necessary, to impose sanctions on Member States")
" Not possible" to "acknowledge or deny" detention centres in Poland
In an amendment passed with a narrow majority (356 to 323), MEPs noted that, in light of the available "circumstantial evidence", "it is not possible to acknowledge or deny that secret detention centres were based in Poland." However, notes the report, "seven of the fourteen detainees" transferred from a secret detention facility to Guantánamo in September 2006 coincide with those mentioned in a report by ABC News (published in December 2005) listing the identities of twelve top Al Qaeda suspects held in Poland.
Regarding the testimonies gathered during their visit to Poland, MEPs conclude that the investigation carried out by the Polish Parliament was not conducted independently and that statements given to the Committee delegation were “contradictory” and compromised by "confusion about flight logs [...] which were first said not to have been retained, then said to have probably been archived at the airport, and finally to have been sent by the Polish government to the Council of Europe."
As far as Romania is concerned, MEPs concluded that "no definitive evidence has been provided to contradict any of the allegations concerning the running of a secret detention facility on Romanian soil."
CIA Flights
“At least 1245 flights operated by the CIA flew into European airspace or stopped over at European airports between the end of 2001 and the end of 2005” although, as MEPs emphasize, “not all those flights have been used for extraordinary rendition”.
Working documents published by rapporteur Claudio Fava also cite "additional information of the extraordinary renditions analysed by the [TDIP], as well as of the companies linked to the CIA (…) and the European countries in which the CIA made stopovers”. In their report, MEPs mention up to 21 well-documented cases of extraordinary rendition: rendition victims were transferred through a European country or were residents in a European State at the time of their kidnapping. With this in mind, the text "calls on the countries of Europe to compensate innocent victims of extraordinary renditions".
The Parliament rejects extraordinary renditions “as an illegal instrument used by the USA in the fight against terrorism” and condemns the “acceptance and concealing of the practice, on several occasions, by the secret services and governmental authorities of certain European countries”. Members call on the Council and the Member States, therefore, "to issue a clear and forceful declaration calling on the US Administration to put an end to the practice of extraordinary arrests and renditions."
Use of torture
The report notes that the renditions investigated by the committee “in the majority of cases involved incommunicado detention and torture” during interrogations, as was confirmed by the victims - or their lawyers - who gave testimony to the Parliament's committee on CIA activities in Europe. According to the testimony of former UK ambassador to Uzbekistan Craig Murray, the exchange of intelligence obtained under torture by third countries' secret services to the British services was a practice known and tolerated by the UK government
In light of the available evidence, note members, there is a "strong possibility that some European countries may have received [...] information obtained under torture."
Reluctance to co-operate
MEPs also deplored “the lack of co-operation of many Member States and of the Council of the EU towards the temporary committee” and explained that “the serious lack of concrete answers to the questions raised by victims, NGOs, media and parliamentarians has only strengthened the validity of already well-documented allegations”. The Council, they said, initially withheld -- and then provided only partial fragments of -- information pertaining to regular discussions with high-level US officials (behaviour which the report calls "wholly unacceptable"). Such "shortcomings" of the Council, reads the report, "implicate all Member State governments, since they have collective responsibility as members of the Council" As MEPs note later in the text, the Treaty-based "principle of loyal cooperation [...] which binds Member States and EU institutions to take any measures to ensure the fulfilment of the European obligations, such as the respect of human rights, [...] has not been respected."
The national governments specifically criticised for their unwillingness to cooperate with Parliament's investigations were those of Austria, Italy, Poland, Portugal and the UK. The report also gives detailed evidence of investigations of illegal rendition or CIA flight cases involving Germany, Sweden, Spain, Ireland, Greece, Cyprus, Denmark, Turkey, the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (FYROM), Bosnia and Romania.
Among some of the specific criticisms levelled by the report against European governments are the following:
- certain officials of the Italian military security services (SISMI) played an "active role" in the 2003 abduction of cleric Abu Omar in Milan; General Nicolò Pollari, former Director of the SISMI, "concealed the truth" when he stated "that Italian agents played no part in any CIA kidnapping"; knowledge of the Abu Omar rendition on the part of the Italian government was "very likely".
- the German Government did not accept the US offer, made in 2002, to release rendition victim Murat Kurnaz from Guantánamo; Mr. Kurnaz was interrogated twice by German officials in Guantánamo on two occasions (para 84, 85); on the other hand, the report reads, the German Parliament's inquiry committee has shown "that there was no involvement of the German authorities in the illegal abduction [of Khaled El-Masri]"
- the Polish government failed to cooperate with the TDIP, "in particular when receiving its delegation at an inappropriate level"; its attitude towards the temporary committee's work was marked by "an overall rejection"
- FYROM authorities failed to deliver "a thorough investigation" into the Khaled El-Masri case (para 135); Romanian authorities, meanwhile, showed "reluctance" to thoroughly investigate "the existence of secret detention facilities on its territory"
- the international community turned a blind eye when the decisions of the Supreme Court and the Human Rights Chamber of Bosnia and Herzegovina, ordering the release of six Algerian men from custody, failed to be implemented -- action which resulted in their subsequent rendition to Guantanamo.
At the same time, members complained about “the omissions” in statements made by the Council and its Secretary General, Javier Solana, regarding the Council’s discussions (on fighting terrorism) with US representatives. Mr. Solana, they add, “was unable to supplement the evidence already in the possession of the temporary committee.” The same goes for EU Counter-Terrorism co-ordinator Gijs de Vries who, MEPs concluded, was “unable to give satisfactory answers”. With this in mind, MEPs took the view that the competences and powers of the Counter-Terrorism co-ordinator should be strengthened and monitored by the European Parliament.
Political recommendations
With a view to the conclusion of the TDIP's mandate, and acknowledging that Committee's conclusions were not "exhaustive", the final report encourages governments and/or national parliaments to launch (or to pursue) independent investigations. MEPs also instruct the Civil Liberties Committee to follow up the proceedings of the TDIP, to monitor developments and, should the Council and/or the Commission not take action -- to determine whether there is a clear risk of a serious breach of the EU's principles and values, "and to recommend [...] any resolution, taking as a basis Articles 6 and 7 of the Treaty on European Union, which may prove necessary in this context".
The report also recommends that all European countries should have "specific national laws to regulate and monitor the activities of third countries' secret services on their national territories"; moreover, it advises, over-flight clearances for military and/or police aircraft should be granted "only if accompanied by guarantees that human rights will be respected". In the meantime, a "ban or system of inspections" should be introduced "for all CIA-operated aircraft known or suspected to have been involved in extraordinary rendition".
Lastly, the report calls for the closure of Guantánamo and asks European countries "to immediately seek the return of their citizens and residents who are being held illegally by US authorities".
UNITED KINGDOM
67 New at plenary. Welcomes the meeting in London with the UK Minister for Europe and the fact that the UK Government supplied documents and explanations; notes that the UK authorities could not answer all the questions raised by the Temporary Committee delegation to London.
68. Thanks the All-Party Parliamentary Group on Extraordinary Renditions (APPG), comprising members of the House of Commons and the House of Lords, for its work and for providing the Temporary Committee delegation to London with a number of highly valuable documents.
68 bis New at plenary. Takes note of the declarations made by UK Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, Margaret Beckett, in a written response to a parliamentary question whereby she admitted that the UK Government had been aware of a secret CIA prison network before President Bush acknowledged its existence in September 2006; asks the UK Government to state whether it has raised the issue with the US authorities and whether, and, if so, when, it informed or discussed the issue with other European governments.
69. Condemns the extraordinary rendition of Bisher Al-Rawi, an Iraqi citizen and resident of the United Kingdom, and Jamil El-Banna, a Jordanian citizen and resident of the United Kingdom, who were arrested by Gambian authorities in Gambia in November 2002, turned over to US agents, and flown to Afghanistan and then to Guantánamo, where they remain detained without trial or any form of judicial assistance;
70. Points out that the telegrams from the UK security service MI5 to an unspecified foreign government which were released to the Chairman of the APPG, Andrew Tyrie, suggest that the abduction of Bisher Al-Rawi and Jamil El-Banna was facilitated by partly erroneous information supplied by the UK security service;
71. Criticises the unwillingness of the UK Government to provide consular assistance to Bisher Al-Rawi and Jamil El-Banna on the grounds that they are not UK citizens;
72. Condemns the multiple extraordinary rendition of Binyam Mohammed, Ethiopian citizen and resident of the United Kingdom; points out that Binyam Mohammed has been held in at least two secret detention facilities, in addition to military prisons;
73. Is deeply disturbed by the testimony of Binyam Mohammed's lawyer, who gave an account of the most horrific torture endured by his client to the official delegation of the Temporary Committee to the United Kingdom;
74. Emphasises that the former UK Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, Jack Straw, conceded in December 2005 that UK intelligence officials met Binyam Mohammed when he was arrested in Pakistan; points out in this respect that some of the questions put by the Moroccan officials to Binyam Mohammed appear to have been inspired by information supplied by the UK;
75. Condemns the extraordinary rendition of UK citizen Martin Mubanga, who met the official delegation of the Temporary Committee to the United Kingdom, and who was arrested in Zambia in March 2002 and subsequently flown to Guantánamo; regrets the fact that Martin Mubanga was interrogated by British officials at Guantánamo, where he was detained and tortured for four years without trial or any form of judicial assistance and then released without charge;
76. Changed at plenary. Takes note of the testimony to the Temporary Committee by Craig Murray, former UK Ambassador to Uzbekistan, on the exchange of intelligence obtained under torture and the legal opinion of Michael Wood, former legal advisor to the UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office.
77. Changed at plenary Expresses its concern about Michael Wood's legal opinion, according to which 'receiving or possessing' information extracted under torture, in so far as there is no direct participation in the torture, is not per se prohibited by the UN Convention against Torture and other Cruel, Inhumane or Degrading Treatment or Punishment adopted by the UN General Assembly on 10 December 1989; expresses its condemnation of any attempt to obtain information by means of torture, regardless of who is involved.
78. Changed at plenary. Notes the 170 stopovers made by CIA-operated aircraft at UK airports and expresses serious concern about the purpose of those flights which came from or were bound for countries linked with extraordinary rendition circuits and the transfer of detainees. Deplores the stopovers at UK airports of aircraft which have been shown to have been used by the CIA, on other occasions, for the extraordinary rendition of Bisher Al-Rawi, Jamil El-Banna, Abou Elkassim Britel, Khaled El-Masri, Binyam Mohammed, Abu Omar and Maher Arar and for the expulsion of Ahmed Agiza and Mohammed El Zari.
IRELAND
121. Welcomes the testimony given to the Temporary Committee by the Irish Minister for Foreign Affairs on behalf of the Irish Government as well as his unequivocal criticism of the process of extraordinary rendition; notes the fact, however, that he failed to answer all the questions in relation to the concerns that Irish airports may have been used by CIA aircraft travelling to or from extraordinary rendition missions (as in the case of Abu Omar);
122. Thanks the Irish Human Rights Commission (IHRC) for its testimony to the Temporary Committee and endorses its view which considers that acceptance by the Irish government of diplomatic assurances do not fulfil Ireland's human rights obligations, which oblige the government actively to seek to prevent any actions that could in any way facilitate torture or ill-treatment in Ireland or abroad; regrets the decision of the Irish Government not to follow the IHRC's advice on this matter to date; notes that there is continuing dialogue between the IHRC and the Irish Government;
123 Changed at plenary. Notes the 147 stopovers made by CIA-operated aircraft at Irish airports and expresses serious concern about the purpose of those flights which came from or were bound for countries linked with extraordinary rendition circuits and the transfer of detainees. Deplores the stopovers in Ireland of aircraft which have been shown to have been used by the CIA, on other occasions, for the extraordinary rendition of Bisher Al-Rawi, Jamil El-Banna, Abou Elkassim Britel, Khaled El-Masri, Binyam Mohammed, Abu Omar and Maher Arar and for the expulsion of Ahmed Agiza and Mohammed El Zari.
124. Notes the absence of Irish parliamentary scrutiny of either Irish or foreign intelligence services and the potential that this creates for abuse;
125. Considers, that, in the absence of a system of random searches, a ban should be imposed on all CIA-operated aircraft landing in Ireland;
126. Urges the Irish Government, in view of the findings of the Temporary Committee, to agree to launch a parliamentary inquiry into the use of Irish territory as part of the CIA rendition circuit.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Justice and home affairs
MEPs debate alleged CIA renditions ahead of the vote on the final report
2007-02-19 - 12:58
The House debated the final report from the Temporary Committee investigating the alleged use of European countries by the CIA for the transportation and illegal detention of prisoners. MEPs expressed a variety of opinions with some condemning the CIA and EU Member State governments while others called the report anti-American propaganda based on speculative media reports. The rapporteur, Giovanni Claudio FAVA (PES, IT) pointed to the challenge inherent in the fight against terrorism and stated that the results of this report do not "allow anyone to look the other way." He mentioned again the principal actors who allegedly colluded with the CIA, reiterating that "around this affair there are responsibilities." Mr Fava pointed out that "the testimonies we received ..[..].. are facts [and that] the facts speak for themselves." As an example, he referred to an innocent victim who had been tortured while in detention in Syria and stated that "this was a sample of humanity which was damaged, hurt and humiliated." Mr Fava did concede that there were those who would have preferred a softer approach in this report but he emphasised that MEPs are not Government representatives and that they "must reaffirm [their] autonomy [and their] independence." He concluded by stating that "this is the fruit of a common civil courage."
Speaking for the German Presidency of the Council Günther GLOSER recalled that it was one year ago that the European Parliament had taken the decision to set up the temporary committee to investigate alleged CIA renditions. The Council, he said, could not accept any compromise with regard to human rights, for example the Council has long-stated that Guantanamo Bay should be closed "forthwith". Many points raised by the temporary committee were under investigation in the Member States through parliamentary inquiries or through the national courts, and it was important for the EU to respect subsidiarity with respect to these investigations. "A more reticent use of words would have been more appropriate as the Council and the European Parliament are not so far apart on these matters," he said.
Speaking for the European Commission, Vice-President and Commissioner responsible for Justice, Freedom and Security, Franco FRATTINI said the issue of security is central to the debate, but legality is a prerequisite for security, security can not be provided at any cost. It was important that there was a quest for the truth and that the facts were clearly established, and this is what the judges would do. The Commissioner also stated that it was for national courts and inquiries to establish the facts, nevertheless the temporary committee's report had provided "a harvest of information".
Commissioner Frattini said: "It is clear that the US and the US authorities are not in the dock, it is the terrorists that are in the dock." Judicial investigations were still taking place including in the US congress. The EU institutions would continue to strengthen Euro-Atlantic co-operation based on the pillars of law and security.
Political group speakers
On behalf of the EPP-ED, Jas GAWRONSKI (IT) said his group had sought to improve the Fava report in committee, to find common ground but had not entirely succeeded. He criticised the committee's approach. For example it had turned up in Washington acting like a tribunal, something which clearly "did not facilitate dialogue".
He told the House that if his group's amendments were not adopted, it would vote against the report, but even if they were adopted, many of the group's Members would still vote against. He himself wanted to see two key amendments included, the first saying that the secret services must be allowed to operate secretly "as long as they comply with the law", the second saying that the CIA may fly wherever it wishes "as long as it is not in breach of the law".
He argued that the Fava report issued "a blanket condemnation of the secret services as a whole". But, he stressed, these services "must be allowed to deal with external threats!"
Council of Europe rapporteur Dick Marty, he added, "shares my view" and moreover has said there is "nothing new in the Fava report".
In conclusion, Mr Gawronski said he agreed with Commissioner Frattini. Certainly "we must speak up for human rights even when fighting terrorism" but the Fava report was "predicated on the assumption that there is one chief guilty party and that is the USA".
For the Socialists, Wolfgang KREISSL-DÖRFLER (DE) said "we cannot play the song of freedom on an instrument of violence". Yes, "international terror is a threat and must be combated by all available means" but, on the basis of national and international law, breaches of human rights "must be lambasted". This is "not some peccadillo" as some in the committee seemed to be suggesting "it is inhuman, immoral, unjust".
The committee's work had been to find out "what happened to people who were abducted and tortured, who was behind it?" Among other cases, a German citizen in Pakistan was abducted and taken to Guantanamo. If there had been anything in this, "he would have been brought to court". Ultimately, "does the end justify the means?".
He stressed that we cannot "simply allow the security services to have their own way". "Illegal practices on European territories is not something the governments can condone". "We must remember what our community of values is based on: the rule of law, the separation of powers and democracy".
Lastly, he told the House there were "sins of omission and sins of commission" and the committee's work had been to bring these matters to light. "No paths must lead to Guantanamo", he concluded.
Speaking on behalf of his group, Ignasi GUARDANS CAMBÓ (ALDE, ES) told the House "what is at stake here today is Europe's credibility". In supporting the Fava report his group would be showing as much concern as anyone about security, including "the secret services, which can work inside the law". However, he went on, "we cannot support the idea that the only way to protect our freedom is through a dirty war". This would represent a "frontal attack on our values".
The committee had "uncovered an illegal, sometimes criminal scheme" set up as part of the fight against terrorism. It had "not acted as a court but as a political body" making its judgments on the basis of "hard facts". True, there were some facts that could not be proved before a court but this was "because many governments involved did not help us".
The committee had not invented anything: it had met the victims, or rather "those who could come" as "others are still in jail". Now it wanted to "make a political statement" and send a message to European governments, saying "on behalf of millions of citizens" that "you cannot fight terrorism through a dirty war in our name". This, he said, was the statement on which the House would be voting today.
The twelve months of investigations confirmed fears, but turned up little in the way of new facts, said Konrad SZYMAŃSKI (UEN, PL). However, this "inconvenient" lack of evidence got left out of the picture, amidst accusations ranging from abduction to torture. In the case of Poland, "there is no proof", so its accusers should "stay silent", he said.
These investigations were an "excellent example of collaboration with the Council of Europe and the fourth estate, especially the press and media" countered Cem ÖZDEMIR (Greens/EFA, DE). Yet within Parliament, "some committee members have been dealt with as if this were still the Warsaw Pact era", he said, adding that "if there's nothing to hide, you don't deal with people like this", and that "the acquis communautaire doesn't disappear on accession".
Khaled El Masri (a German resident who claims to have been abducted by CIA agents in the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia) still awaits an apology from the US authorities and clarifications from their German counterparts, said Mr Özdemir, adding that other, similar, cases still need to be investigated in Germany.
The case of Canadian citizen and alleged torture victim Mr Maher Arar showed just how little information is gleaned from torture, said Mr Özdemir. Although he welcomed the fact that Mr Arar would receive compensation, we should not forget prisoners in the Guantánamo Bay detention centre who have little to hope for. This "is not anti-Americanism - our concern is for human rights and democracy", he concluded.
This report is an "historic step", and the European Parliament has "brought rigour to its task" echoed Giusto CATANIA (GUE/NGL). "The US strategy was possible thanks only to the complicity of European secret services" he continued, and "Solana and De Vries need to address this" (Mr Javier Solana is the EU's EU Foreign Policy Representative and Secretary-General of the Council and Mr Gijs de Vries is its Counter-Terrorism Co-ordinator). General Nicolò Pollari (the former Director of the Italian secret services SISMI, accused of "concealing the truth" when he claimed that "Italian agents played no part in any CIA kidnapping") should be made to "render an account to the government", said Mr Catania, concluding that Tacitus's phrase: "They made a desert and called it peace" must not become a fitting description of the war against terror.
Gerard BATTEN (IND/DEM, UK) said the report represented typical "anti-Americanism" and a "grab for more power for the EU". Much of the content of the report, he said, was "speculation". The international community was now engaged in a war of ideology against "fundamentalist Islam" and he thanked the US for leading this battle.
Luca ROMAGNOLI (ITS, IT) said that the temporary committee had tried to investigate the allegations, but he could not agree with the report's conclusions which he said, "should be thrown-out". The report was at best tenuous and was based largely on media reports.
Roger HELMER (NI, UK) said that it was a case of "me too" as the Council of Europe had already produced a report on the matter which one British Minister had described as "having as many holes as a Swiss cheese". The Fava report was, he said, not much better. The committee had simply logged numerous flights, and based much of its work on press cuttings. The US authorities had admitted that a small number of renditions had taken place immediately after 9-11. The report boiled down to "anti-American propaganda" and attacked many national governments.
British and Irish speakers
Sarah LUDFORD (ALDE, UK) said those who collaborate in refusing to face the facts on the grounds that an inquiry is anti-American will have red faces when the heavy guns in Congress turn their energies to this topic. It is about security, but built within a framework of law in which the security not to end up as a tortured ghost detainee counts too and it is certainly about promoting Europe's values in the world, the ones of democracy, human rights and the rule of law to which Member States signed up in the Treaty. Mrs Ludford agreed with US Defence Secretary Robert Gates who spoke at the recent Munich Security Conference about the West's defeat of totalitarianism in the 20th century and our opposition to extremist ideologies now. He said: 'Our most effective weapon then and now has been Europe's and North America's shared belief in political and economic freedom, religious toleration, human rights, representative government and the rule of law. Those values kept our side united'. Indeed, so why has the Bush administration, not Americans as a whole, tossed away the moral high ground and dragged America's reputation into the mud by a programme of kidnapping, forced disappearance, dark prisons, indefinite detention, cruel and inhuman treatment and outsourcing of torture.
Mrs Ludford stated that she did not rejoice in the fact that the latest survey of global opinion finds an antagonism to America at an intense pitch. Even in Poland, fewer than four out of ten have a mainly positive view of the US. Europe has failed a test in the last five years, she said, a test of whether it will practise its values or only preach them. We have, she continued, lacked the guts to refuse to collude with torture flights and lacked the vision to use Europe's capacity to be a real and united best friend to America and it is about time that we actually practised those values.
Eoin RYAN (UEN, IE) said: "Some people are arguing that we should all support this report because otherwise we are not standing up for human rights. I have to say that I completely and totally disagree with that. I oppose flights of extraordinary rendition anywhere, but I cannot support this report because many of its conclusions are politically motivated."
Let us be clear, he continued, that we are talking about conclusions and not findings. This is not an evidence-based report. For example, reference to 147 suspected flights into Ireland or 300 flights into Germany is totally unsubstantiated. If these conclusions were presented before any court as factual evidence, they would be thrown out of court because they would be found to be both inaccurate and speculative. The European Parliament should remember that many of the things in this report are conclusions and not findings. For a report to conclude that all CIA flights should be banned in Ireland and not be banned in any of the other 26 member countries, lacks perspective and is another clear example of how politically motivated this report has become. This report does not look forward. It even fails to call for a review of the 60-year-old Chicago International Convention. However, Mr Ryan stated that he had an amendment on this. Some people, he stated, are saying that we should come back in six months' time with proposals. If there are proposals, they should be in the report here today. Mr Ryan believed that this report is full of conclusions and not findings and unfortunately, he stated, he will be voting against it.
Charles TANNOCK (EPP-ED, UK) said: "I was opposed from the very start to the Temporary Committee. It has proven to be an expensive exercise. We do not have any figures but I estimate the cost to be over EUR 1 million. It has duplicated Senator Marty's efforts in the Council of Europe and has produced nothing substantially new which was not already in the public domain. Regrettably the Left and Liberals cannot resist an opportunity to bash NATO and the United States which, in spite of making mistakes, remains a democracy which shares European common values and is our ally in the fight against global terrorism.
The Fava report is heavy on allegations and accusations, but light on conclusive proof. Inevitably some mistakes and excesses may have occurred but in my opinion there was no systematic US policy for extraordinary renditions to illegally torture abductees in third countries or any proof of the existence of CIA detention camps in Romania or Poland. Where there is evidence of wrong doing such as in Italy, the national criminal justice systems have kicked in and started prosecutions. Simple renditions of illegal combatant terror suspects through EU territory are a proven fact, but not necessarily illegal in international law where torture is not involved and diplomatic assurances to the Member States do offer safeguards in extradition cases to third countries. The report also seeks to extend the powers of the European Parliament into areas like security and counter-terrorism which are the remit more properly of national parliaments and governments. I particularly dislike the request of the British Government to extend consular protection to former UK residents who had not bothered to become citizens, but chosen instead to travel to dangerous parts of the world. This is contrary to all the traditional obligations and rights of citizenship of our Member States. Finally, calls for Article 6 and 7 sanctions against Member States are totally unacceptable in my view."
Claude MORAES (PES, UK) said "Whatever the political difficulties in this inquiry, above all we had a duty to European citizens not only to investigate existing allegations of rendition, but to ensure that we set a human rights standard in this continent, not just for the current victims but for any future victims and communities who may be affected by rendition or human rights abuse. The rapporteur, my political group and all of those Members in this House who genuinely care about human rights have worked extremely hard to present a plenary report with substance and balance. It is important that a credible report goes to Council. We now have the opportunity shortly to vote for such a report, a report which I believe deserves broad support right across this House."
Proinsias DE ROSSA (PES, IE) said: "All 785 of us have a responsibility to demonstrate that our Treaty commitments to human rights are not just rhetoric. We have established that some Member States authorities, including unfortunately Ireland, are colluding in a breach of human rights. If we do not loudly shout 'stop' our people will believe they are on their own and that would be disastrous for the cohesion and indeed the future of our democracies. We are not talking about history, nor do we lack evidence. We have it straight from President Bush that he will continue with extraordinary renditions and with secret detention centres. Member States, the Commission, the Council have an obligation to take on board our 100 or more recommendations on getting to the full truth, preventing abuse of human rights and torture and ensuring our intelligence services are accountable to our parliaments. To be successful in countering terrorism, we have to defend our democratic and our humanitarian values, not abandon them as too costly or inconvenient. Otherwise we concede victory to those who want to destroy those self same values.
Finally, I want to urge Members in particular to reject amendment 38 from the UEN, which seeks to create the fiction that the problem is an outdated Chicago Convention. The problem is a failure of Member States to actually implement the Chicago Convention."
Response to the debate
Mr Gloser responded for the Council. He said that while there had been many differences between the different contributors to the debate, it was clear that "the large majority of the chamber agrees that combat of terrorism is necessary, this purpose is legitimate, but it must be fought only with legal means." He said that the Council did not have any competences here, and he rejected out of hand the criticism of Javier Solana, who had, he said, cooperated with the committee "within his means."
It was important and right for Member States, he said, to carry out the necessary investigations and reveal the factual situation. In some cases, he said, the report turned allegations and assumptions into facts. Saying that references to Articles 6 and 7 of the treaty could be "a formal argument" he said the Council did not have any powers to introduce measures.
Regarding the secret services, he said the important thing was the basis for their work, and that remained within the remit of the Member States. Finally, he said that security issues and the combat with international terrorism were not limited to EU Member States – they could only be solved via international cooperation, with the United States, working on basis of common values shared by the EU and the US.
Commissioner Frattini said all could agree on the principle on that security and fundamental freedoms can never be played off one against the other. "A single violation committed during an investigation makes it mandatory for courts to punish those responsible and reject the evidence obtained – and also gives a propaganda victory to terrorists." Rules, he said, must be respected in investigations, otherwise the law is broken and terrorists will not be punished by the law. "We have had far too few terrorists convicted so far," he said.
He said that the report would have added value if it was clear that it was not a condemnation of United States. It should not make general value judgements or make rulings, something which should be left for the courts.
The added value of report was that it sent a message of firmness and unity against terrorism, he said. "The message to terrorists is that they cannot take any comfort – terrorist break laws and we must respect them. I hope there will be huge vote in favour of Member States discharging their moral and institutional duty to find out what has happened and change the rules where necessary, including on secret services."
Finally, he said that more European-United States cooperation was needed both on security and respect for individual rights.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
European Council
Lisbon Strategy: MEPs urge action on labour market, innovation and energy
2007-02-19 - 12:58
Parliament welcomes the efforts made by the Commission and the Member States to make the Lisbon Strategy a success, and sets out, in a resolution adopted on Wednesday, a range of further action that will be needed. The resolution, adopted by 438 votes in favour to 103 against with 30 abstentions, sets out MEPs' expectations of the spring meeting of EU Heads of State or Government, which is always mainly devoted to economic affairs. The Lisbon Strategy, first adopted by EU leaders in 2000, is a package of measures aimed at improving the performance of European economies.
Parliament stresses the interdependence of economic, social and environmental reforms, which, along with growth and employment are the prerequisites for success in creating a dynamic and innovative economy and society. MEPs say that the EU should strive to become the most resource- and energy-efficient economic area in the world.
MEPs stress that solving economic and employment problems will require the active involvement of Parliaments at both national and European level. It also wants greater involvement of civil society actors to increase the "ownership" of the Lisbon Strategy by the whole of society. MEPs add that the role of the national "Mr or Mrs Lisbon" - the minister charged with coordination national action under the Lisbon Strategy - needs to be made more effective.
Labour markets balancing flexibility and security
Regarding labour markets, Parliament says reforms must aim to reconcile the demands of industry for greater flexibility with the demands of workers for more security, for example by creating new job prospect and new forms of security. MEPs say a special effort is needed to promote policies of employment training for unemployed workers who are less qualified and to improve the educational system.
Parliament wants action to raise labour market participation among young people, female and older workers. This would include: ensuring employment, training or similar opportunities are offered to every school leaver within six months; improving the employment rate among disabled people; reducing the start-up time for new businesses to at most one week; raising investment in childcare; reducing the tax burden on employment; combating discrimination and social exclusion; raising investment in innovation.
Innovation and trade
On a related point, MEPs stress that enforcement and protection of intellectual property rights is still relatively costly and time-consuming in Europe. They call for EU-wide standards, improved cooperation between national standardisation bodes and simplified procedures in this area. They add that the failure to make progress on European patent policy is “exceptionally regrettable,” and call for a new strategy on this from the Commission.
Parliament says “free and fair trade enhances prosperity in Europe and the wider world.” It calls for Member States to refrain from protectionism, while also noting that international trade can have negative consequences for the most vulnerable and least qualified workers in some sectors. It says it is ready to “consider appropriate trade measures against 'free rider' countries, which do not shoulder their fiar share of the burden of combating global climate change.
Research and energy
Welcoming the adoption of the Seventh Framework Programme, Parliament points out that it has repeatedly stressed the importance of research and development and the increased role of knowledge in fostering economic growth and social and environmental well-being.
MEPs say further efforts to establish a common energy policy are essential to the success of the Lisbon Strategy. The aim should be to create more competition and benefits for consumers. Parliament notes that nuclear power is an important part of the energy mix for some Member States, but it also notes the risks involved and the problem of nuclear waste. The use of nuclear power is a matter for each Member State to decide for itself, says MEPs.
Parliament urges the European Council to endorse the Commission's energy action plan, placing consumers at the heart of energy policy. It says there should be a road map to achieve a renewable energy share of 20 per cent by 2020, a target of 30 per cent reduction of CO2 emissions for all industrialised countries by 2020, with a minimum target of 20 per cent for the EU.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Environment
Major recycling operation for Europe's waste policy
2007-02-19 - 12:58
Parliament mounted an assault on Europe's growing waste mountain when it beefed up the new framework directive on waste proposed by the European Commission. Despite existing legislation, we are producing more waste every year. MEPs are convinced this cannot go on: they want the upward curve to be halted in 2012 and waste production to start declining from 2020. Parliament adopted a report by Caroline Jackson (EPP-ED, UK) on the framework directive by 651 votes to 19 with 16 abstentions (co-decision procedure, first reading). They also adopted an own-initiative report by Johannes Blokland (IND/DEM, NL) on the "thematic strategy" for waste, a more general text without binding rules, whose content they wish to flesh out and make more ambitious. The vote on this report was 662 to 17, with 3 abstentions.
As result of these votes, the principle of a "hierarchy (in the treatment) of waste" is for the first time laid down in a piece of draft legislation as well as in the "thematic strategy", which will give rise to other, more specific, measures in future.
The main aim of the "hierarchy" is to prevent and reduce waste production. It also lays down an order of preference for waste operations: re-use, recycling, other recovery operations and, as a last resort, safe and environmentally sound disposal.
Opinions differed among MEPs as to how binding this hierarchy should be. In the end it was agreed that derogations from the order of priorities should only be allowed on the basis of established, publicly available scientific criteria.
Incinerators in the firing line
For MEPs a crucial point is to reduce the amount of landfill and incineration, both of which cause pollution. In the debate ahead of the vote, however, Members were divided over whether incineration should be regarded as a form of disposal or a recovery operation. The Commission initially proposed that it should be categorised as recovery, provided it meets a certain energy efficiency standard.
MEPs backed the energy efficiency principle by laying down a scale of standards to be met by incinerators.
In the end a majority of MEPs rejected the idea that incineration should be regarded as recovery. If this option remains in the legislation at the end of the co-decision procedure, those involved in waste processing will no longer be able to opt as easily as they can today for the simple solution of incineration.
Stopping waste from piling up
MEPs also want Member States to draw up national prevention programmes within 18 months of the entry-into-force of the directive. The aim would be to stabilise waste production at the level reached in 2008 by 2012. In addition, reduction targets to be reached by 2020 would have to be laid down by 2010.
Parliament also introduces targets for re-use and recycling. By 2020, 50% of municipal solid waste and 70% of waste from construction, demolition, industry and manufacturing must be re-used or recycled. In principle any waste must, wherever possible, at least be recovered. Rules on landfill are also tightened up.
The "thematic strategy" now contains a schedule:
- by 2015, landfill will be banned for at least paper, glass, textiles, plastic and metal and separate waste collection systems for these categories must be set up;
- by 2020, no recyclable waste must end up in landfill sites.
Tough negotiations with Council ahead
MEPs added a good many further provisions or principles which are more binding than those contained in the Commission's initial proposal:
- introduction of a "polluter-pays principle";
- introduction of a "proximity principle", i.e. that waste for disposal should be processed in one of the "nearest appropriate installations", regardless of national frontiers;
- a new article on traceability and control of hazardous waste;
- a ban on mixing different categories of hazardous waste; hazardous compounds should be separated from all waste streams before they enter the recovery chain;
- a call for legislation to be proposed to define which secondary products are no longer deemed to be waste;
- new articles on biowaste and catering waste;
- new articles on permits, especially for hazardous waste, and on sanctions;
- creation of a Consultation Forum on Waste Management.
The ambitious goals that Parliament has laid down with this first reading vote, together with the differing views, for example over incineration, herald a tricky co-decision procedure with the Council. At present, in some Member States, up to 90% of municipal waste goes to landfill sites. Europe-wide, only 33% of waste is recycled or composted.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Environment
Climate change: tougher targets needed, say MEPs
2007-02-19 - 12:58
In a resolution on climate change, Parliament calls for a range of clear and binding measures to tackle the problem in the medium and long-term. The resolution is the EP's response to the Commission's paper "Limiting Global Climate Change to 2 degrees Celsius - the way ahead for 2020 and beyond", published in January. Tackling climate change is on the agenda of the EU's spring summit and is a priority of the German Council presidency. MEPs believe the EU's strategy on climate change should be based on two key objectives: to limit the average global temperature increase to 2°C above pre-industrialisation levels; and to undertake overall emission reductions for all industrialised countries of 30% in comparison with 1990 levels by 2020, with a view to achieving a reduction in the order of 60-80% by 2050.
The resolution regrets the lack of clarity of the Commission's "energy and climate package" with regard to the target for greenhouse gas (GHG) emission reductions for 2020 and demands an overall reduction of 30% for all industrialised countries, to have a reasonable chance of attaining the EU objective of limiting the average temperature increase to 2°C. It adds that the EU should base all its internal policies on the target of 30% by 2020.
Parliament stresses that energy policy is a crucial element of EU global strategy on climate change and that diversification of renewable energy resources and a switch to the most energy efficient technologies has great potential for emission reductions.
Greater energy efficiency offers a huge potential for emission reductions, so MEPs want the Commission and Member States to adopt ambitious measures in this field and to consider going beyond the Commission's proposed 20% reduction target. They also urge greater use of combined heat and power, given the inefficiency of many existing power plants.
Well-balanced national tax/levy systems can also help improve energy efficiency. An EU-wide tax system to promote a low carbon economy should also be considered.
Energy consumption is increasing most in the transport sector and road transport contributes to roughly 25% of the Community's CO2 emissions. Steps are needed to boost public transport, introduce binding measures for the transport sector, including aviation, and encourage more integrated and greener public transport. Aviation and maritime transport emissions should be included in post-2012 international commitments.
Given the urgent need to reduce CO2 emissions from cars, MEPs call on the Commission to impose a binding target of 120 grams per kilometre by 2012 for new passenger cars marketed in the EU.
Parliament notes the proposal of a binding target to increase the level of renewable energy in the EU energy mix to 20% by 2020 as a good starting point but believes this should be increased to 25%. It also points to the absence of binding targets for individual sectors and urges such targets notably for electricity generation, heating and cooling.
The Commission's proposed binding minimum target for biofuels of 10% of vehicle fuels in 2020 is noted, but MEPs believe a figure of 12.5% would also be realistic and desirable. They stress the importance of sustainable production of biofuels, but add that this must not be at the expense of food production nor aggravate deforestation. They therefore call for mandatory environmental and social certification of biofuels.
With a reference to the Stern Review, MEPs underline the economic, social and health costs of inaction, which would cause damage corresponding to 5-20% of global GDP per year, whereas the cost of a sound climate policy and investment in clean technologies is put at between 0.5% and 1% of global annual GDP up to 2050.
The resolution also calls for targets to be set for ultra-low or non-CO2 emitting energy technologies, so as to supply 60% of electricity by 2020. Lastly, it states that cutting global emissions must not lead to other threats such as nuclear proliferation or terrorism; nuclear power should therefore remain excluded from CDM/JI or other mechanisms aimed at rewarding emission reductions in developing countries.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Environment
Better geographical data: conciliation agreement approved by EP on INSPIRE
2007-02-19 - 12:58
Europe needs better map-based information to support its policies, especially on the environment. A new database designed to achieve this - known as INSPIRE -should be in place by early 2009. Parliament and the Council struck a deal which was approved by MEPs which will enable data to be shared across the EU, without undermining high quality services in the Member States. INSPIRE (Infrastructure for Spatial Information in the Community), a project put forward by the European Commission in July 2004, aims to pool and improve the standard of geographical data generated in the various EU Member States (such as satellite images, temperature records, rainfall levels) in order to improve the planning and implementation of Community policies in areas such as the environment, transport, energy and agriculture. This should lead to better understanding of problems such as floods or air and water pollution, which recognise no national borders.
After two readings by Parliament and Council under the co-decision procedure, the chief points of disagreement remaining between MEPs and EU governments were intellectual property rights, derogations to the sharing of spatial data and the financial viability of publicly owned bodies. All these points were settled at a conciliation meeting on 21 November 2006, with the outcome being described as a "fantastic result" by Frieda Brepoels (EPP-ED, BE), who piloted the legislation through Parliament. "We had hoped for an agreement at first reading but meanwhile our proposal developed", she said.
Data protection, confidentiality and intellectual property rights
Parliament successfully insisted that the directive should not conflict with the provisions of the Aarhus Convention on access to environmental information nor with Directive 2003/4/EC by which the convention is implemented in the EU - a point stressed by the chair of the EP delegation to the Conciliation Committee, Alejo Vidal-Quadras (EPP-ED, ES). In this connection, the Council agreed to drop its amendment seeking to allow broad derogations to the application of the 2003 directive on grounds of confidentiality of statistics or of personal data, the wording of the amendment being judged too vague by MEPs. This decision was, according to the negotiators, one of the keys to reaching an agreement.
However, Member States will, for example, be able to restrict public access to network consultation services displaying panoramic views where there is a risk to international relations, public security or national defence. They will also be allowed to limit access to e-commerce services on a range of grounds (confidentiality of proceedings of public authorities; international relations, public security or national defence; confidentiality of commercial information; intellectual property rights; confidentiality of personal data; protection of any person who supplied the information requested on a voluntary basis; protection of the environment).
The agreed text also states that INSPIRE does not affect the existence or ownership of public authorities' intellectual property rights.
Guaranteeing the financial viability of public services
At Parliament's insistence, the Member States will have to make available free of charge the services for discovering and, subject to certain specific conditions, viewing spatial data sets.
However, because some Member States were concerned about the financial sustainability of their weather forecasting services, a derogation to the principle of free public access will allow the public authorities to levy charges "where such charges are securing the maintenance of spatial data sets and corresponding data services, especially in cases involving large volumes of frequently updated data".
More generally, the question of ensuring the financial viability of public services for supplying spatial data was another key point of the agreement. Under the compromise, Member States may allow public authorities which supply spatial data sets "to license them to, and/or require payment from, the public authorities or institutions and bodies of the Community" which use them. However, any such charges and licences "must be fully compatible with the general aim of facilitating the sharing of spatial data" and must "be kept to the minimum required to ensure the necessary quality and supply of spatial data sets and services together with a reasonable return on investment". Moreover, spatial data provided under Community legislation relating to the environment may not be subject to charging.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External relations
Darfur: MEPs want to set a date for deployment of a United Nations supported peacekeeping force
2007-02-19 - 12:58
In a joint resolution adopted by MEPs, the EP calls on the United Nations, even in the absence of consent or agreement from the Sudanese Government, to clearly set a date for deployment of a United-Nations-supported peacekeeping force to secure humanitarian aid corridors. A no-fly zone over the region and sanctions are proposed while China's role in Darfur is criticised. The resolution also calls on the governments of the Member States of the EU, the Council and the Commission to assume their responsibilities and make every possible effort to protect the people of Darfur from a humanitarian disaster. MEPs call on the international community, including the EU Member States, to make equipment available in the region for the enforcement of the no-fly zone over Darfur - a region the Sudanese Government has been bombing.
Another concern for the House is China who should cease to export arms to Sudan and to stop blocking decisions on targeted sanctions in the UN Security Council. The European Parliament is also in favour of targeted economic sanctions, including travel bans and asset freezes and threatens to have an embargo on oil.
Some of the authors of the resolution - Philippe Morillon (ALDE, FR), Simon Coveney (EPP-ED, IE), Ana Gomes (PES, PT) and Jean Lambert (Greens/EFA, UK) underlined during a press conference on Wednesday 14 February that the dramatic deterioration of the humanitarian situation in Darfur sparked the further mobilisation of the European Parliament.
The absence of the Council of Ministers was heavily criticised by some MEPs during the debate. They also criticised the watered-down conclusions of the General Affairs and External Relations Council (GAERC) meeting of 12 February. (See link below) General Affairs and External Relations - conclusions
EN
1
LINK
http://www.consilium.europa.eu/ueDocs/cms_Data/docs/pressData/en/gena/92758.pdf
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External relations
More common action needed on fighting international terrorism, says European Parliament
2007-02-19 - 12:58
MEPs think the most serious external threat to the EU lies in radical Islamic terrorist groups. They therefore call on the Council to step up the fight against such actors by agreeing on a common definition, increasing resources and power to relevant bodies such as Europol, the EU Anti-Terrorism Coordinator and the International Criminal Court. "The most serious threat to Europe at the moment is posed by violent radical groups claiming to defend Islam, such as the criminal Al-Qaeda network and the groups which are affiliated to it or are inspired by its ideology," claims an own-initiative report by Luis Yañez-Barnuevo (PES, ES) passed by a large majority (500-53-51) by the plenary.
The report advocates a larger degree of coordination and cooperation at EU level. It "regrets the fact that [...] some Member States have not yet signed and/or ratified some of the 16 United Nations universal instruments on combating terrorism," and urges them do so. It also "calls on the Council to adopt a common position establishing a definition of terrorism," "reiterates the need to exercise effective control over various Islamic charities." At the same time, MEPs emphasised the need to "ensure that certain groups of people from various diasporas living in Europe are not stigmatised," and call for a "constructive and serious dialogue between peoples and nations, as well as between cultures, religions and civilisations."
MEPs made further recommendations for the Union's foreign policy, emphasising "the need for greater cooperation and coordination with the United States in the fight against international terrorism, while stressing the need for fundamental Human Rights principles to be protected." They also called "on countries with which the EU has commenced accession negotiations or which have expressed their intention of joining the EU to take immediate measures to disband nationalistic and fanatical organisations which are directly opposed to the democratic principles of the Union and stir up animosities and racial hatred."
Institutional recommendations
On the institutional front, the Parliament expressed its wish for "an increase in Europol's powers," "an increase in the powers and resources available to the EU Anti-Terrorism Coordinator," and the "abrogation of the unanimity rule concerning some areas of police and judicial cooperation." MEPs also stress that "the response adopted by the EU in the face of terrorism must be proportionate and properly targeted on the fight against terrorism, bearing in mind that, until proven otherwise, the most productive measures in the fight against new forms of terrorism are effective intelligence and police services."
Finally, the report "calls on the Commission and the Council, in order to make the International Criminal Court (ICC) more acceptable and realistic, to include acts of terrorism within its jurisdiction, as these constitute crimes against humanity." The EP insisted on "the need to continue defending human rights and fundamental freedoms in the fight against terrorism," since "their violation clearly jeopardises the fight against terrorism and constitutes a failure of democracy."
Reactions by the Commission and MEPs
In a debate held at the EP yesterday afternoon, External Relations Commissioner Benita Ferrero-Waldner expressed her satisfaction with the report. Nevertheless, she also suggested caution before changing the definitions of crimes against humanity at the ICC, noting that any changes to its statute might undermine efforts to broaden international support for the court.
Tobias Pflüger (GUE/NGL, DE) noted that his group had submitted a minority opinion to the report, as they found that it does not sufficiently address the root causes of terrorism, such as poverty and political injustice. He also expressed his dissatisfaction with the fact that terrorist acts committed by states were not dealt with by the report.
The EU's role in counter-terrorism
Counter-terrorism is not an entirely new topic for the European Parliament. A few days before the 9/11 attacks in New York, MEPs had adopted a resolution containing a series of recommendations on the role of the EU in combating terrorism - among them the call for a European arrest warrant and a common definition of terrorism among Member States.
Eurojust and Europol both have important roles to play in coordinating Member States' counter-terrorism activities. All these steps are overseen by the European Union's Anti-Terrorism Coordinator, Gijs de Vries, who has recently announced that he will be stepping down in March from his post, after three years in the job. He has come under harsh criticism by MEPs for his inability to give satisfactory answers to questions by the EP's temporary committee on the alleged use of European countries by the CIA for the transport and illegal detention of prisoners.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Women's rights/Equal opportunities
Women's rights in Turkey: MEPs say improvements still needed
2007-02-19 - 12:58
Turkey's legal framework on women's rights "has in general been satisfactory, but its substantive implementation remains flawed", says the European Parliament in its second report on women's role in social, economic and political life in Turkey. The report emphasises that respecting human rights, including women’s rights, is a condition sine qua non for Turkey's membership of the EU. The own-initiative report by Emine Bozkurt (PES, NL) and adopted with 522 votes in favour, 15 against and 53 abstentions, which follows up Parliament's July 2005 resolution on women's role in Turkey, highlights key areas of concern. It welcomes the start of active EU accession negotiations with Turkey, but "regrets the slowing down of the reform process in Turkey over the last year and the persistent problem with women's rights" and reiterates Parliament's call for "full and effective implementation of the Community acquis in the field of women's rights, particularly in the poorer regions of the country".
Implementation of legislation
MEPs urge the Turkish Government to speed up implementation of the new legislation on women's rights so as to ensure that it is absolutely in line with the requirements of the Community acquis and that it is effectively implemented in practice.
Even though MEPs acknowledge that the new Penal Code (in force since 2005) substantially strengthens the basic rights of women, they also note with concern that (unsuccessful) attempts have been made to repeal legislation on women's rights. MEPs also deplore the fact that, in parts of south-east Turkey, girls are not registered at birth. MEPs note that this hampers the fight against forced marriage and "crimes in the name of honour", since the victims have no official identity, and they urge the Turkish authorities to continue taking all necessary measures to ensure that all Turkish children are registered at birth.
Availability of data
MEPs note that there is still a lack of accurate data on the situation of women in Turkey and that existing data do not yet cover all problems relating to the situation, role and rights of women. In that respect they welcome the initiative launched at the beginning of 2007 by the Turkish State Institute of Statistics to provide 'gender statistics' relating to social, cultural and economic life, including data on the gender pay gap.
Tackling violence against women
The report condemns "instances of violence against women, including honour killings, domestic violence, forced marriage and polygamy". It calls on the Turkish Government and the Commission to tackle "violence in general and honour crime in particular" as a priority and to set up special high-security shelters. The report also "stresses the importance of systematic investigation and effective punishment" and therefore the training of police and judicial authorities in gender equality issues and the fight against violence. MEPs call on Turkish institutions to build alliances with all groupings - civil, social or religious in society so as to initiate awareness-raising campaigns against violence against women and children.
Women in politics
The report notes that the political participation by women in Turkey is too low and that there is an absolute need for female role models in positions of power and decision-making. MEPs point out that discrimination against women can sometimes best be remedied by temporary positive discrimination measures. MEPs also urge the political parties in Turkey, starting from the upcoming elections in 2007, to include more female candidates on election lists.
Gender equality in access to education and labour market
Parliament expresses concern about the Commission's observation that women remain vulnerable to discriminatory practices in Turkey, due inter alia to a lack of education and a high illiteracy rate. UNICEF estimates that each year between 600,000 and 800,000 girls are either prevented by their families from going to school or do not attend it because of logistical difficulties. MEPs therefore call on the Turkish government to ensure gender equality in access to education and the labour market, especially in the south-eastern regions. The female employment rate in Turkey is just under 25%, compared to the average women's employment rate in EU-25 of 55%.
Lastly, MEPs note that they intend to evaluate the progress in the field of women's rights in Turkey on a regular basis in addition to the yearly progress report of the Commission.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Industry
MEPs want to five voice to small shareholders
2007-02-19 - 12:58
By approving the report by Klaus-Heiner Lehne (EPP-ED, DE), MEPs backed the Commission's proposal to ensure that all shareholders of a EU listed company are able to cast their votes at the firm's general meetings, no matter where they reside. According to the Commission, EU-citizens holding shares in a listed company situated in another Member State often face problems when exercising their voting rights. This can be particularly true for small shareholders, who sometimes encounter obstacles that make voting practically impossible. The proposed directive aims to simplify the procedures for voting, including the possibility of proxy voting, and to improve access to information before a general meeting takes place.
MEPs agreed that it is necessary to enable all shareholders to take reasoned decisions and to cast their votes in time. Indeed, the approved text establishes that all general meetings must be convened sufficiently in advance and that all related documents must be made available in time to all shareholders. Particularly, MEPs decided that the convocation of a company's general meeting must be issued not later than 21 days before it takes place.
The European Parliament amended the proposal also to specify the provisions related to the obligation of the company to post on its website basic information on the incoming general meeting. The approved text, in fact, calls on Member States to ensure that all shareholders, with no distinction according to individual shares, are informed about the agenda of the meeting and the resolutions to be adopted. In addition, all shareholders should be able to put items on the general meetings' agenda and to table resolutions.
Moreover, MEPs adopted amendments to simplify the exercise of proxy voting. In fact, they ask Member States to remove any restriction to the eligibility of persons to be appointed as proxy holders. Nevertheless, MEPs have also set rules to avoid conflict of interest, when, for instance, the designed proxy holder is a controlling shareholder of the same company. The approved report also provides that the proxy holder must cast his vote in accordance with the instructions provided by the shareholder. Finally, MEPs expressly excluded cooperatives from the scope of the directive, because of their special membership structure.
According to Mr Lehne, the text adopted by the House is the result of an agreement with the Council and aims at reaching a first reading approval.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Industry
Radio Spectrum - Towards a sustainable approach
2007-02-19 - 12:58
An unlicensed model, tradable rights and standards regarding the service and technology neutrality, within a very clear framework, are the key principals for a future European policy on radio spectrum, says the European Parliament in an own-initiative report drafted by Fiona HALL (ALDE, UK) and almost unanimously adopted. Fiona HALL said: "Creating a more flexible approach to radio spectrum management is essential. European innovation in wireless technology will be held back unless more efficient use is made of spectrum. At the heart of this debate is the Lisbon agenda of growth and jobs. It's important not to get this political commitment mixed up with the technical issue of how such services ought to be delivered. It be a big mistake to ring-fence the frequencies currently used by broadcasting services by insisting on their exclusion from any new approach to spectrum management."
MEPs stress that there could be more unrestricted use of spectrum and “welcome the Commission's proposal to adopt differentiated spectrum management models including the unlicensed model which provides additional flexibility by allowing for free access within some technical limitations." They consider " that developing the right mix between the different type of licensing models manners will be important in achieving EU policy objectives” However, the freeing up of spectrum raises a number of issues for existing users and therefore needs to take place within a very clear legal framework.
For MEPs, the principle of service and technology neutrality is the key to a more efficient use of spectrum. When access to spectrum is without restriction on the service to be offered on a particular bandwidth or the technology to be used for the delivery of that service then spectrum-dependent innovation is able to flourish, underlined the House.
MEPs emphasise that spectrum management should not only be based on a market-driven approach but also needs to take into account wider social, cultural and political considerations. Adequate amounts of spectrum should be allocated to meet the needs of consumers and of services of public and general interests. The stability and continuity of media services provided by broadcasters needs to be secured but on the other hand a level playing field for new entrants and for new technologies is important since room for innovation must be guaranteed.
In the EU, the regimes for assigning spectrum to interested parties differ from Member State to Member State and this divergence can cause additional delays and costs. Therefore, the Parliament takes the view that "the EU will require efficient and responsive guidelines for common decision-making mechanisms and that, furthermore, a European register will be needed with the completion, expansion and accessibility of the EFIS database." So, Member States are called upon to support enhanced cooperation measures between spectrum management authorities.
MEPs consider that the introduction of a market-based approach to spectrum will be most effective if based on a consensual agreement backed by regulators, operators and other actors." They highlight that a common agreement at political level be reached for their implementation, in accordance with the existing division of competences between the European Union and the Member States.
Summing up, MEPs underline that the European Union "needs to adopt a sustainable approach to spectrum which will promote competition and the development of innovative technologies, inhibit the hoarding of frequency rights and the aggregation of monopolies and benefit consumers, and that this approach should take into consideration technological change as well as the needs of market players and of citizens."
Background:
During the past decades technological progress has started to change the quality and the notion of communications, signalling the beginning of a new era of communication and information diffusion based on powerful electronic superhighways. Fibre optics, semiconductors, broadband integrated networks, intelligence networks, UMTS and multimedia broadcasting have been major achievements of the last decades.
The deployment of many of these technologies is dependent on the existence of enough spectrum for the players that would like to enter the market. Spectrum is a “scarce” resource with two specific technical characteristics. On the one hand, it is an indefinite, renewable resource in that using it does not make it "used up". On the other hand, it has been allocated into portions, each with a specific use. This means that once a spectrum portion is occupied by one user, it cannot be occupied by another. As spectrum is needed in all electronic communications the demand is very high and at present there does not appear to be enough spectrum width available to meet that demand.
Up to now the system used for spectrum allocation has operated at four levels (international, European, inter-regional and national), with the result that six to eight years elapse between the request for allocation and the assignment of a frequency. With a view to avoiding interference, spectrum bands have traditionally been allocated for specific uses and specific technologies. However, the rapid development of technology and the convergence of telecommunications, media and electronic devices have created a dynamic environment for which the traditional approach is too slow and inflexible to deliver the spectrum access needed.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Economic and monetary affairs
Improving economy is an opportunity to reform and invest for the future
2007-02-19 - 12:58
Europe should take advantage of the present improvement in economic growth to make the changes and investment needed to enhance its potential growth rates for the longer term, so as to be able to generate more employment. This is the key message of a report on the EU’s Broad Economic Policy Guidelines. In their advice to Member States, contained in the report drawn up by Udo BULLMANN (PES, DE), MEPs call, among other points, for:
• effective coordination of economic policies, including growth-intensive public spending, stimulation of private investment and public-private cooperation, notably on projects for science, research, transport, communication, energy and environmental sustainability;
• improved access to financing for small and medium sized businesses, along with favourable tax and social contribution arrangements;
• the curbing of protectionist tendencies;
• action to make the labour market more inclusive, balancing job security and flexibility, as well as better opportunities to combine professional and family life;
• enhanced and structured economic cooperation in the EU and in particular the euro area.
Institutional action recommended by the report includes:
• a “league table” of the best and worst performers among the Member States in terms of implementing reforms to achieve the jobs and growth goals of the Lisbon Strategy;
• action to make the Lisbon Strategy more visible to all players in Member States’ societies, with broader consultation;
• a joint process of reflection between the EU bodies via an inter-institutional working party following the spring summit, to develop the next set of integrated policy guidelines for the years to come.
The Broad Economic Policy Guidelines, adopted each year by the EU’s Heads of State or Government at their spring summit, are one of the main methods for coordinating economic policy between the EU’s Member States. Together with the Employment Policy Guidelines, they form a package, known as the “integrated policy guidelines.”
The Employment Guidelines are set for three years at a time, so the parallel report from Jan ANDERSSON (PES, SE) limits itself to a call for Parliament to be given adequate time to play a full role in developing the next set of guidelines for 2008.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Economic and monetary affairs
MEPs praise the European Investment Bank
2007-02-19 - 12:58
After a debate with the President of the European Investment Bank, Philippe Maystadt, MEPs adopted a report on Thursday, 15 February 2007 a report which is, in general, strongly supportive of the Bank’s work. MEPs are nevertheless presenting some suggestions for improvement, such as greater consistency in the EIB’s external mandate, a new environmental framework and the involvement of civil society organisations in developing social standards. The report was drawn up by Cristobal Montoro Romero (EPP-ED, ES).
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Energy
Call for action to soften economic impact of rising energy prices
2007-02-19 - 12:58
Europe should act now to prevent increasing energy prices damaging Europe’s economy, according to MEPs. Parliament adopted a report on Thursday which says that if no action is taken, Europe’s dependency on energy imports will rise from 50 per cent today to 71 per cent in 2030. They call for a massive investment in energy infrastructure and supply and new measures to improve energy-efficiency. The report, drawn up by Manuel Antonio dos Santos (PES, PT), notes that the present increase in oil prices is of a similar scale to those of the 1970s and early 1980s, but differs from those shocks in that a substantial element is caused by growing demand from economies such as China, so part of the rise will be permanent.
Economic impact – especially on the poorest
MEPs stress the tangible effect of oil price increases on the EU, which have reduced growth, investment and employment while increasing inflationary pressure and interest rates. They note in particular the social consequences of higher energy prices, which hit the poorest and most vulnerable especially hard.
The transport and housing sectors in particular are most affected, say MEPs. The report includes a call for a comprehensive EU strategy to phase out fossil fuels in the transport sector, while expanding the use of unconventional fuels. Ensuring fair energy prices in the domestic energy market means completing the single market in a sector often dominated by a few companies, with the unbundling of infrastructure and supply of energy being essential according to MEPs.
Massive investment needed
Parliament is calling for a “massive investment in energy infrastructure and supply over the coming years” alongside an in-depth, Community-wide, debate on different energy sources. It asks the Commission and Council to draw up a detailed plan to reduce EU dependence on oil imports and for a shift toward clean energy. It also urges the adoption of energy efficiency improvements, which, it says, are the cheapest way to cut CO2 emissions and improve energy security. Fiscal policy should be used to encourage these moves, and public procurement selection criteria should include energy efficiency.
The report calls for an integrated EU emergency mechanism for security of supply to increase the minimum oil stock from 90 to 120 consumption days and develop a minimum gas stock of at least 90 days and expresses regret that the Commission did not suggest doing so in its proposals of 10 January. Parliament suggests following the US model of publishing weekly breakdowns of European oil and oil product stocks.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Visa policy
Easier travel between EU and Russia
2007-02-19 - 12:58
The European Parliament adopted two reports on facilitating the movement of people between Russia and the EU. This is the first serious attempt to put flesh on the agreement reached by the two sides, at the St Petersburg Summit in 2003, to strengthen their relationship by creating a common area of freedom, security and justice. In the two consultation reports, drafted by Maria da Assunção ESTEVES (EPP-ED, PT) the House supports without amendment an agreement concluded with Russia on the issuance of short-stay visas to foster travel by citizens in both directions, and another agreement on ensuring the readmission of illegal immigrants by Russia. first report was adopted with 453 votes in favour, 56 against and 31 abstentions.
The readmission agreement between the European Community and Russia is the fifth of this kind to have been negotiated and concluded by the EU with a third country. In the case of Russia, the two agreements are linked and should be signed and enter into force at the same time.
In her explanatory statement Maria Esteves argues that any agreement on visas with Russia should be based on genuine conditions of reciprocity but that visas for EU citizens wishing to enter Russia are currently subject to complex compulsory registration and people wishing to travel to Siberia or the Chechen Republic - for example journalists - require additional authorisation and must pay a supplementary fee, whereas a Schengen short-stay visa allows Russians unrestricted travel within the Schengen zone. She also notes the difficulties encountered by journalists, NGOs and members of the clergy in obtaining and renewing visas for Russia in recent years.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Agriculture
Cautious approach to reforming the wine sector, say MEPs
2007-02-19 - 12:58
Cautious, carefully-managed reform is needed to restore the vitality of the EU wine sector, says a report adopted by the European Parliament with 484 votes in favour to 129 against and 24 abstentions. It recommends retaining distillation measures for now, empowering Member States to restrict grubbing-up of vines, and liberalising planting rights only gradually. It also advocates strict labelling rules and maintaining current regulations on acceptable winemaking practices. Distillation
The own-initiative report by Katerina BATZELI (PES, EL) on the EU's Common Market Organisation (CMO) in wine argues that the "public storage of alcohol should be abolished," but at the same time "rejects the immediate abolition of the distillation mechanism and other market support measures" and suggests that the distillation measures should be converted into two parts:
"compulsory distillation, which will act as a safety net and allow the gradual reorganisation of the market", and
"voluntary distillation, [...] which will allow the adaptation of the sector for wine alcohol used for incorporation into certain wine products", such as liqueurs and brandies.
Furthermore, the Parliament "considers it appropriate to offer incentives for alternative uses of alcohol and the by-products of vinification, via bio-energy policies that may make a valid contribution to combating production surpluses," and argues for a new crisis management mechanism for use in times of emergency.
Grubbing up
Parliament reiterates its stance that "the issue of permanent abandonment of wine-growing must not be the centrepiece of CMO reform." It considers it essential that each Member State and region be able to set a "flexible upper limit for grubbing-up for each region, and that they should have the opportunity to select which categories of wine will take priority in the grubbing-up programme." To this end, the report suggests that eligibility for grubbing-up aid should be subject to certain Community criteria, to take account of the specific features of, for example:
- vineyards in mountainous, coastal and island regions,
- vineyards with geographical indications or registered designations of origin,
- vineyards where soil erosion or biodiversity loss could be a problem,
- traditional regions of historical importance, or
- vineyards that have received structural aid from the EU.
Liberalisation of new plantings and promotion of consumption
The report maintains that a gradual reallocation of planting rights is necessary, in order to avoid an "uncontrolled expansion of the EU's wine potential from having a negative impact on the market." To this end, the House favours allocating new rights primarily to young farmers, especially for the production of quality wines. It suggests that regional authorities should take decisions on liberalising planting rights, especially where geographical indications are involved.
"The Commission should lay down some activity guidelines for the promotion of European wines, based on moderate and responsible wine consumption," said the European Parliament. It also suggested promoting specifically labelled European wines to the world market.
Aid for "must"
The European Parliament emphasises the need to provide for aid for must and concentrated rectified must used for enrichment, since it is necessary to preserve an historical oenological practice stresses the need to maintain aid for must used to produce grape juice, the aim being to maintain a product used for a purpose other than wine production that is important for the sector and helps to maintain market equilibrium. (Must is the mixture of fermenting grape juice, pips, skins, stalks and so on)
Winemaking practices and labelling
The report acknowledges that wine "enrichment has a direct impact on production levels," but it nevertheless suggests that the current legislation be kept unchanged, as "the Commission's proposal on reducing the maximum level of enrichment is not justified." Enrichment of wine with sugar and concentrated must "has to be allowed in every wine growing region where it was traditionally used and where no structural surpluses exist" it adds. The report also strongly supports a ban on the "fermentation of imported musts and the mixing thereof with Community musts." It specifically requests that the power to approve new winemaking practices within the EU should lie with the Council (in consultation with Parliament), and not with the Commission.
With respect to labelling, the report stresses that the use of oenological practices that are not allowed in the EU should be clearly labelled on imported beverages. The European Parliament also stressed the need to better secure protected geographical indications and protected designations of origin in WTO talks. To this end, it expresses support for bilateral negotiations with third countries on mutual recognition of such designations. Finally, the report also calls for harmonisation of Member States' rules on languages to be used on labels within the EU.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Agriculture
Parliament rejects voluntary modulation proposal for a second time
2007-02-19 - 12:58
A European Commission proposal that would have allowed Member States to divert some Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) direct farm payments to rural development spending was almost unanimously rejected by the European Parliament with 89 votes in favour, 584 votes against and 19 abstentions. The Commission must now decide if it will withdrawal its proposal. The Council will take the final decision on this issue as the Parliament's view is non-binding. The Commission proposal for a voluntary modulation scheme would allow 20% of direct payments to be diverted to rural development projects, at the discretion of each Member State. The report, authored by Lutz GOEPEL (EPP-ED, DE), warned that such a transfer could create distortions in competition between farmers from various Member States, and could also lead to a "re-nationalisation" of the CAP.
Agriculture Commissioner, Mariann Fischer Boel said in the debate on 13 February: "It is no big surprise that you have reconfirmed the views that were expressed last autumn and once again called on the Commission to withdraw its proposal. I know and I understand Parliament’s concerns about voluntary modulation. My position is no secret to you, and a repetition of your arguments and of my arguments is not necessary, but we have to face reality.
Turning to solutions other than voluntary modulation, I would have preferred to ensure sufficient funding in our rural development policy, but the European Summit decided otherwise. One thing is very clear to me: the European Parliament’s concerns do not fall on deaf ears. Although the Council has reaffirmed its wish to maintain its proposal, efforts are currently being made to accommodate your concerns. There have been concerns that voluntary modulation would unravel the common agricultural policy, but, as it stands now, all of the indicators are that voluntary modulation will only be used in a very limited number of Member States to boost their own rural development programmes."
New chairman of the Agriculture Committe, Neil PARISH (EPP-ED, UK) said " Madam President, I think the Commissioner now finds herself between a rock and a hard place.
Commissioner, you know very well you do not like the Council proposal, and you know that, under the institutional agreements, you have to put it forward. Now, we are listening to what you are saying, but we dislike the voluntary modulation intensely, so we are waiting for a new proposal to come forward. I think the best way we can deal with this is to get on with it, to reject it again and for you to come forward with a proposal very quickly, because we are all interested in rural development but we are also interested in a level playing field.
On the point that Mr Allister made, this is not voluntary modulation to all those farmers that lose their payments. Perhaps we should actually offer it to them and say ‘will you voluntarily lose 20 % of your payment?’ I suspect not many of them would come forward and say ‘yes’. So this is very much compulsory modulation, but probably only done to two Member States, the United Kingdom and Portugal.
Not only will it not be voluntary, but it will not even be uniformly applied across the UK, because our present Government wants to have different levels of modulation throughout the UK. So, in the area that I represent, South-West England, which borders Wales, there is a good chance that there will be a totally different modulation on one side of the border to the other. Probably English farmers will be at least 20 or 25 % worse off than their Welsh counterparts. As you quite rightly say, we need an impact assessment; we actually want that on the table. That should have been brought forward by the Council and perhaps we would have looked at this more sympathetically. Therefore, as I said, we are ready to negotiate."
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Fisheries
Redouble the efforts against illegal fishing, says European Parliament
2007-02-19 - 12:58
MEPs adopted an own-initiative report on the implementation of the EU action plan against illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing. The report points out that the Green Paper on a new maritime policy could serve as a framework for cooperation on the basis of which the fight against illegal fishing might be more effective. The House also asks the Commission to publish blacklists of fishing vessels and to consider the idea of establishing an EU coastguard. In its work programme for 2007, the Commission announced that illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing (IUU) will become a priority and it will produce a communication on IUU fishing and a proposal for a regulation defining a new strategy to combat IUU fishing. The report by Marie-Hélène AUBERT (Greens/EFA, FR) aims to provide the Commission with concrete ideas and suggestions for action to be taken.
According to MEPs, the Commission should create a Community register of vessels engaging in IUU fishing, which would include vessels on regional fisheries management organisations (RFMOs) blacklists. Such a register would facilitate the swift exchange of information among the Member States and make it possible to monitor vessels taking account of possible re-flagging. Member States should apply common minimum penalties for serious infringements (§ 18) and these penalties must be sufficiently dissuasive.
The European Parliament asks that all blacklists of fishing vessels and fish transport vessels, including their owners or operators, adopted by RFMOs are published and incorporated directly into Community law. Non-EU vessels on those lists must be prohibited from entry into EU ports for any purpose, except in cases of 'force majeure' or for humanitarian reasons. All EU-flagged vessels must be prohibited from providing support (fuel, supplies, transhipment, etc.) to those vessels while at sea.
The legal origin of fish must be demonstrated before it is allowed to be offloaded in EU ports or imported into the EU. The report points out that fish should be fully traceable from the time it is brought aboard a fishing vessel until it reaches its final customer.
MEPs urge the Commission to ensure that any person guilty of IUU fishing do not receive any type of aid or subsidy from Community funds for any branch of their activities, and to ask the Member States to take similar action with regard to their respective national aid.
Helping developing countries in the prevention of illegal fishing
The importance of the EU in the world, as a major fishing power and as the world's largest market for fish, obliges it to be at the forefront of the fight against IUU fishing. MEPs consider that the EU can only act credibly on the world scene if it has already taken effective action to halt its own involvement in IUU fishing, both in EU waters and by EU vessels or interests outside the EU.
According to estimates by the Marine Resources Assessment Group, mentioned in the report, such fishing around the world is worth at least $2.4 billion. Much of this comes from the waters of developing countries, which are too poor to be able to effectively monitor fishing activities in their waters and prevent illegal fishing, resulting in loss and hardship for their coastal populations, who depend on fish for their livelihoods and food security.
The report urges the Commission to help developing countries, especially those with which it has fishing agreements, to comply fully with the commitments of the international plan of action designed to prevent illegal fishing, helping to strengthen the scant means available to them by including specific actions in the new partnership agreements.
Traceability of fish from the net to the plate
MEPs call on the Commission to present its proposal on eco-labelling by June 2007, reiterating its belief that the improvements in the traceability of fish, from the net to the plate, that would be required by eco-labelling schemes would be of considerable help in identifying IUU fish and keeping it off the EU market.
The House also asks the Commission and the Member States to expand the Community information campaign so as to improve public awareness of the extent and serious nature of IUU fishing.
An EU coastguard
Parliament welcomes the establishment of the new Community Fisheries Control Agency, in Vigo (Spain), and is confident that the agency will play an important role in the fight against IUU fishing. MEPs call on the Commission to consider the idea of the establishment of an EU coastguard.
Finally, MEPs ask the Commission to carry out and submit a study on compliance with Community labour, health and safety legislation and on respect for the social rights of workers on vessels and on their living and working conditions on board.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Human rights
Human rights: Tibet, Iraq refugees, Guinea
2007-02-19 - 12:58
At the end of the week's session, Parliament adopted three resolutions on human rights topics. MEPs called for a resumption of the dialogue between the Chinese government and the Dalai Lama, they highlighted the need to help the huge number of refugees inside and outside Iraq and they condemned the violent repression by the Guinean government of protests against its misrule. Dialogue between Chinese government and Dalai Lama
The European Union has taken a close interest in the situation of Tibet in recent months. In this latest parliamentary resolution MEPs urge a resumption of the process of dialogue between China and the Dalai Lama which was launched in September 2002 but has stalled in the last 12 months.
The resolution, adopted by 71 votes to 0 with 1 abstention, opens by "welcoming the commitment of the Government of the People’s Republic of China and His Holiness the Dalai Lama to resolve the Tibet question through a process of dialogue", despite their "differences on substantive issues".
It points out that the European Union adheres to a ‘one China’ policy and also that the Dalai Lama has consistently stated "that he is not seeking independence but a genuine devolved autonomy for Tibet".
Parliament then urges the Chinese government and the Dalai Lama to resume and continue their dialogue "without preconditions and in a forward-looking manner that allows for pragmatic solutions which respect the territorial integrity of China and fulfil the aspirations of the Tibetan people".
While it "welcomes the laws and regulations on regional ethnic autonomy" adopted by the Chinese government, Parliament is "concerned that many of these laws contain conditions that impede or undermine their implementation".
An EU Special Representative for Tibet?
The Council, Commission and Member States of the EU are asked "to actively support the strengthening of the dialogue and, in the absence of tangible results on substantive issues and in consultation with both parties, assess what further role the European Union can play to facilitate a negotiated solution for Tibet, including through the appointment of an EU Special Representative for Tibet", a suggestion Parliament has made before.
Call for Tibet issue to be raised in cooperation agreement talks with China
MEPs point out that the negotiations on a new EU-China Partnership and Cooperation Framework Agreement officially began on 17 January 2007 in Beijing. They call on the Commission "to raise the question of Tibet and the resumption of talks between the two sides during the negotiations on the new EU-China Partnership and Cooperation Framework Agreement and report to Parliament on the evolution of the dialogue" between China and Dalai Lama's envoy in 2007 and thereafter.
In addition, the resolution calls on the Council Presidency to adopt a Declaration indicating "how the EU could facilitate progress towards a peaceful and negotiated solution for Tibet". Parliament also requests that the Council's annual CFSP report include information on progress in the dialogue.
* * *
The plight of refugees inside and outside Iraq
Parliament wants the world to do far more to aid the growing flood of refugees seeking to flee the violence in Iraq. The UN estimates that 1.8 million are displaced internally, up to 2 million Iraqis have fled the country and 50,000 people try to leave every month.
Violence and crime are rife. Some groups are especially persecuted, including professionals, women, Iraqis employed by foreign contractors, the UN or NGOs, and ethnic and religious minorities. The security of third-country nationals and stateless citizens, notably refugees from Palestine, Turkey, Iran and Syria, has also drastically deteriorated.
Conditions are dire, with limited supplies of water, food, fuel and medicines. Humanitarian bodies are appealing for funding to meet the needs in Iraq and its neighbouring countries. However, several states hosting Iraqi refugees are restricting entry and the attitude of most EU Member States - except Sweden - to Iraqi refugees has been equally restrictive.
The international community has a duty to take refugees in
Consequently, in its resolution - adopted by 74 votes to 0 with 1 abstention - Parliament "urges Iraq's bordering countries to abide by their legal duty immediately to admit refugees, particularly those stranded at their borders and belonging to specially targeted minorities".
The EU Member States and the international community are asked "as a demonstration of international burden sharing, to contribute to the resettlement of Iraqi refugees and stateless persons, including the Palestinian refugees from Iraq stranded in the region".
The resolution calls on EU Member States "to swiftly and fairly determine the claims of Iraqi asylum-seekers" and "to fulfil their international and acquis obligations to grant refugee status or subsidiary protection to those who are at risk of persecution or serious harm".
More funding needed
It welcomes the recent UNHCR appeal for extra international support to fund its work and calls on the EU and Member States and other international donors "to respond to the UNHCR appeal". MEPs see it as "a case of extreme emergency" and urge "that a significant part of the EU budget earmarked for programmes with Iraq be allocated to this aim".
The resolution says that many donor countries have been reluctant to face up to a regional Iraqi refugee crisis, and urges them to realise that the Iraqi authorities and neighbouring governments "appear unable to fully cope with the crisis" and hence to review the need to provide "financial assistance to help those host countries".
MEPs also ask the Commission and Member States to assist the UNHCR's efforts "focused on minimum protection from detention and refoulement and non-penalisation for illegal entry; as well as access to education, adequate housing, basic health care facilities and other basic services".
Parliament welcomes the international conference on the Iraq refugee problem, to be held in Geneva on 17 April 2007, and "urges the Council, the Commission, the authorities in the region and the international community to fully participate in that Conference and provide appropriate financial support".
At the end of the debate on the resolution, Commissioner Jan Figel told the House that an aid package of €10.2 million in humanitarian aid for victims of the Iraq crisis was being provided through the ECHO humanitarian aid office. €6.2m would be for those outside Iraq and €4m for those inside the country.
* * *
Repression by government of Guinea condemned
In a resolution on the west African state of Guinea, adopted by 75 votes to 0 with 1 abstention, the European Parliament criticises the repressive measures taken recently by the country's authorities to deal with social and political unrest. The government this week declared a state of emergency giving the army wide-ranging powers and special forces have killed or wounded many civilians.
Since 2005 there have been several incidents in which Guinean security forces have fired on unarmed demonstrators, notably in June 2006, when police and soldiers gunned down at least 13 unarmed demonstrators. A general strike was called on 10 January 2007 by Guinea's trade unions and civil society in support of economic and social demands but a peaceful demonstration held on 17 January in Conakry was violently repressed by the security services. President Conté declared a state of emergency on 13 February, which includes a 20-hour-a-day curfew and a ban on processions, marches, demonstrations and meetings, and gives the army extensive powers to take 'all the necessary measures'.
Stop the killings
The resolution "condemns the disproportionate and excessive use of force by the Guinean security forces during the recent demonstrations in various parts of the country, which resulted in the death of many civilians, the wounding of several demonstrators and the detention of trade union leaders". It "calls on the Guinean authorities to put an immediate stop to the killings".
Change the prime minister
MEPs stress "the importance of appointing a consensus Prime Minister, in accordance with the undertakings given by President Conté" on 27 January to appoint such a figure, who was supposed to have "extensive executive powers for a three-year transition period during which parliamentary and presidential elections would be organised". The appointment of Eugène Camara as Prime Minister on 9 February was not in accordance with this agreement, says the European Parliament.
Investigate abuses, release demonstrators, restore freedoms
The resolution also calls for the establishment of "an independent international commission of inquiry under UN responsibility to investigate the recent killings as well as past human rights abuses, and to identify those responsible and bring them to justice".
The Guinean authorities are urged "to order the immediate release of all persons arrested during the demonstration in the absence of valid legal charges and, if such charges exist, to ensure that such persons are given a prompt and fair trial".
Individual and trade union freedoms must be restored and the "authoritarian abuses which have marked President Conté's regime for 23 years" must cease. Negotiations must be opened with civil society organisations and trade unions. And "a democratic transition towards a system corresponding to the aspirations of the Guinean people" is needed.
Apply the human rights clause
Member States of the EU-ACP Cotonou Agreement are required to respect human rights. Parliament therefore calls on the Commission to "envisage the political dialogue" provided for in Article 96, as a first step in applying the agreement's human rights provisions, "while stepping up its humanitarian aid to victims".
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Adopted texts
2007-02-19 - 12:58
Texts adopted during the Plenary session are now available and can be accessed via the link hereunder. . Texts adopted
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta.do;jsessionid=1F32511DB5310BB71B0A6722977B6267.node1?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Agenda for March Plenary
2007-02-19 - 12:58
The Draft Agenda for the 12-15 March Plenary in Strasbourg is now available and can be accessed via the link given hereunder. . Draft agenda for 12-15 March 2007 (Strasbourg Plenary)
EN
1
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?reference=2007-03&language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-FULL DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-FULL DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
