Monday plenary: MEPs debate waste, banned liquids on planes
Institutions
2007-02-13 - 12:17
The EU's waste problem was debated: a vote follows today
The opening day of February's plenary session saw MEPs debate a report on how to cut the EU's mountain of household and industrial waste. MEPs want binding targets for the cutting of waste and less use of landfill sites. The House also discussed recent restrictions on liquids passengers can take on planes. This was in response to several questions from MEPs to the European Commission
INSPIRE: mapping out better policy
Monday also saw a debate on the "INSPIRE" database that will improve mapping or "spatial information" across the EU. Put plainly, this means more information using maps will support environment, transport, and energy and agriculture policy. It could also help deal with air pollution and floods which respect no national frontiers.
Recycle not waste
Prior to being voted upon today, MEPs debated two reports from the Environment committee on cutting the EU's mountain of waste through increased recycling. One of the reports by British Conservative Caroline Jackson advocates targets that would keep waste in 2012 at anticipated levels of 2008.
The other looks at the European Commission's long term strategy for the prevention and recycling of waste. They will be voted today with a more in depth examination of their proposals published later here.
Banned Liquids: MEPs warn of "lakes of perfume and whisky"
A debate on recent restrictions on what liquids passengers can carry on planes brought widespread criticism of the measures from MEPs. They criticised whether the measures was actually necessary, how they carried out (chaos at some airports) and the way the decision had been taken (it has a secret protocol).
MEPs challenged the apparent arbitrary nature of the new rules, warning that they would have a negative effect on the EU's image. They warned that "Brussels" would be responsible for "lakes of perfume and whisky" or mountains of shaving foam, tooth paste and lipsticks building up at European airports.
In the debate several speakers also raised the issue of transit passengers having their duty free good confiscated at a connecting airport in the EU. MEPs quoted figures showing that 20 tonnes of duty free goods are confiscated weekly at Frankfurt airport, 1500 litres of alcohol and perfume at Amsterdam and 10000 items a week in Madrid. Many pointed out that many of these good were bought in European owned shops in third countries.
Secrecy: the Commission regulation that lays down the rules has a secret annex prevent either the public or their elected MEPs having access to it. In the debate the democratic legitimacy and accountability of this measure was challenged.
Important not to alert terrorists, says Commissioner
Defending the measures, Europe's Transport Commissioner Jacques Barrot strongly defended the legality and necessity of the measures. He said that British security services had uncovered a significant plot to use liquids to bomb airliners. He told MEPs he had kept the Transport Committee informed and that secrecy was essential to avoid altering terrorists of security measures being taken.
Despite this, Mr Barrot admitted the application of the measures needed evaluation and was sensitive to the duty free issue. He told MEP he hoped that improved screening devices would make the measure unnecessary soon.
Today in Plenary
Today sees Parliament's new President Hans-Gert Poettering make his inaugural speech. This will be followed by a debate in which German Chancellor Angela Merkel and Commission President José Manuel Barroso will participate.
The afternoon will be dedicated to preparing the European Council meeting of 8-9 March in Brussels, and during the evening, the House will debate the reform of the wine sector.
20070209STO02962 Cutting waste Opening of the session Safe and secure flights in the EU Watch Plenary live
EN
1
PHOTO
20070213PHT03104.jpg
EN
5
LINK
/eplive/public/freetext_page_direct/20061120FTX00012-2101/default_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070209STO02961 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208IPR02884 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060727STO09976 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
