Strasbourg Plenary session 12-15 February
Institutions
2007-02-09 - 18:13
European Parliament, Strasbourg
The February plenary session will see Parliament's President Hans-Gert Poettering make his inaugural address setting out his priorities for the next two and a half years. German Chancellor Angela Merkel and Commission President José Manuel Barroso will respond. Parliament will also turn its attention (with a debate and vote) to the final report from the Committee investigating the alleged use of European countries by the CIA for transportation and detention of prisoners.
The House will also debate and vote on a resolution on the forthcoming European Council on the Lisbon strategy to be held in Brussels on 8 and 9 March. On Wednesday at midday, the Italian President Giorgio Napolitano will address the House in a formal sitting.
Monday 12 February Monday starts off with a debate on a conciliation agreement on spatial information. Parliament and the Council have struck a deal which will enable data to be shared across the EU, without undermining high quality services in the Member States. The House will then focus on tabling two reports on waste from the Environment Committee. The first puts forward binding targets for reducing waste by 2010 and rejects Commission proposals to modify the existing five-stage "waste hierarchy"; the second looks at the Commission's proposed long-term strategy for preventing and recycling waste. Also on Monday, MEPs will be asking the questions to the Commission on EU restrictions on liquids that passengers can carry on aircraft.
Tuesday 13 February At 10am on Tuesday, EP President Hans-Gert Poettering will make his inaugural speech on the priorities of his two and a half year mandate. German Chancellor and Council President-in-office Angela Merkel and Commission President José Manuel Barroso will participate in the debate which follows. All former Presidents of the Parliament have been invited to attend. A highlight of this week's session will be the Tuesday afternoon debate with the Council Presidency and Commission President José Manuel Barroso on the - chiefly economic - issues to be discussed at the European Council meeting of 8-9 March in Brussels. On Tuesday evening, the House debates the reform of the wine sector with the Agriculture committee recommending retaining distillation measures for now, empowering Member States to restrict grubbing-up of vines, and liberalising planting rights only gradually.
MEPs will also be asked to reject, for a second time, a European Commission proposal that would have allowed Member States to divert some Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) direct farm payments to rural development spending. Liberal MEP Fiona Hall (will table a non-binding report on a European policy on radio spectrum.
Wednesday 14 February From 9am on Wednesday, the European Parliament will debate (vote also on Wednesday) the final report from the Temporary Committee investigating the alleged use of European countries by the CIA for the transportation and illegal detention of prisoners.
The votes are due to start at 11.30am on Wednesday. During the votes, the House will vote on a resolution on climate change which underlines that the transport sector has the largest increase in energy consumption with road transport contributing to roughly 25% of the Community CO2 emission and the resolution therefore calls for a boost in public transport. At midday on Wednesday, President Giorgio Napolitano of Italy will address the House in a formal sitting. On Wednesday afternoon, there will be a joint debate on employment and the economy.
Wednesday evening sees MEPs debating a report from the Fisheries Committee report on the implementation of the EU action plan against illegal, unreported and unregulated fishing.
The last point on Wednesday evening is a question to the Commission on the free-circulation of Roma people within EU borders. Thursday 15 February On Thursday, the House will debate two reports from the Economics Committee.
As is usual, the plenary session ends with three debates and votes on resolutions relating to human rights in the world. On this occasion, the topics are:
Dialogue between the Chinese government and envoys of the Dalai Lama Humanitarian situation of refugees from Iraq The situation in Guinea More information on the Strasbourg plenary session can be accessed via the first link below:
20070209STO02935 Briefing: Strasbourg in detail Agenda
EN
1
PHOTO
20070208PHT02867.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?reference=2007-02&language=EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070130BRI02590 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
