Strasbourg Plenary: 12-15 February
Institutions
2007-02-19 - 15:15
Some of the highlights from Strasbourg
The second Strasbourg Plenary session of 2007 saw MEPs debate two issues related to the fight against terrorism. One concerned a report by MEPs on the CIA's "rendition" activities in Europe, the other, on restrictions imposed on airline passengers concerning liquids they can carry onboard. The week also saw President Hans Gert Poettering give his inaugural speech with several predecessors present. Reports on waste, energy efficiency and wine reform were also debated and voted on.
Monday 12th
Monday saw MEPs debate the EU's growing mountain of waste - they considered two reports that called for more recycling and less use of landfill sites.
The first day also saw a debate on the new restrictions on liquids that airlines have imposed in the interests of safety. Given that Frankfurt airline is confiscating 20 tonnes of duty free produce a week, one MEP warned of "whisky lakes" making a mockery of new procedures. The House wanted the necessity of the rules looked into and criticised a secret annex contained in the regulation laying down the restrictions.
Tuesday 13th
The second day in Strasbourg saw Hans Gert Poettering deliver his inaugural address in front of MEPs, previous Presidents, Angela Merkel and José Manuel Barroso. He called for the EU to reconnect with citizens, engage in reform of the Union and a "dialogue of cultures" which he said was the "hallmark of Europe". This was followed by speeches by Chancellor Merkel, President Barroso and leaders of the Parliament's political groups.
Wednesday 14th
The report submitted by the temporary committee of inquiry into the CIA's activities in Europe dominated the day with a debate and a vote on the report. The findings of the MEPs were that 1,245 CIA flights occurred in European airspace in the four years after 2001. The report said some of these were used for the "illegal transportation of detainees". It also said that some European countries accepted and concealed this practice. It called for the Council of Ministers to look into the allegations further.
Also on Wednesday Italian President Giorgio Napolitano called for the EU's draft Constitutional Treaty to be passed in its present form. Re-negotiation would be like opening a "Pandora's box" he told MEPs during his address to them.
Ahead of an EU Summit on March 8-9, MEPs passed a resolution on the measures they think are needed to improve the Lisbon Strategy (the EU's economic growth and jobs agenda). A further resolution on the need for measures to tackle climate change was also passed.
Thursday 15th
The last day saw MEPs adopt two reports on visa and immigration issues with Russia. The reports dealt with the categories of people who could be given short stay visas (such as lorry drivers), how Russia readmits its citizens who illegally enter the EU and the documentation EU citizens need if they travel to Siberia and Chechnya.
A resolution calling for more investment in the EU's energy sector to reduce dependency on imports and for greater efficiency was also passed. Finally MEPs voted on a report on reform of the EU's wine sector. The report - based on European Commission proposals - calls for the protection of historic vineyards and a reduction in the EU's wine lake.
For a full round up click on the links below:
20070216FCS03278
MONDAY: MEPs debate waste, banned liquids on planes
MEPs focused on two reports on waste from the Environment Committee The opening day of February's plenary session saw MEPs debate a report on how to cut the EU's mountain of household and industrial waste. MEPs want binding targets for the cutting of waste and less use of landfill sites. The House also discussed recent restrictions on liquids passengers can take on planes. This was in response to several questions from MEPs to the European Commission.
INSPIRE: mapping out better policy Monday also saw a debate on the "INSPIRE" database that will improve mapping or "spatial information" across the EU. Put plainly, this means more information using maps will support environment, transport, and energy and agriculture policy. It could also help deal with air pollution and floods which respect no national frontiers. Recycle not waste Prior to being voted upon today, MEPs debated two reports from the Environment committee on cutting the EU's mountain of waste through increased recycling. One of the reports by British Conservative Caroline Jackson advocates targets that would keep waste in 2012 at anticipated levels of 2008. The other looks at the European Commission's long term strategy for the prevention and recycling of waste. They will be voted today with a more in depth examination of their proposals published later here. Banned Liquids: MEPs warn of "lakes of perfume and whisky" A debate on recent restrictions on what liquids passengers can carry on planes brought widespread criticism of the measures from MEPs. They criticised whether the measures was actually necessary, how they carried out (chaos at some airports) and the way the decision had been taken (it has a secret protocol). MEPs challenged the apparent arbitrary nature of the new rules, warning that they would have a negative effect on the EU's image. They warned that "Brussels" would be responsible for "lakes of perfume and whisky" or mountains of shaving foam, tooth paste and lipsticks building up at European airports. In the debate several speakers also raised the issue of transit passengers having their duty free good confiscated at a connecting airport in the EU. MEPs quoted figures showing that 20 tonnes of duty free goods are confiscated weekly at Frankfurt airport, 1500 litres of alcohol and perfume at Amsterdam and 10000 items a week in Madrid. Many pointed out that many of these good were bought in European owned shops in third countries. Secrecy: the Commission regulation that lays down the rules has a secret annex prevent either the public or their elected MEPs having access to it. In the debate the democratic legitimacy and accountability of this measure was challenged. Important not to alert terrorists, says Commissioner Defending the measures, Europe's Transport Commissioner Jacques Barrot strongly defended the legality and necessity of the measures. He said that British security services had uncovered a significant plot to use liquids to bomb airliners. He told MEPs he had kept the Transport Committee informed and that secrecy was essential to avoid altering terrorists of security measures being taken. Despite this, Mr Barrot admitted the application of the measures needed evaluation and was sensitive to the duty free issue. He told MEP he hoped that improved screening devices would make the measure unnecessary soon. Waste Session opening Safe flights Press: Post briefing
TUESDAY: Poettering promotes values, reform and dialogue
Hans-Gert Poettering and ten former EP presidents Defending European values, promoting reforms and engaging in a dialogue of cultures - these were the priorities Hans Gert Poettering set out yesterday for his term as Parliament's President. He called for tolerance among citizens and for clearer law-making at a European level. He also called for the EU to pursue a common energy and immigration policy. Also on Tuesday MEPs passed reports on cutting waste and women's rights in Turkey.
Europeans should be "proud" of their heritage. There to hear his speech to MEPs were ten former holders of the office as well as German Chancellor Angela Merkel and Commission President José Manuel Barroso. Mr Poettering said overcoming the division of Europe from the Cold War was "the miracle of his generation" and that Europeans should be "proud" of their heritage. On the rights of individuals Mr Poettering pledged that in "practical political activities we should always serve the dignity of the individual". He pointed to the Parliament's Sakharov Prize for freedom of thought and its opposition to the death penalty. On how to promote jobs and protect social benefits he said Europe "must construct a cushion by strengthening our competitiveness and retaining the European social model". President calls for dialogue between cultures and religions Mr Poettering urged fellow European law makers to pass simpler and more effective laws. Key questions such as "does it serve people and the environment?" should be addressed in the drafting phase he said. He reaffirmed his commitment to the European Constitution and looked forward to the "Declaration on Europe" to mark 50 years since the Treaty of Rome was signed. Calling for tolerance he told MEPs that "dialogue between cultures and religions are the hallmark of Europe". Merkel: EU must not "lose sight of big picture" Following this Chancellor Angela Merkel - President-in-Office of the Council told MEPs that the it represented half a billion citizens and should therefore not "lose sight of the big picture". This was important as Europe faces big issues such as peace, security, social protection and competition she said. Later in the debate Mr Barroso told MEPs that "our European values underline the essence of the Europe we want and treasure: a Europe of peace, freedom, democracy, prosperity and justice". For the political groups, Joseph Daul of the European People's Party said his group fully endorsed an EU that was "strong and open" to the world. He called for a recognition of the peace and prosperity that Europe had brought although he stressed citizens wanted more freedom, security and job prospects. For the Socialist PES Group Martin Schulz highlighted the cultural and economic cooperation that had made Europe a success. He called for greater institutional reform and for more progress on a "social Europe". For the Liberal ALDE Group Graham Watson said the EU had to face new challenges of "rapid world population growth and migration, energy resources and climate change" to name just some. He said that the response of the EU institutions had often been "uncertain" said the "European Parliament must become the dynamo of European integration". Cut waste say MEPs The Parliament voted on two waste-related issues on Tuesday. British rapporteur Caroline Jackson for the European People's Party presented a report about the new waste directive proposed by the Commission. While supporting the emphasis on waste reduction and recycling, the adopted report calls for binding targets, in order to stabilise waste production by 2012. It also supports existing "five principles" of waste treatment such as prevention, re-use, recycling, recovery and safe disposal of waste. The report pointed to the lack of clear definitions of waste and for more recycling as only a third of waste is recycled in the EU. The second report adopted was written by Dutch rapporteur Johannes Blokland (IND/DEM). It makes a distinction between measures aimed at industrial waste and household waste, especially in relation with landfill sites. The adopted report calls also for a review of existing legislation concerning incineration of waste and criticises waste disposal instead of recycling and re-use. MEPs call for greater women's rights in Turkey Also yesterday Parliament passed a report calling for greater implementation of women's rights in Turkey. Although the report states that the new 2005 Penal Code improved the rights of women it still identifies several areas of concern. These include the lack of accurate data on women in Turkey and the fact that in areas of South east Turkey girls are not registered at birth. This can serious affect the legal status in later life. The report also notes the lack of political participation by women in Turkey and low levels female employment (25% compared to the EU25 level of 55%). Poettering speech in full Waste Women's rights
WEDNESDAY: CIA, Italian president, Lisbon strategy and wine reform
Italian President Giorgio Napolitano and EP President Poettering The long awaited report into CIA activities in Europe was a key event on Wednesday. The report adopted by MEPs noted that the CIA operated more than 1,245 flights in European airspace over a four year period and that secret detention centres may have been located in US military bases. Later, MEPs adopted resolutions on the Lisbon strategy and climate change. The Italian President also addressed the House.
CIA Report
The CIA report says that some of these flights were used for the "illegal transportation of detainees" - the practice known as "extraordinary renditions". As well as the detention centres the report notes that renditions "in the majority of cases involved incommunicado detention and torture” during interrogations. This was confirmed to the Committee of MEPs by the victims and their lawyers. In the report the Parliament rejects extraordinary renditions “as an illegal instrument used by the USA in the fight against terrorism” and condemns the “acceptance and concealing of the practice, on several occasions, by the secret services and governmental authorities of certain European countries”. The report calls for EU members to consider an "independent inquiry" into what occurred. Italian President backs Constitution Italian President and former MEP Giorgio Napolitano used an address to MEPs to urge them to support the existing EU Constitution and not be tempted into renegotiation. He said the need for stronger institutions and united Europe was contained in the Treaty and renegotiation would be like opening a "Pandora's box". Mr Napolitano noted that challenges Europe faced were energy issues and the environment although he said that with the "present institutional framework I don't think....we can go much further". Lisbon agenda Every spring EU leaders meeting to discuss the Lisbon strategy which aims at generating economic growth and job creation in the EU. Ahead of this meeting on March 8-9 MEPs passed a resolution highlighting some areas they believe deserve consideration. These include balancing the flexibility demanded by employers with the security workers would like. MEPs also want more focus on education and training. They also noted that protection of intellectual property rights is costly and time consuming. Finally they state that an EU common energy policy is vital if the goals of Lisbon are to be achieved. Also on the agenda at the Summit is climate change: MEPs adopted a resolution yesterday in response to the European Commission's "energy and climate package" announced in January 2007. The resolution calls for a limit in the global temperature rise to 2°C above pre-industrialisation levels and for industrialised countries to reduce emissions by 30% my 2020 in comparison with 1990 levels. Wine reform The Commission proposals to reduce vineyard capacity across Europe by cutting the amount of vines and storage of surplus wines was the subject of a report discussed by MEPs yesterday. Drafted by Socialist Greek Katerina Batzeli it criticises the Commission plans as too radical and likely to lead to standardisation of wine by large producers. Her report recommends reform in two phases 2008-2011 and 2012-2015. The key words in the report are prudence and gradual. These include rebalancing the market, gradual elimination of the modes of distillation, a careful approach as regards the digging up of vines and a progressive liberalization of the rights of plantation. MEPs vote on the report today. CIA Report Lisbon strategy Climate change
THURSDAY: visas with Russia, energy, wine reform
Energy efficiency needs improving Thursday saw MEPs adopt two reports on visa and immigration issues with Russia. The day also saw them endorse a report on how Europe can lower energy prices and decrease its dependency on energy imports. The report advocates the phasing out of use of fossils fuels in public transport and increasing overall energy efficiency.
On visa arrangements with Russia the report focused on short stay visas that would increase travel by EU and Russian citizens in both directions. Amongst other things, it covers close relatives, business travellers, official delegations and scientific, sporting and cultural events. With a view to increasing trade, international lorry drivers and those involved in transporting passengers are also covered. The report also covers EU citizens who enter Russia and then require subsequent documentation if they want to travel to Chechnya or Siberia. The second report concerned the readmission into Russia of illegal immigrants who have entered the EU. Both reports will serve as consultation documents to the Council on the visa / immigration accords initialled in Moscow in April last year. They were drafted by Maria da Assunção Esteves of the European People's Party. Energy: call for action on rising energy prices A report into the state of Europe's energy needs has called for greater energy efficiency and for the EU to reduce its dependence on imported energy. MEPs yesterday passed a report by Socialist MEP Manuel Antonio dos Santos which compares present oil prices with those of the early 1970's. It also points out that if present trends continue Europe's dependency on energy imports will rise from 50% of capacity today to 71% by 2030. The report calls for a massive investment in energy infrastructure across the EU and the phasing out of fossil fuels in the transport sector. Its also calls for the completion of the EU's internal market in the energy field - pointing out that at present the sector is dominated by large firms. The reports says that embracing energy efficient measures would be an easy and cheap way for the EU to reduce CO2 emissions. Finally, its calls for the EU to have an energy stock of oil and gas that in an emergency could keep the economy running for 120 and 90 days respectively. "it is time for action, not words" Speaking during the debate Mr Manuel Antonio dos Santos called on MEPs to "look at the nature of four energy shocks of the last 50 years" telling that "we will only be successful if we take a supranational approach with the whole EU working together. It needs common European policy for energy...this is diplomacy of new century..." Later, Joaquín Almunia, the European Commissioner for Economic and Monetary Affairs said he welcomed the report and told the House that "we need a genuine single market in energy, to reduce risk to consumers and have acceptable supply of energy". He went on to say that "it is time for action, not words" and pledged that these matters will be a main point at the Council meeting of 18 March. Also yesterday MEPs from all sides backed a report that aims to protect the historical and cultural position of European wine production. See article below for a full report. Energy Wine reform Watch a resume of the week
EN
1
PHOTO
20070219PHT03387.jpg
EN
2
PHOTO
20070213PHT03104.jpg
EN
7
PHOTO
20070213PHT03126.jpg
EN
11
PHOTO
20070215PHT03194.jpg
EN
15
PHOTO
20070216PHT03272.jpg
EN
18
LINK
mms://wm.streampower.be/ep/ondemand/highlights/hilightsstrasbourg200702.wmv
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070209STO02961 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208IPR02884 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060727STO09976 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208BRI02878 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208IPR02888 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208IPR02886 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208IPR02887 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070209IPR02947 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208IPR02893 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208IPR02902 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070209IPR02933 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070208IPR02894 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
