The Week Ahead 5-11 March 2007
Institutions
2007-03-02 - 10:33
Political groups week, Brussels
Spring European Council. Hans-Gert Pöttering will take part in his first European Council as EP President, and will hold a press conference at the start of the meeting (Thursday). On the fringe of the Council, he will hold meetings with Lech Kaczynski, President of Poland, Victor Yushchenko, President of Ukraine, Boris Tadic, President of Serbia, Gediminas Kirkilas, Prime Minister of Lithuania, Ivo Sanader, Prime Minister of Croatia, and Zeljko Sturanovic, Prime Minister of Montenegro, the Foreign Minister of Portugal, Luis Amado, the CFSP High Representative, Javier Solana, and Sir Nicholas Stern, author of an influential report on climate change.
Preparing for the plenary. Parliament's political groups will devote most of the coming week to preparations for the Strasbourg plenary session of 12 to 15 March. The agenda includes debates on the Berlin Declaration of 25 March marking the 50th anniversary of the Rome Treaty, and on the outcome of the spring summit.
Women's Day. To mark International Women's Day (8 March), the Women's Rights Committee is holding a seminar entitled "Women building the Future of Europe" . President Pöttering, former EP President Nicole Fontaine, the German Minister for Economic Cooperation and Development, Heidemarie Wieczorek-Zeul, and the Commissioner for Social Affairs and Equal Opportunities, Vladimir Spidla, will take part (Thursday) .
The future of Europe. Parliament is continuing its programme of citizens' forums in the Member States as part of its contribution to the debate on the future of Europe. A number of MEPs will take part in these meetings, which are being hosted by Paris (France), Stockholm (Sweden), Cardiff (United Kingdom) and Valga (Estonia) on Monday, Wednesday, Thursday and Friday respectively.
EU/Israel. President Pöttering will meet the Israeli Foreign Minister, Tzipi Livni. (Monday)
Pre-session briefing. Any changes to the plenary agenda decided by the Conference of Presidents will be announced at the customary pre-session press briefing on Friday 9 March at 11am.
20070302IPR03758 The Agenda
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071000AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
