EU sanctions against Uzbekistan lack bite, say MEPs
Human rights
2007-03-01 - 12:32
EU sanctions against Uzbekistan need to be made to bite, said MEPs from the EP Sub-committee on human rights at a public hearing of experts on 28 February. These sanctions, imposed in October 2005 after government forces killed hundreds of people in the city of Andijon in May that year, are to be reviewed by the Council next week.
Human rights advocates in Uzbekistan are still subject to persecution, defamation and compulsory hospitalisation, and their are relatives "harassed and intimidated", reported Aaron Rhodes of the International Helsinki Federation for Human Rights.
The EU sanctions include an arms sales embargo and a visa ban on a dozen high-ranking Uzbek officials . Back in October 2006, the European Parliament said that these sanctions should be maintained and proposed that President Islam Karimov be included in the visa ban.
"The human rights community cannot function" in Uzbekistan said Mr Rhodes. As a result, information on the state of affairs in Uzbekistan remains incomplete, thus ensuring "impunity for grave human rights abuses". That said, concluded Mr Rhodes, "we don't think the EU should drop the sanctions; they should toughen [them]."
Mr Rhodes dismissed the impact of sanctions on Uzbekistan's arms imports as "ridiculous" (the Uzbeks, he said, get all the guns they want from Russia). However, the sanctions "are a symbol for the Uzbek people" of Europe's response to their government's misdeeds. And that is their "most important contribution", he added.
"The sanctions are not really working", but that "does not mean we should withdraw them", said MEP Marios Matsakis (ALDE, CY). In fact, "we need more stick" in the EU's stick-and-carrot policy towards Uzbekistan. We should look at sanctions "which are more effective -- which bite", he said.
Head of the Human Rights Society of Uzbekistan Talib Yakubov argued that the sanctions regime had in fact proved "extremely successful" - President Karimov's international image has plummeted, while his popularity at home "is virtually zero", he said.
Ms Riina Kionka, Javier Solana's Personal Representative on Human Rights told MEPs that the Tashkent government had "let us know", on 27 February, that another EU exploratory mission to Uzbekistan (like that sent late in 2006) "will not be welcome". This development, she said, makes it "highly unlikely" that sanctions will be lifted when the Council meets next week to discuss Uzbekistan next week.
Given the possibility of lifting sanctions and launching a human rights dialogue with Uzbekistan, said Richard Howitt (PES, UK), "it is important that we make our contribution felt on this issue".
Exchange of views with experts
2007-02-28 Subcommittee on Human Rights In the chair Richard HOWITT PES UK
20070301IPR03724
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
