Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly: a user's guide
Development and cooperation
2007-03-09 - 16:02
The Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly holds its third annual plenary session from 16 to 17 March 2007 in Tunis. The proceedings will be opened by Fouad Mebazaa, President-in-Office of the Assembly and Speaker of the Tunisian Chamber of Deputies.
Intercultural dialogue between Europe and the Islamic world will be on the agenda of the Assembly, which will also discuss and adopt a report on the implementation of the code of conduct on the fight against terrorism. The Assembly will discuss and adopt a report on the implementation of the code of conduct on the fight against terrorism. European Parliament President Hans-Gert Pöttering, Germany's European Affairs Minister Günter Gloser and European Commission President José Manuel Barroso will speak at the opening session.
The Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly (EMPA) was set up on 3 December 2003 in Naples and is the parliamentary dimension of the Barcelona Process, which was launched at the Euro-Mediterranean Conference of foreign affairs ministers on 27 and 28 November 1995.
EMPA, which holds a plenary session once a year, is a "joint assembly", consisting of two groups: 120 parliamentarians from the European Union (of whom 75 are appointed by national parliaments and 45 by the European Parliament) and 120 MPs from national parliaments of the Mediterranean countries.
Following the accession of Bulgaria and Romania to the EU on 1 January 2007, the Euromed partnership today covers 37 countries: the 27 Members of the EU and 10 countries of the Mediterranean rim (Algeria, Egypt, Israel, Lebanon, Jordan, Morocco, Palestinian Authority, Syria, Tunisia and Turkey). Libya has had observer status since 1999.
Since 2004 the Mediterranean countries are also parties to the European Neighbourhood Policy.
The President of EMPA is the current Speaker of the Tunisian Chamber of Deputies, Fouad Mebazaa. His mandate expires in March 2007, when he will be succeeded by Anne Benaki-Psarouda, Speaker of the Hellenic Parliament, who will hold office until March 2008.
EMPA held its first meeting in March 2005 in Cairo. It held an extraordinary session in Rabat in November 2005 to celebrate the 10th anniversary of the Euromed partnership. Its second ordinary session took place from 26 to 28 March 2006 on the European Parliament's premises in Brussels.
20060323BKG06654
Role and functioning
The Barcelona process has three broad objectives:
1. To establish a common area of peace and security by strengthening dialogue on political and security issues.
2. To create an area of shared prosperity through an economic and financial partnership and the gradual establishment of a free-trade area.
3. To overcome barriers between peoples through a partnership in social, cultural and human affairs and by promoting understanding between cultures and exchanges between civil societies.
Through the opinions it draws up on all the policy areas of the Euro-Mediterranean partnership, including the implementation of association agreements, EMPA helps consolidate the partnership. The assembly's role is advisory and so the solutions and recommendations it sends to the Euro-Mediterranean Conference are not binding. However, the agreement of the European Parliament, the national parliaments and those of the partner countries is needed for association agreements concluded under the Euromed partnership.
Three parliamentary committees of 80 members each prepare the work of the plenary in the partnership's main policy areas: the Committee on Political Affairs, Security and Human Rights; the Committee on Economic, Financial and Social Affairs and Education; the Committee on the Promotion of the Quality of Life, Human Exchanges and Culture. There is also an ad hoc committee on women's rights in the Euromediterranean countries, composed of 40 members (20 from each side).
In its debates the assembly uses French, English and Arabic as working languages. Texts put to the votes are also available in Hebrew, Turkish and all official languages of the European Union. EMPA website More info on the Euromed partnership
EN
1
LINK
/intcoop/empa/default.htm
EN
2
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/comm/external_relations/euromed/index.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
