The Week Ahead 26 February – 4 March 2007
Institutions
2007-02-23 - 10:42
Committee Week - Brussels
Maritime safety. The lessons of the Erika and Prestige disasters have given rise to five reports on which the Transport Committee will vote this week. The aim of this "third maritime package" is to protect Europe against the dangers of accidents and pollution (Tuesday).
Intellectual property/online music. The Legal Affairs Committee will hold a first reading vote on European criminal law provisions dealing with counterfeiting and piracy. It will also vote on a report calling for a framework directive on cross-border copyright, with the aim of boosting the music industry (Tuesday).
Energy. Two hearings on European energy policy take place: at the Industry Committee, on the EU and internal aspects of energy policy (Tuesday); at the Foreign Affairs Committee, on a common foreign policy on energy (Wednesday) .
Euro. EP President Hans-Gert Poettering, ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet, Eurogroup Chair Jean-Claude Juncker, Commissioner Almunia and Nobel Prize winner Joseph Stiglitz will join a meeting of MEPs and national MPs on the euro (Wednesday and Thursday) .
Roaming. The Industry Committee will examine a draft report on the proposed roaming regulation which aims to give consumers more protection against excessive cross-border mobile phone charges (Tuesday).
Organic products. The Agriculture Committee will vote on a report on organic farming in Europe which focuses on the need to preserve consumer confidence (Tuesday).
Constitution. Following January’s Madrid conference of representatives of Member States which have ratified the constitutional treaty, the ratification procedure will be discussed at the EP Constitutional Affairs Committee (Wednesday).
Nordic dimension. At a special parliamentary conference, MEPs, national MPs and other experts will study ways of boosting cooperation and prosperity in the Baltic Sea and Arctic regions (Wednesday and Thursday).
20070223IPR03575 The Agenda
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070900AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
