Transport Committee aims for new rules for public transport tenders
Transport
2007-03-28 - 19:13
Amendments to proposed common rules for local and regional public transport contracts were adopted by the Transport Committee on Tuesday - after 6 years of disagreement in the Council of Transport Ministers. The committee wants to give regional or local authorities more discretion over whether to award small-scale public transport service contracts directly, or open them to tender. The full Parliament will need to support these changes by an absolute majority if they are to be confirmed.
In January 2007 the Council finally submitted its common position, which Parliament had repeatedly requested since 2001. In its first reading, six years ago, Parliament set the tone by adopting amendments that greatly increased the autonomy of local and regional administrations in providing their own public transport services, rather than procuring them via a call for tenders.
Competitive tendering, or direct award?
The new legislation will replace a patchwork of national regulations governing the extent to which public transport is open to competition. In its common position, the Council now proposes a system offering competent authorities the freedom to choose between competitive tendering and direct award and also defines several derogations whereby authorities may award contracts directly.
Direct award thresholds
The Committee adopted compromise amendments agreed between political groups stipulating that, so far as national law allows, the competent regional or local authorities may now decide to award public service contracts directly either where their average annual value is estimated at less than €1 million or where they concern the annual provision of less than 300,000 kilometres of public passenger transport services.
In the case of a public service contract directly awarded to a small or medium sized enterprise employing between 50 and 250 people, these thresholds may be increased to either an average annual value estimated at less than €3 million (Council proposal: €1.7 million) or when they concern the annual provision of less than 1,000,000 kilometres of public passenger transport services (Council: 500,000 kilometres).
Defining competent authorities
The Committee also adopted a stricter definition of "competent regional or local authority", which means a region which has substantial administrative competences, a city which has the status of community, or, in the case of a conurbation and the surrounding area falling within its regulatory sphere of influence, co-operating communities.
It was also agreed that the award of public service contracts by road and by rail should comply with the new regulation within 8 years (Council: 12 years) of the date of entry into force of this regulation. During these 8 years, Member States must take measures in order to avoid structural problems relating to transport capacity.
Internal operators
More technical amendments were adopted on a strict definition of an "internal operator", to whom a contract is awarded directly and who is not allowed to participate in calls for tenders elsewhere, and on avoiding under-compensation, a problem which many public transport companies face when their losses are not adequately compensated by public authorities.
An informal trialogue with Council is scheduled for April, with a view to reaching a final compromise that could then be submitted to the 8 and 9 May plenary in Brussels. German Secretary of State Achim Grossman told the Transport Committee he was confident that an agreement could be reached before the end of the German Presidency.
Erik Meijer (GUE/NGL, NL) saw his second reading recommendation adopted with 37 votes in favour, 4 against and 7 abstentions. When this comes to plenary, Parliament will need an absolute majority - currently 393 votes in favour - to amend the Council's common position at second reading.
Procedure: co-decision, second reading -- Plenary vote: May I, Brussels
2007-03-26 Committee on Transport and Tourism Paolo Costa ALDE IT
20070328IPR04809
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
