Pöttering reprimands Maciej Giertych MEP over pamphlet
Parliament's Rules of Procedure
2007-03-14 - 10:02
The President of the European Parliament Hans-Gert Pöttering reprimanded non-attached Polish MEP Maciej Giertych following his publication of a pamphlet ("Civilizations at War in Europe") containing anti-semitic and xenophobic statements in accordance with Article 147 of the Rules of Procedure. President Pöttering had already clearly condemned "Statements based on racism or anti-semitism" as being "against the fundamental values of the European Union".
President Pöttering said to the plenary in Strasbourg: "On this occasion I deeply regretted what is objectively a serious breach of the fundamental rights and in particular the dignity of human beings to which our institution so strongly adheres.
On this basis, I have decided, in accordance with the procedure laid down in Rule 147, that a reprimand should be imposed on you, which is the first of the measures referred to in the aforementioned rule. The plenary, together with the other relevant political bodies of the House, will be duly informed once you are notified of this penalty. During my presidency, I intend to safeguard both the freedom of expression and the standard of conduct of Members, as well as the honour of this House. As I declared on 13 February 2007 in my inaugural address to the plenary, tolerance and respect for others are important European values, which are at the centre of my political priorities and to which the European Parliament is deeply committed. I trust you will understand that the European Parliament, which thrives on lively political debate and unfailingly condemns all forms of xenophobia, should under no circumstances be associated with the views published in your brochure."
President Pöttering has been previously assured by the Parliament's administration that the European Parliament has not made any financial contribution to this publication.
Rules 147 (see links) of EP Rules of Procedure states:
1. In exceptionally serious cases of disorder or disruption of Parliament in violation of the principles laid down in Rule 9, the President, after hearing the Member concerned, shall adopt a reasoned decision laying down the appropriate penalty, which he shall notify to the Member concerned and to the presiding officers of the bodies, committees and delegations on which the Member serves, before announcing them to plenary. 2. When assessing the conduct observed, account shall be taken of its exceptional, recurrent or permanent nature and of its seriousness, on the basis of the guidelines annexed to these Rules of Procedure(1). 3. The penalty may consist of one or more of the following measures: (a) a reprimand; (b) forfeiture of entitlement to the daily subsistence allowance for a period of between 2 and 10 days; (c) without prejudice to the right to vote in plenary, and subject, in this instance, to strict compliance with the Members' standards of conducts, temporary suspension, for a period of between 2 and 10 consecutive days on which Parliament or any of its bodies, committees or delegations meet, from participation in all or some of the activities of Parliament; (d) submission to the Conference of Presidents, pursuant to Rule 18, of a proposal for the Member's suspension or removal from one or more of the elected offices held by the Member in Parliament.
Rule 9.2
2. Members’ conduct shall be characterised by mutual respect, be based on the values and principles laid down in the basic texts on which the European Union is founded, respect the dignity of Parliament and not compromise the smooth conduct of parliamentary business or disturb the peace and quiet of any of Parliament's premises.
20070314IPR04113 Rule 147 on penalties Rule 9 on Members' financial interests, standards of conduct and access to Parliament. Statement by the President of the European Parliament concerning the publication of a brochure by Maciej Giertych MEP - 2 March Statement by President of the European Parliament on sanction imposed on Maciej Giertych MEP - 14 March
EN
3
LINK
/president/press_releases/en/files/cp0015.htm
EN
4
LINK
/president/press_releases/en/files/cp0026.htm
-//EP//TEXT RULES-EP 20070101 RULE-147 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT RULES-EP 20070101 RULE-009 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
