European Parliament President Hans-Gert Pöttering addresses the European Council
European Council
2007-03-09 - 09:47
The President of the European Parliament Hans-Gert Pöttering delivered a speech at the opening of the European Council in Brussels on Thursday. This was President Pöttering's first Summit meeting with the Heads of State and Government of the 27 Member States of the European Union.
The full text of President Pöttering's speech is available on his website: http://www.europarl.europa.eu/president
Key points include:
On Climate Change:
"Global Warming and Climate Change are challenges of the highest priority. Rather than speaking in terms of winning a battle, I prefer to speak of winning a peace - we must bring peace to the environment, to this creation."
"There is an ever-greater awareness of the threat posed by Climate Change. Over 90% of European citizens are concerned. This is a race against time."
"Urgent and responsible decisions are required. The EU must play the leading role in developing an ambitious strategy for global cooperation."
"Failure to act would be to neglect our responsibility towards future generations. It is unacceptable that our grandchildren should have to pay the price for our refusal to take the necessary decisions."
"Binding targets are the key to our credibility with international partners. Parliament calls for a 30% reduction in greenhouse gasses by 2020 and for 25% of our energy to come from renewal sources by the same date."
"We must develop new clean energy technologies and work at energy efficiency. What we need is nothing short of a new Industrial Revolution."
"We need a genuine Single Market for energy, including a properly-functioning emissions trading system."
"The EU must also lead the way over the next three years in bringing about an agreement on a post-Kyoto regime. We must convince our partners to cooperate with us. Without the USA, China and India on board it will be extremely difficult to reach our global CO2 targets."
"There are signs of a change of mind from china and India where the effects of Climate Change on their own environment is becoming ever clearer. We must use this opportunity by proposing a gradual inclusion in the system linked with the transfer of clean technologies."
On Foreign Policy:
"Intercultural Dialogue is a priority of my mandate as President. We must work hard at an active dialogue between cultures, in particular between the Western and Islamic worlds. I want to pursue this agenda on many levels."
"The EU can play a very constructive role in building bridges and helping peace initiatives."
"We must remain resolute in preventing Iran from developing nuclear weapons. We must condemn in the strongest possible manner all attempts by the Iranian President to deny Israel's right to exist or the very existence of the Holocaust."
"We need to develop a stronger partnership with a democratic Russia. Guarantees of a secure energy supply must form an integral part of the EU-Russia Partnership and Cooperation Agreement. At the same time we cannot tolerate any reversals of democratic development or freedom of expression."
On the Future of Europe:
Each and every one of the 27 Heads of State and Government has signed up to the European Constitutional Treaty. Parliament's strong will for maintaining the substance of the agreed text must be made clear. The reforms must be brought about in some way or another."
"We must build on the basis of our values so that together we can meet the challenges of the future."
20070305IPR03778
EN
1
A
/president
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
