MEPs debate EU foreign policy for 2007 with Solana
External relations
2007-03-29 - 12:17
MEPs debated the outlook for the EU's Common Foreign and Security Policy with High Representative Javier Solana. Issues from the captured British navy personnel, Darfur, the situation in the Middle East, the final status of Kosovo and the possible US anti-missile shield to be installed in Europe were all raised in the extensive debate.
Javier Solana, High Representative for the CFSP
Javier SOLANA began his statement by informing MEPs that he had just returned from the Arab League summit in Riyadh, where he said the EU had played a role of some importance.
He noted that a few days ago the Berlin Declaration had marked 50 years of the EU. "It sets down marks for the future development of European Union in all fields and the common foreign policy is one of major challenges EU needs to face. The rest of world has major desire for the EU to have ever clearer role in foreign policy. People are asking us to be present in the most disparate places and conflicts. They want things done in a European way and with an effective European foreign policy. We want that too" - and so did European citizens, said Mr Solana, according to Eurobarometer surveys. "We need to be up to people's expectations of us in the EU."
Middle East
Mr Solana said that the current Arab League summit in Riyadh could be one of most significant in the League's 60 year history. A new feature was that clear leadership has been exercised throughout by the King of Saudi Arabia. The kingdom, he said, had not in past been active in foreign policy, but: "King Abdullah has started action of some importance to solve problems of Arab world as a whole. Arab League is important and was talking about important subjects. The most important one is the revival of Arab League initiative on peace process." This had originated in the 2002 Beirut offer to recognise Israel in exchange for withdrawal to 1967 border. It was now back on the table "with energy and determination. We got that initiative into the famous road map as element of a comprehensive peace process," between Palestine and Israel but also including Lebanon and Syria.
On the Middle East, Mr Solana said, "the EU is convinced the Arab Israeli conflict is at heart of region's problems, which is why we supported the Mecca agreement as a contribution to ending conflicts between Palestinians and as a way of achieving the end of the occupation which began in 1967. We support the indefatigable efforts of President Abbas, who is trying to achieve objectives of Palestinian people. There are three principles he has invoked: mutual recognition, renunciation of violence and achievement of peace through negotiations. EU has not abandoned Palestinian people and it won't. We have new opportunity to solve the conflict."
Regarding the new Palestinian Authority government, said the CFSP High Representative, "we will have to decide how to deal with that government and how to finance it. My position [...] is that there are some people in government we know well, and some we don't know, since they are from Hamas, which is on the list of terrorist organisations, so we don't talk to them." He said the new Finance Minister and Foreign Minister were both people the EU had been talking to for years. "It would be a mistake to cut off all contact with the people in this government with whom we have worked for many years. On financing, we should not change policy from one day to next, but if you listen to the new Finance Minister, that would be a good start in learning how to make our aid as effective as possible," both in humanitarian terms and in helping the peace process. "Deeds are more important than words: we need to see how new Palestinian government behaves and react on that basis. We could be able to move from crisis management to conflict solution." The Quartet, he said, had met several times this year, and he hoped before the summer to get Quartet together with countries such as Egypt, Saudi Arabia, the UAE and Jordan with the parties to the conflict. This would, he said, by Israel's first meeting with the Quartet as such.
Iran
Mr Solana said that he had met the Iranian Foreign Minister while he was in Riyadh. He had made very clear, he said, that "the EU cannot accept the abduction of 15 British naval personnel. The EU must show solidarity in getting these people freed." On the nuclear issue, he noted that the UN Security Council had now issued its third unanimous resolution on Iran, calling on them to meet its obligations arising from the IAEA resolutions. That is was a unanimous vote was very important, he said, in particular given the current make-up of the Security Council including some major Islamic and non-aligned countries - and five European states. "It sends a clear and obvious message to the Iranian government that its nuclear programme must meet the conditions set out in Security Council resolutions." He also made clear that the aim was a political solution: "no other solution is available." Following his meeting with the Iranian Foreign Minister, he said he thought the message had been "clearly understood."
On non-proliferation in general, he warned that this was an issue which could divide world. "Every effort must be made to explain properly and share our concern," he said. For too long, he added, the disarmament part of the non-proliferation treaty has been left aside. "The treaty says nuclear powers have to start thinking about how to disarm in order that such weapons can disappear from the planet," and the issue of technology transfer of technology made some countries think there was a double standard. "A serious negotiation on this with third countries led by EU would be a serious contribution to creating a world where problems solved by dialogue not by arms."
Kosovo and Serbia
Turning to the Balkans, Mr Solana referred to the proposal developed by Martti Ahtisaari on the final status of Kosovo. The former Finnish President had warned that it would be extremely difficult, even impossible, to find a solution both sides can agree to, and that the international community might need to impose a solution. This, said Mr Solana, would need all the UN Security Council members behind it - and there may be problems in getting the support of Russia and China. The EU now needed to decide whether to support Mr Ahtisaari's final position and then see how things turn out in Security Council. "When there is a final status for Kosovo decided, we will face enormous responsibilities in representing international community. As well as economic matters, there will be CFSP mission for the police and judiciary - will be largest mission EU has ever had in Foreign Policy terms [...] We cannot afford to fail. If EU fails in Balkans stability, it will be a major failure and will reduce our influence elsewhere."
Serbia, said Mr Solana, was a great country of the Balkans to which the EU owed every support. "We need to help Serbia where we can, we should be as generous as possible with this major country." There was a good relationship with President Tadic, and "we need to support him so that new government can be a pro-European one, which can bring Serbia towards its destiny of a European perspective." He praised Mr Tadic's commitment to complete and effective cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal. "It is important that people so clearly implicated in crimes, be brought to court."
"Will be discussing Kosovo and Serbia every week till summer. The European presence in Kosovo is ready and when UN resolution passes, we will be ready to be operational, but we need to worry about how long it will last and where to find resources," said Mr Solana.
Eastern Europe
Mr Solana said he had recently met both the President and Prime Minister of Ukraine. The new government there had been an unexpected coalition, but it was now starting to work, though the questions of reform and constitutional stability remained of concern. Attention should also be paid to the frozen conflicts in region, including the Transnistria problem, in cooperation with Russia. There was a new plan for this, with both sides more committed that before, with active support from the Ukrainian government. Regarding Belarus, Mr Solana said he fully supported the comments made by Angela Merkel the previous day.
Africa
The "unhappily old problem of Darfur", said Mr Solana, had both an African Union and an Arab League dimension. "We Europeans cannot be proud of what has happened, but can at least be satisfied that from the start we have been involved in finding a solution. We worked hard for the Abuja agreement and have financed the AU force." He had spoken the previous day to the Sudanese President about a UN role in Darfur, and while "we did not achieve complete agreement, I have hopes that we will get steps in right direction." He warned that Sudan's north-south conflict was also not fully resolved, since the settlement was still subject to a referendum. Any break-up of this oil rich country would be a disaster for everybody. "China and India get a lot of their oil from Sudan and their contribution is fundamental," he added.
Missile defence
After reporting on progress in setting up one of the world's most modern crisis management structures, bringing together civilian and military actors, Mr Solana turned to the proposed anti-missile defence system: "There is no decision by EU on this, the EU is not a defensive alliance, but does have external and security policy and can and should debate this subject. We are not the ones to decide on this - that belongs to defensive alliances, but we can talk amongst ourselves in the most open way possible. Any such system can affect our relations with Russia. The treaties in force allocated sovereignty over this issue to the Member States, but this must be compatible with EU's general interest in security," he said, indicating he would be happy to see this discussed in the Atlantic structures.
In conclusion, he said that "the EU was born as a peace project 50 years ago; it should be a peace project on world stage as well. If we not able to play full part that will be a failure, and we all want it to be a success."
Meglena KUNEVA, European Commissioner
"In a world of growing challenges, individual Member States can do little alone", said Consumer Protection Commissioner Meglena KUNEVA . But collectively, as part of the EU - a global player with a population close to half a billion across 27 countries, accounting for one-quarter of the world's income over a fifth or world trade and some 60% of global development assistance - "we have the means to play our role in world affairs", she added.
It is the EU's internal market that provides the main source of strength for its peace efforts (including its own enlargement - "the most successful peace and security initiative ever carried out in Europe"), she continued.
The EU needs a "fully joined-up foreign policy", to tackle long-term challenges including in particular the fight against terror and arms proliferation, poverty and disease, organized crime and illegal migration, climate change and threats to our energy supply. This policy must start with greater coherence in the use of our own instruments, she continued, as “the overall effectiveness and therefore the global influence of the EU depend on optimal use of all available leverage in support of external goals.”
The EU is present in almost all the “hot spots”, and will remain a major player in Afghanistan, where it has spent more than a billion euros over the last five years; in the Middle East, where it is using the Temporary International Mechanism (TIM) to support the Palestinians, and in Iraq where it is preparing for a "long term engagement", she said.
Yet in Ms Kuneva's view, "the biggest challenges for CFSP are still before us: it is much easier to agree to set up mechanisms to address instability in the developing world and to support effective multilateralism than to take common decisions which affect Member States’ vital bilateral relationships outside the EU".
"The risk of splits is always present. We need to have faith in our own strength. The more consistent we are, and the clearer we speak with one voice, the stronger we shall be" concluded Ms Kuneva.
Political group speakers
EPP-ED group Chairman Joseph DAUL (FR) stressed the importance not only of ensuring stability on our own continent, but of encouraging citizens elsewhere to throw off the yoke of totalitarianism.
Europe must continue to defend human rights, he said, citing the examples of human rights violations in Darfur, which amount to "genocide", and in Zimbabwe, which he predicted would "collapse into chaos" if Europe did not come to its aid.
Mr Daul described Iran's detention of 15 British sailors as "worrying and unacceptable", and said that the UK's EU partners should do all they could to get them freed rapidly.
He concluded by calling for a stronger EU-US partnership to provide more aid for the world's poorest nations, and by expressing his confidence in Mr Solana.
For the Socialists, Martin SCHULZ (PES, DE) supported Mr Daul's wish for Croatia to be an EU member in time for the 2009 elections but said this would mean telling the Czech and Polish leaders that they "must budge on the constitutional debate".
He urged Iran to "release the British military personnel" as a sign that it is genuinely "ready for constructive dialogue in international politics". On Palestine, he agreed with Mr Solana that "We cannot refuse dialogue with the new national unity government in Palestine" just because it includes Hamas.
Looking at the many problems around the world mentioned by the High Representative, he wondered "Which of these could be solved by an anti-missile defence system in the Czech Republic or Poland? Not one!" In fact such problems were often caused "because we don't spend money on eradicating poverty and disease". He concluded "Any missile defence system will only create problems, cause an arms race and spend money we don't have".
On behalf of the Liberal group, Graham WATSON (UK) backed Mr Solana's focus on the Middle East and urged him to "take the initiative" with the new Palestinian government so as not to "lose the opportunity to secure a lasting peace".
On the British military prisoners in Iran, he revealed that "HMS Cornwall is from my constituency. Most of these people are my constituents". He asked Mr Solana to use the Union's influence on their behalf and also to press Libya to release the captive Bulgarian nurses.
"At the top of our agenda", however, must be Darfur, he stressed. "Our inability to prevent the first genocide of this century would send the wrong signal about Europe's role and potential within the world". He backed the idea of bringing in UN troops.
He also supported Mr Solana's emphasis on nuclear non-proliferation, saying "If the United Kingdom and France renew their nuclear weapons, if the USA builds a missile shield, then the message we are sending to the Russians and others is that we are engaging in a new arms race". Again he urged the High Representative to "take the initiative and set the agenda" as otherwise "the agenda will be set for you" by the individual Member States. It was crucial that "we have a common response to the development of this missile defence shield".
Speaking for his group, Konrad SZYMANSKI (UEN, PL), took a different view, saying there was "a danger if the Member States adopt the Russian view" on the missile defence issue as this is "based on false arguments" designed to "divide the EU". He maintained that, "paradoxically, deploying elements of the shield would speed up facilities for NATO".
Daniel COHN-BENDIT (Greens/EFA, DE) expressed his solidarity with the captured British navy personnel and the Bulgarian nurses held in Libya. He stressed the importance of nuclear disarmament, but said this could only be achieved by first completing civil nuclear disarmament. On Darfur, Mr Cohn-Bendit said that the EU must take a lead working through the UN to protect refugees and insist on a no-fly zone. China had to be told that a solution must be found to this crisis "human beings must never be sold for barrels of oil". Regarding the potential US anti-missile shield, he said that this would do nothing to prevent Iranian suicide bombers from attacking the US or Europe.
Francis WURTZ (GUE/NGL, FR) limited his comments to the situation in the Middle East. The situation, he said, a few weeks ago could not have been much worse with the possibility of civil war in the Palestinian territories. However, he criticised the EU for not rescuing the situation, it was the Palestinians themselves and the Arab countries in the region that saved the situation. Israel, he said, was not respecting its commitments, and the international community needed to support and recognise the new Palestinian government.
Speaking for the IND/DEM, Bastiaan BELDER (IND/DEM, NL) said Europe's security would not be enhanced by debating the potential US anti-missile shield, it would only serve to antagonise allies. He too warned against the dangers of Iran, who, he said, was developing ballistic missiles capable of hitting Europe. China and Russia play a role in this by offering Iran the necessary technology.
Daniela BURUIANĂ-APRODU (ITS, RO) began with a reference to the "advent of new challenges like energy and the environment" In addition to these challenges, there are, what Mrs Buruiană-Aprodu referred to as "asymmetrical threats", threats which no longer target one country, but have instead become global issues. Such issues, such as terrorism, the environment and poverty, "necessitate collective answers". A dramatic rethinking is needed, along with a consideration of "human and material resources which might be redirected to other sectors."
For the non-attached Members, Jana BOBOŠÍKOVÁ (NI, CZ) emphatically welcomed the words of Javier SOLANA when he said that it is "up to individual states to decide whether or not to take part in a US defence missile system." A US missile defence system is, she said, "the only sensible option right now." Mrs Bobošíková ended with a message to those who feared that an anti-missile system would divide Europe, urging them "to reflect on just how the EU was divided in the past and who was responsible."
British and Irish speakers
Gerard BATTEN (IND/DEM,UK) said: "Mr Solana, I understand that you are looking for a new job. On a personal basis, I wish you well in any new career that you may choose but I am pleased that the role of European Foreign Minister is no longer viable because of the rejection of the proposed European Constitution in 2005. The idea is always been a non-starter. There can never be a common European foreign policy because we all have different histories international commitments interests and allies. take Britain for example. We do not necessarily share with our European neighbours the same perspectives on the international crises we face today. As you will be well aware, Britain faces a very grave situation in Iran which has illegally detained British troops. It would be ridiculous for an EU Foreign Minister to try and negotiate the release of Members Her Majesty's Armed Forces. However, Britain is also now in an equally ridiculous position as a result of our membership of the European Union. If diplomatic efforts fail to obtain the release of the British troops, then Iran's illegal actions may have to be met with sanctions. But Britain could not enact sanctions against Iran even if it wanted to because Britain no longer has control over its own trading rules. Trade policy is now under the control of the European Union. This is yet another example if one were needed of why Britain must leave the European Union and restore control of her own affairs."
Ashley MOTE (ITS, UK) said "Mahatma Gandhi, that brave, peaceful and utterly determined father of Indian independence, once walked into the Governor-General's office during the days of the Raj and accused him to his face of being masters in someone else's house. We Brits now know how he felt and some of you might even find a smug satisfaction at the very thought. However, when we see the European Union and its officials throwing their weight about the globe, like Johnny-come-latelies strutting on an ever bigger stage, we know the end game. We know where such self-appointed self-importance ultimately leads.
I ask you three questions, Who told the EU it could impose fines on foreign companies with no regard for the consequences on commerce, wealth creation and the protection of jobs in countries that do not even belong to the European Union? Then there is the EU's economic partnership agreements doing so much damage to real families in Third World countries and whilst their leaders grow fat on the back of these agreements, local producers and traders struggle to compete with cheap imports. The same applies to the fishermen off the coast of Africa: while local government ministers grow fat, their coastal waters have been decimated by our trawlers and local fishermen can no longer make a living. Gandhi was right. The EU has no business posturing as a master in other people's houses."
Roger HELMER (NI, UK) said "I was born in 1944 in the dying months of the Second World War. For the whole of my lifetime it has been NATO and the Transatlantic Alliance which have kept the peace in Europe. It was not the European Union or the Commission that defeated the USSR and brought down the Berlin Wall; it was the courage and determination of leaders like Ronald Reagan and Margaret Thatcher. The CFSP and its military posturing threaten to undermine the Transatlantic Alliance. It is born out of jealousy and resentment and anti-Americanism. It is overweight with strategies and planning papers and staff colleges but desperately light on men and ships and tanks and guns and aircraft. The CFSP threatens the very foundations of security and leaves us all dangerously exposed in an unpredictable world. This is yet another reason why my country would be better off out of the European Union."
Seán Ó NEACHTAIN (UEN, IE), speaking in Irish, said that the EU of 27 Member States should play a role of an "honest broker" in the Middle East. The EU also needed to keep a close eye on Iran where developments were "worrying". The EU, he said, also needed to support the Balkan States to enhance and develop them economically. Finally, the EU must do all in its power to achieve the Millennium Development Goals.
Charles TANNOCK (EPP-ED, UK) said: "I welcome Mr Solana's reference to Africa and Darfur and the lack of human rights in Darfur, but he regrettably missed out on Zimbabwe. The Arab League in Riyadh, which he visited only yesterday, promised a new initiative on the Arab-Israeli conflict, but it still insists on the right of return of all Palestinian refugees – so nothing new as far as I can see. On Kosovo, I fear that snatching it away unilaterally from Serbian sovereignty – a country still digesting the partition from Montenegro – will create further instability in the region and generate a precedence which Russia will play out to the maximum over the frozen conflicts in the South Caucuses. But even over Crimea. Ukraine is a country that now needs more support and is it not now high time that it be granted by the Council the status of potential candidate, like the Western Balkans.
On the Middle East, I would urge caution over resuming direct aid to the Palestine New Unity Government before Hamas explicitly accepts the three conditions, including recognising the right of the State of Israel to exist. I should also like to thank all those in this House – the President of this Parliament in particular – who have shown solidarity with the ambushed 15 British service personnel who were snatched from Iraqi territorial waters where they were fully entitled to be under both UN resolutions and the explicit consent of the Iraqi Government.
Iran remains a serious problem as it defies the international community in its determination to acquire nuclear weapons and will openly dissemble on this issue as it has done recently over its claim of the exact position of the whereabouts of the British servicemen when they were captured. Is it not now high time that the EU, with the USA, apply serious economic sanctions against this brutal regime, which publicly executes people for sexual misdemeanours and whose President Ahmadinejad has vowed to wipe Israel off the face of the earth. Ending the export credit guarantees by Germany would be a very good start."
Response to the debate
Responding to the debate, Javier SOLANA stated: "I am ready to continue discussing important issues. We must condemn in a clear manner and demand immediately the liberation of the UK soldiers taken by Iran." The Middle East was one of the most important issues and "Something may happen before September if we work in good cooperation with US, Arab countries and between ourselves. I would have liked some of you to be in Riyadh to see EU foreign policy in action: we are effective and we count. I hope to see some of these topics operational in coming days."
On Lebanon he said "the government of Prime Minister Siniora is the legal government of Lebanon and we need to continue helping them. The recent conference on reconstruction is proof of our commitment. We need government that is not blocked and can achieve results, and we need to get international tribunal on the assassinations, first of all that of Rafik Hariri."
"We have an intense agenda up to summer," he concluded: "I will be happy to keep following up with you this intense agenda for peace and stability in world and for our neighbourhood."
20070326IPR04625 Javier Solana homepage
EN
1
LINK
http://www.consilium.europa.eu/cms3_applications/applications/solana/index.asp?lang=EN&cmsid=246
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
