Corporate Social Responsibility: Richard Howitt MEP leads the debate on a new partnership
Employment policy
United Kingdom
2007-03-14 - 18:39
Corporate Social Responsibility - labelling one idea in comprehensive report
On 13 March in Strasbourg, MEPs adopted a report authored by Richard Howitt on Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR). The report supports the Code of Good Practice of the International Social and Environmental Accreditation and Labelling Alliance, as a leading example of promoting collaboration between existing labelling initiatives, in preference to the creation of new social labels at the national or European level.
MEPs point out that consumers play an important part in the creation of incentives for responsible production and responsible business practices. They believe, however, that the current situation is impenetrable for consumers because of the confusion between different national product standards and labelling schemes, all of which help to undermine the existing social product labels. MEPs draw attention to the fact that, at the same time, considerable costs are incurred by companies when switching between many different national requirements and standards; also points out that it is expensive to set up monitoring mechanisms to oversee social product labelling, particularly for smaller countries.
The report underlines that CSR policies should be promoted on their own merits, neither as a substitute for appropriate regulation in relevant fields, nor as a covert approach to introducing such legislation. Agreeing with the Commission of the term, the EP defines CSR as "the voluntary integration of environmental and social considerations into business operations, over and above legal requirements and contractual obligations."
Extracts from the debate
Richard Howitt (East of England, Labour) , opening the debate, said: "Politicians and above all people understand that the problems of world poverty and of environmental degradation remain stubbornly prevalent in today’s world. For ten years, many companies have begun to examine how they can manage their own social and environmental impacts through initiatives for Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR). Business cannot be expected to take responsibility alone for meeting these challenges. However, it is now time for the communications, the conferences and the codes of conduct to begin to make a significant and measurable difference and a move from process to outcome. [...]
The one clear piece of new legislation we will support will be for mandatory environmental and social reporting by business, reiterating our previous position and sending a powerful political signal from this Parliament. All of our other proposals are about more effective use and implementation of the existing regulatory framework and support for voluntary action.
I say to the opponents inside this Parliament and to the one or two associations outside that, in their enthusiasm to block action at EU level, I do not believe that they do justice or genuinely represent the best interests or the best of business when it comes to CSR. Take the Danish pharmaceutical company Novo Nordisk, speaking on behalf of the business leaders’ initiative for human rights, which told us: ‘Minimum standards are essential for a level playing field to be developed in this area’. Take the European Investment and Research Service, who told us: ‘If you can go some way to rekindling the interest of the Commission in a more substantive approach to CSR, that would be most welcome’. Or take the French business confederation MEDEF, speaking of behalf of Business Europe: ‘I want to thank you very much for the quality and the relevance of most of the questions and suggestions put forward by you.’
Now is not the time to retreat. It is time to be ambitious and to show vision and take all of these and others together. One of the key ways we can get greater enthusiasm, dynamism and consensus behind EU action on CSR is by championing it in global institutions and better implementing global CSR initiatives here in Europe. There is also the strategic partnership that I propose between the Commission and the global reporting initiative, a new business dialogue between the EU and Japan on corporate social responsibility, and the use of the fifth anniversary this year of the World Summit on Sustainable Development as an opportunity for us in Europe to lead the international debate for intergovernmental initiatives and corporate accountability, which was agreed at Johannesburg."
Roger Helmer (East Midlands, Conservative ) said: "In this House we talk constantly about the Lisbon Agenda, which is supposed to make the EU the world’s most competitive knowledge-based economy by 2010. The Commission President, José Manuel Barroso, likes to boast about his plans to control excessive regulation to help enhance the competitiveness of European economies.
Yet this report, as originally presented, sought to create mandatory regulation of a wide range of areas of corporate activity, including employee relations and the environment. But these areas are already heavily regulated, indeed massively over-regulated, by EU legislation already on the statute book. What we were proposing to do here was to double up on existing regulation with all the potential for ambiguity and confusion that would have created.
We should also be aware of existing best practice of CSR amongst existing major businesses. Last summer, I had the privilege of visiting the Gates Foundation in Seattle, which of course is run by Bill Gates of Microsoft. This Foundation’s spending on philanthropy exceeds the GDP of a number of small countries. Arguably, it does more to relieve poverty and hardship in Africa than EU aid does and, because it is a private sector organisation, its spending is hugely more efficient. I believe that, with the amendments that we are proposing to put in place here, we should be able to support this report.
Philip Bushill-Matthews (West Midlands, Conservative) referring to Richard Howitt, he said: "I should just like to take issue on two tiny points with which he opened his comments. Firstly, he said he was disappointed that the Commission report almost indicated that it was opting out. I disagree with that. I think its report was very positive and we should welcome it. Secondly, he said that he hoped that the Commission would help bring the NGOs back to the multi-stakeholder forum table. In fairness, it was neither the Commission nor the multi-stakeholders that encouraged them to leave. They themselves chose to leave. It is up to them whether they wish to come back or not. Some of them at least had a minority view – in a democracy that is perfectly permitted."
20070226IPR03599 European Parliament resolution of 13 March 2007 on corporate social responsibility: a new partnership - text adopted Richard Howitt MEP All 78 UK MEPs Debate in Strasbourg Monday 12 March 2007 The International Social and Environmental Accreditation and Labelling (ISEAL) Alliance
EN
1
PHOTO
20070313PHT04083.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/members/public/geoSearch/view.do?country=GB&partNumber=1&zone=Eastern&language=EN&id=2073
EN
4
LINK
/members/expert/groupAndCountry/search.do?country=GB&language=EN
EN
6
LINK
http://www.isealalliance.org/
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0062 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT CRE 20070312 ITEM-018 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
