Ukraine on the way to European integration, says Prime Minister Yanukovych
External relations
2007-03-28 - 09:46
"Ukraine has been moving forward in the process of democratisation," said the country's Prime Minister, Viktor Yanukovych in the Foreign Affairs committee of the European Parliament on Tuesday. He called on MEPs to support the negotiations for a new framework agreement which were launched recently, and was questioned by Members on both domestic political developments and external affairs of the Ukraine.
"The 50th anniversary of the Treaty of Rome is an important day of celebration for all who share European values, and therefore also for Ukraine," began the Prime Minister. He noted that civil society and a free media were growing in the country, and called this process "the main acquis of the 2004 Orange Revolution." He gave voice to his wish to create a broad coalition of political parties, a "coalition of national unity." Rebecca Harms (Greens/EFA, DE), however, warned Mr Yanukovych that "some compromises can be the wrong ones," and that they should not be pursued for their own sake.
Katrin Saks (PES, EE) asked whether the demands for early elections by several political forces - such as Yulia Tymoshenko, the leader of the opposition - were going to be accommodated. Mr Yanukovych answered that "certain criteria, such as an economic crisis, are needed for early elections to take place," and that "these are absent in Ukraine today." He added that voters had made a choice a year ago, and those calling for early elections were simply unhappy with the result of that process. Reacting to a question by Michael Gahler (EPP-ED, DE) about his relationship with his former opponent, current President Viktor Yushchenko, the Prime Minister said they had a "normal working relationship, and mutual respect" for each other.
Ukraine and its neighbours
On foreign topics, the question of Ukrainian-Russian relations dominated discussions. Mr Yanukovych explained that Ukraine was working to reduce its energy dependence in several ways, through energy saving technologies, diversification of supply, and exploring further fossil fuel fields. He added that "equal rights of access to natural resources for foreign companies will be guaranteed," and gave voice to his hope that "Ukraine should form a reliable bridge between the EU and Russia," not just in the field of energy.
He also called on MEPs to help achieve a simplified visa regime for Ukrainian citizens wishing to visit the EU. Conversely, Charles Tannock (EPP-ED, UK) asked the Prime Minister to "sort out uncertainties in your company law" that were making foreign direct investment risky for Western companies. Ana Gomes (PES, PT) inquired about export controls of small arms and light weapons (SALW), while Kathy Sinnott (IND/DEM, IE) brought attention to the ongoing problems with the trade in organs, tissue, cells and embryos that is still afflicting the Ukraine. Mr Yanukovych gave assurances that all three topics were actively being dealt with by his government.
Ukraine's European perspective
The Chairman of the committee, Jacek Saryusz-Wolski (EPP-ED, PL) recalled that in December of 2004, the EP "was the first EU institution to talk of a Ukrainian perspective for EU Membership." The Prime Minister thanked him for the Parliament's long-lasting support for his country, and confirmed that "we are following the European choice unequivocally." He said the common goal of all political parties in Ukraine was to "maintain Ukraine on the road to European integration."
2007-03-27 Committee on Foreign Affairs Chair Jacek Saryusz-Wolski EPP-ED PL
20070326IPR04590
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
