Opening of March Strasbourg plenary - minute of silence for victims of terrorism
Institutions
2007-03-12 - 18:32
On Monday afternoon, before the plenary session, a special ceremony was held with around 580 school students from around Europe to mark International Day against Terrorism. Yesterday was the third anniversary of the terrorist attack of 11 March 2004 in Madrid in which 192 people died. This day also serves to commemorate the London bombings of 7 July 2005.
At the opening of the session Parliament's President Hans-Gert Pöttering made a speech on this subject. He told the House "We must keep the memories of these people alive and show solidarity with their families". He went on "Terrorism is a blow to freedom and democracy. Terrorism is an attempt through blind violence to destroy values that the EU and the Member States believe in." "It is a crime that cannot be tolerated under any circumstances."
He emphasised that "The EU and the international community must fight together against terrorism in all its forms". Indeed "We need a strong and united Europe. In order to fight terrorism effectively, we must go beyond our present narrow cooperation to find the right policies". But Guantánamo, he stressed, was "not in line with Europe's view of law".
The President also referred to the Italian journalist Daniele Mastrogiacomo of the newspaper La Repubblica, who has been kidnapped by the Taleban in Afghanistan, as well as the German citizen and her son kidnapped in Iraq. He urged their captors "to release them unharmed" and added "we cannot be blackmailed by violence".
The House then observed a minute's silence.
Change to the agenda
Moving on to the week's plenary agenda, the House voted to make one change: the Kyösti VIRRANKOSKI (ALDE, FI) report on Biotechnology: prospects and challenges for agriculture was referred back to the Agriculture Committee for further work.
The President also announced that this week in Strasbourg he will be signing the INSPIRE directive with the Council presidency . INSPIRE, which stands for "infrastructure for spatial information in Europe", will require EU governments to make geographical data available more easily, thereby supporting common policies to protect the environment.
Highlights of the Strasbourg week - 12-15 March 2007
The Strasbourg March plenary session sees MEPs debate, with European Commission Vice-President Günter VERHEUGEN, the outcome of the European Council on 8-9 March with energy and climate change high on the agenda. German Foreign Minister Frank Walter STEINMEIER and European Commission Vice-President Margot WALLSTRÖM will lead the debate with MEPs on the Berlin Declaration to be signed on 25 March 2007 to mark the 50th anniversary of the signing of the Treaty of Rome. The House also turns its attention to laws relating to the collective cross-border management of copyright for online music services. MEPs will also debate the issue of a ban on seal products entering the EU. Monday 12 March The House will debate Richard HOWITT 's (PES, UK) own initiative report on Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR). The committee urges the EU to adopt a European standard for product labelling where observance of human rights and fundamental workers' rights are part of the labelling scheme. Also on Monday, there will be a debate on equality between men and women (roadmap 2006 to 2010). The report calls for the European Commission to give stronger practical effect to its Roadmap for Equality between Women and Men (2006-2010). MEPs in the committee want the principle of equal pay for equal work to be properly applied, paternity leave encouraged, action taken against violence, better integration of immigrant women and promotion of respect for women's rights in the EU's external relations. Later on Monday, the Parliament will debate the collective cross-border management of copyright for online music services . The Legal Affairs Committee says there should be binding legislation on the online music market, ensuring European cultural diversity is safeguarded. Reacting to the Commission's recommendation proposing to open up the market to competition, MEPs in the committee are critical both of the procedure chosen and the substance. Before the opening of the plenary, Parliament will hold an event to mark the International Day against Terrorism. Around 500 schoolchildren from Strasbourg, London, Madrid and Kreis (Germany )will be at the European Parliament at an event to mark the day. EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering will make a statement on this topic at the opening at 5pm on Monday. The last point on Monday is a joint debate on oral questions: One share, one vote: proportionality between ownership and control of listed European companies. Tuesday 13 March On Tuesday morning, the European Parliament debates the Commission's Annual Policy Strategy for 2008 . This document is presented every year around March and marks the beginning of the Commission's policy cycle. It outlines the Commission's policy objectives, namely in the four key strategic areas of the Barroso Commission: prosperity, solidarity, security and freedom and a stronger role for the EU in the world. It also puts forward key actions in cross-cutting issues such as jobs, energy and climate change and migration management. The House will then debate the recent EU-US draft air services agreement . The House will also vote on a resolution on this subject. Mary Lou McDONALD (GUE/NGL, IE) will be presenting her report on the ratification of the Maritime Labour Convention which urges that the EU Member States ratify, as swiftly as possible, the Consolidated Maritime Labour Convention adopted by the International Labour Organisation in 2006. The convention aims to improve working conditions for seafarers, thus reducing unfair competition on the global market as well as making merchant shipping a more attractive profession.
Also on Tuesday's agenda is an oral question to the Commission on illegal bird hunting in Malta .
At 5pm, there will be a debate on a Commission communication on consumer policy strategy 2007-2013.
Wednesday 14 March The two key debates of the week take place on Wednesday morning, with German Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier and Commission Vice-Presidents Margot Wallström and Günter Verheugen taking the floor on the upcoming Berlin declaration (to be signed on 25 March to mark the 50th anniversary of the signing of the Treaty of Rome) and the outcome of the European Council (8 and 9 March). MEPs will also debate the future of Bosnia Herzegovina . The Foreign Affairs Committee is concerned that the winners of the parliamentary and presidential elections, who were formerly moderate parties, are increasingly resorting to radical and nationalistic language, formerly the prerogative of extremist political groupings. Also on Wednesday, the European Parliament will debate the future of the European aeronautical construction industry in the wake of the announcement of job cuts at Airbus.
Final point of the agenda is a Commission statement on missing persons in Cyprus.
Thursday 15 March MEPs turn their attention to the banning of seal products in the European Union . In September 2006, MEPs adopted a written declaration calling on the Commission to immediately draft a regulation to ban the import, export and sale of all harp and hooded seal products. As is usual, the plenary session ends with three debates and votes on resolutions relating to human rights in the world. On this occasion, the topics are: Guatemala, Cambodia and Nigeria.
20070309IPR03997 Briefing - 12-15 March 2007 (Strasbourg Plenary) Final draft agenda - 12-15 March 2007
EN
2
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?language=EN&reference=2007-03
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070228BRI03712 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
