Human rights in Uzbekistan: no progress
Human rights
2007-05-03 - 09:36
In October 2005, the EU Council of Ministers adopted sanctions against Uzbekistan, a result of the Tashkent government's role in the killing of hundreds of people in of the city of Andijan in May 2005. Two weeks from now, the Council will meet to review these sanctions and to decide whether or not to lift them. Ahead of this decision, the Human Rights Subcommittee met on Tuesday and heard a range of views on the best way to proceed.
As Subcommittee Chair Hélène Flautre (Greeens/EFA, FR) put it in opening the meeting, there has been "no headway", neither in Tashkent's investigations of the Andijan massacre, nor in the case of Umida Niyazova, a Human Rights Watch translator recently sentenced to seven years in prison for alleged anti-government activities. According to Martin Callanan (EPP-ED, UK), a recent participant in the EU-Uzbekistan Parliamentary Cooperation Committee, “Uzbekistan is the most repressive of the Central Asian states, […] with the possible exception of Turkmenistan.”
However, “the isolation of Uzbekistan”, argued Rolf Schulze, a German Foreign Ministry official speaking on behalf of the Council Presidency, “is not an option.” Even if Member States might not be of one mind “as to how one should proceed with the sanctions”, he said, the EU should strive to have an institutionalised human rights dialogue with Central Asian countries, Uzbekistan included. The human rights dialogue with Tashkent, he noted, was opened by the Council last month. Acknowledging – in response to a question by Sarah Ludford (ALDE, UK) – that certain economic and energy interests were at stake in the EU’s relationship with Uzbekistan, Mr Schulze insisted, nonetheless, that there should be no trade-off between human rights and other issues.
Lotte Leicht, of Human Rights Watch, warned against any lifting of sanctions. "It is our view," she said, that “it would be clear-cut nonsense” to lift or lighten the sanctions without seeing tangible movement on human rights from Tashkent – notably, as concerns the fate of human rights defenders currently jailed in Uzbekistan. We respect dialogue, she added, “but it must be result-oriented”. There is a threat – said Neil Melvin, of the Centre for European Policy Studies – that by engaging with Uzbekistan the EU will become “complicit” in Tashkent’s domestic policies and that the Union “will be discredited by such a strategy.”
Rolf Timans, Head of the Unit for Human Rights and Democratisation at the European Commission, was sceptical of the idea of making the release of political prisoners a precondition for engaging with Uzbekistan. “One has to be realistic”, he said. “This is only the first round [of the human rights dialogue]” – one should not expect that the Uzbek authorities will release such prisoners overnight. We have to start discussing human rights first, he added; “let’s not expect that the results will be forthcoming immediately.”
Mrs Flautre (Verts/ALE, FR) took issue with such reasoning. “I hope that there are no Uzbek officials in the room”, she remarked. “Your words”, she added, addressing Mr Timans, “suggest that they [the Uzbek authorities] hardly need to make an effort.” Mrs Lichte then reiterated her plea. It is “not enough” for the EU to “express concern”, she argued: the Union must “demand” the release of the human rights defenders unjustly held by the Uzbek government.
2007-05-02 Subcommittee on Human Rights Chair Hélène Flautre Greens/EFA FR
20070430IPR06169
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
