Security measures in civil aviation: who should pay
Transport
2007-04-25 - 14:07
Parliament insists on strict regulation of the use of ‘Sky Marshals'
Parliament adopted a second-reading report heavily amending the Council's common position on a new regulation laying down common rules on checks, searches, surveillance, prohibited items, security patrols and other aspects of airport and aircraft security. A key difference with the Council is who should pay for any extra security measures not required by the regulation.
In the report, drawn by Paolo COSTA (ALDE, IT), Parliament insists on strict regulation of the use of ‘Sky Marshals’ and the carriage of weapons on board aircraft. Regarding implementing measures, such as the decision by the Commission to ban liquids on board, the EP wants those to expire after six months.
Although Parliament wants implementing measures to expire after six months, it says they may be maintained "but only after a thorough re-evaluation of the security risks and a thorough evaluation of costs and operational impact associated with those measures".
For the first time, European rules will cover security measures during flights, including in-flight security officers. ‘Sky marshals’, as they are commonly known, will have to be properly trained and Parliament insists that weapons “shall not be carried on board an aircraft, unless the required security conditions have been fulfilled, and authorisation has been given by the State granting the operating licence to the air carrier concerned” . It demands prior approval by the State of departure, by the State of arrival and, where applicable, by “any State which is over flown or where intermediate stops are made” . Parliament also voted for the costs of security measures to be met by airline users and Member States, although if a Member State wants to impose even more stringent measures, it will have to cover the whole cost. "This is a reasonable approach, taking into account the protection of airline customers', the industry's and the Member States' interests", Mr Costa said. The report also stresses that security taxes and charges must be used “exclusively to meet airport or on board aircraft security costs”.
As Parliament differs with the Council over this key point, and given the numerous other amendments adopted, a conciliation procedure with Council will be needed.
Once adopted, the regulation would apply two years after its entry into force, except for the detailed implementing measures for common basic standards (methods of screening, access control and other security controls, methods of performing aircraft security checks and aircraft security searches or prohibited articles), which would apply immediately from the date of entry into force. Thus, subject to agreement in conciliation, these detailed measures could take effect from late 2007, with the whole regulation applying as of 2009.
20070420IPR05680 Common rules in the field of civil aviation security
EN
1
PHOTO
20070425PHT05855.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5274732
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
