Petitions Committee discusses "excessive controls" of UK customs authorities
Petitions
United Kingdom
2007-04-11 - 16:09
MEPs hear how UK Customs and Excise have relaxed measures due to EU law
The Petitions Committee on 11 April discussed a number of petitions concerning the sanctions imposed by the British authorities on finding individuals in the process of transporting alcohol and tobacco products purchased in other Member States. The petitions have been presented to the Committee from individuals who have had difficulty with the British customs authorities.
The petitioners state that the customs authorities have regularly confiscated large quantities of goods from individuals, often as a result of "the difficulty of convincing the authorities that the quantities of alcohol and cigarettes purchased at a lower price are for personal consumption." In some cases, the authorities have also confiscated the individuals' private vehicles.
Problems identified with UK Customs and Excise authorities
Under Community law (directive 92/12/EEC, see link), private individuals may acquire any quantity of such excise goods and bring the goods to another Member State without any formalities, on the condition that the goods are intended strictly for the individual's personal use. The petitioners allege that "UK Customs and Excise, by applying excessive controls and penalties against those believed to be holding excise goods purchased in other Member States for purposes other than their own personal use, are deterring UK residents from shopping in other Member States and thus denying them the freedoms of the Internal Market."
Action taken by Commission and UK amendments
The Commission issued a reasoned opinion to the UK on 7 July 2004 and on 20 October 2004 referred the matter to the European Court of Justice. In response, the UK consequently came forward with a series of proposals for amending its sanctions policy, and these policy changes were implemented as of March 2006. Under the amended policy, if an individual is found to possess goods for purposes other than individual consumption, they will be given the option of holding onto the goods against payment of the excise duty plus a penalty. In addition, vehicles will no longer be seized; instead the owner will be warned that it could be seized in any further cases. These amendments are on the based upon the importance of maintaining proportionate sanctions, in line with Community law.
Commission statement: UK has resolved the issue
The Commission stated that the UK had amended its policies "in all the fields mentioned by the Commission", and that these changes "eliminate the element of disproportionality." In the Commission's view, the procedures were now closed. In reference to individual cases, the Commission added that the power to bring infringement procedures against Members States was to ensure compliance with Community law, not as a means of redressing individual grievances.
MEPs and Petitions Committee call for further action
Challenging this position, John PURVIS (EPP-ED, Conservative, Scotland) claimed that the UK authorities continue to operate a policy of "border control", leading to what he saw as "still a threatening and intimidating situation" for travellers. The Commission should "go into this in much more detail", Mr Purvis added, because "these people who have had cars confiscated, goods confiscated...cannot get any redress." It was, he added, unacceptable that the Commission had "no more to say because...the UK is in compliance [with EU law]." On the current situation, Mr Purvis said that "I don't think we have a single market between the UK and the rest of the continent:"
The Chairman of the Petitions Committee, Marcin LIBICKI (UEN, Poland), agreed with Mr Purvis, stating that "the Commission is not exerting sufficient pressure" on the UK authorities. He added that "the European Court of Justice (ECJ) should deal with this matter "and, referring to the amended UK policies, should be aware of "a breach of Community law beforehand." The rulings of the ECJ "should not be limited in time", for we have to "look at how we can give redress to those who suffered in the past."
The petition will remain open for further consideration.
20070410IPR05085 Council Directive 92/12/EEC of 25 February 1992 on the general arrangements for products subject to excise duty and on the holding, movement and monitoring of such products Petitions Committee of the European Parliament All 78 UK MEPs
EN
1
PHOTO
20070411PHT05168.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:31992L0012:EN:HTML
EN
3
LINK
/activities/expert/committees/presentation.do?committee=2366&language=EN
EN
4
LINK
/members/expert/groupAndCountry/search.do?country=GB&language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
