Safety at sea: Parliament votes on latest maritime legislation
Transport
2007-04-25 - 14:46
Parliament backed measures put forward by the European Commission to protect Europe against maritime accidents and pollution. This "third maritime safety package" seeks to promote healthy competition between shipping operators who comply with international rules on safety and compensation.
Maritime safety has long been a priority of Parliament. In the wake of the Erika and Prestige oil-spill accidents, the EU passed new legislation on maritime safety but further measures are needed to prevent accidents and pollution and to deal with the aftermath of accidents.
The third package consists of seven reports. Two of these (on the obligations of flag states and civil liability of shipowners) were adopted by Parliament in March. The other five (on port state control, a traffic monitoring system, accident investigations, passenger protection insurance and ship inspection bodies) were adopted today in Strasbourg.
1) Safety inspections: port state control
This draft directive seeks to improve the standard of safety inspections of ships in European ports by recasting and simplifying existing EU law.
In a report by Dominique VLASTO (EPP-ED, FR) Parliament voted to tighten up the inspection regime, the criteria for selecting ships for inspection and the parameters for calculating a ship's risk profile. A database showing the risk of profiles of ships and indicating all ships due for inspection should be devised by the European Commission, say MEPs.
The House also expanded inspection regime should apply to vessels with a high risk profile and to passenger ships and oil and chemical tankers more than 12 years old. Pilots should have a bigger role in detecting any shortcomings on board. If port authorities learn that a ship has anomalies or apparent defects, they should inform the competent authority of the port state concerned.
2) Traffic monitoring system: places of refuge for ships in distress
Establishing a clear and precise legal framework on places of refuge for ships in distress is the main aim of this Commission proposal. On behalf of the Parliament, rapporteur Dirk STERCKX (ALDE, BE) says that there should be "no margin of discretion" for Member States in applying this decision on places of refuge and that an independent authority should be set up to designate ports of refuge for vessels in distress. The Commission proposed that fishing vessels over 15 metres long should be equipped with the Automatic Identification System but the House believes this should be required only of ships over 24 metres long.
3) Accident investigations
The inability of some flag States to carry out technical investigations immediately after maritime disasters and incidents is a major concern in shipping circles. This directive would lay down guidelines for such investigations.
The goal of the investigations is not to determine civil or criminal liability but to establish the circumstances and to research the causes of maritime accidents in order to learn lessons and improve maritime safety.
According to rapporteur Jaromír KOHLÍČEK (GUE/NGL, CZ), the independence of permanent investigation bodies is a key point. The European Parliament therefore adopted amendments to boost their independence and distinguish more clearly between technical and criminal investigations. It also highlighted the importance of an efficient early warning system and cooperation between Member States. An amendment was also adopted against the criminalisation of captain and crew of a ship after a major incident.
4) Accident insurance
The draft directive on the "liability of carriers of passengers by sea and inland waterways in the event of accidents" will create an EU-wide level playing field for civil liability of shipowners regarding damage to passengers and their belongings (e.g. luggage and vehicles).
The European Parliament, in a report by Paolo COSTA (ALDE, IT), backs the draft directive, which would incorporate into EU law the 2002 Protocol to the Athens Convention, thereby introducing compulsory insurance to cover passengers in the event of shipping accidents and raising the compensation limits. It also includes a right for an advance payment in the event of death or injury of a passenger. Against the wishes of the rapporteur the EPP-ED and IND/DEM groups tabled amendments to exclude the inland waterway sector and domestic traffic from the scope of this legislation. These amendments were adopted with a small majority.
5) Ship inspection bodies
This proposal aims to improve the quality of work of the "classification societies" (now known as "recognised organisations"), the private bodies which can be authorised by EU Member States to carry out inspection, checking and certification tasks relating to ships flying their flag.
Rapporteur Luis DE GRANDES PASCUAL (EPP-ED, ES) and the Parliament back the Commission's plans, which include the creation of an independent assessment committee to certify the quality system of the recognised organisations.
Previous EU maritime safety legislation
Under the previous two maritime safety packages (known as Erika I and Erika II), the European Union adopted a range of legislation on maritime security and safety, including inspections of ships in port and a ban on using single-hull vessels to transport oil, as well as the creation of the European Maritime Safety Agency EMSA.
What happens next?
At the debate, German Parliamentary of State Katrin ROTH was confident that important parts of the third maritime package could be concluded under the German Presidency, also before July 2007. But given the controversy of some reports, many MEPs think that this co-decision procedure will be continued under the Portuguese presidency.
20070420IPR05677 Plenary adoption of first two reports of the third maritime package Previous work by the EP on maritime safety
EN
2
LINK
/highlights/en/801.html
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326BRI04615 ITEM-006-EN NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
