MEPs' Assistants: Parliament wouldn't be the same without them
Institutions
2007-03-30 - 11:11
Assistants: ever present in the corridors
A common feature in the corridors of the European Parliament are MEPs accompanied by smartly dressed 20-somethings usually carrying files in one hand and a mobile phone in the other. Normally both are hurrying, either to the hemicycle Chamber, a committee room or to meet a group of Constituents. Welcome to the world of MEPs' assistants - 1,416 of whom work in Brussels and Strasbourg. They are among the 4000 people who assist MEPs - either at the Parliament or in their countries.
Assistants work directly for MEPs and as such their tasks and salaries vary enormously: they can range from secretarial tasks to acting as a full blown political advisor. Usually it is a mixture of several roles so assistants are often a sort of secretary-advisor-press-officer-tour guide (for visitors) all rolled into one.
It is usual - though not universal - for them to be part of the same political group or party as their MEP. This shared political outlook, the long hours and the variety of tasks normally mean that a close working understanding between and MEP and their assistant is vital.
This focus on assistants is in four parts:
1. A look at a "typical day" in the Parliament.
2. How do you become an assistant - what qualities do you need
3. Assistants have rights! - A look at their campaign for a legal statute
4. Finally, "in their own words" assistants tell us about their jobs
Let's start by trying to put together a "typical day" for an assistant:
20070209FCS02971
A typical day?
Post, emails, leaflets: all in one day This is what a typical day in Parliament's Committee week ("pink week" held in Brussels) may look like:
0830 - Arrive at desk and eat croissants or pieces of fruit bought on way to work, while checking the post and email. Check the diary appointments for the day. Have a quick look through the papers and news agencies online to see if there are any stories that affect people in the MEP's region.
1100 - Send quick email to other assistants to arrange much needed coffee break/gossip in the "Mickey mouse" - the nickname given to Parliament's coffee bar on account of its brightly coloured chairs.
1120 - Rush to a committee room to give your MEP documents they urgently need - knowing your way around the Parliament and finding meeting rooms is essential survival training for an assistant. You have to know the quickest way to room PHS 1A002 from anywhere in the building...
1145 - Mobile rings, your MEP has to return home immediately for a meeting in the constituency. You have to rush to the Parliament's travel office to arrange travel home.
1300 - Well deserved lunch - either in the canteen or in front of the computer depending on the workload.
During/after lunch: - help your MEP prepare for a committee meeting. Help draft a speech on tabled amendments to proposed EU legislation - check which other items are on the agenda.
1500 - Attend committee meeting and take notes. This committee may be discussing important regional development funding which is vital for your MEP's region. You have to be able to brief your colleagues back home about what is happening and be able to answer questions from constituents on the subject.
1830 - MEP arrives back in the office after committee for a meeting with NGOs to discuss an upcoming report or piece of legislation.
1930 - You have to write to the European Commission on behalf of a constituent who is complaining about some aspect of EU law.
Just about to leave when you're mobile rings, a group of people from the constituency are arriving tomorrow for a tour of the Parliament and they need help with some practical arrangements.
So now you have some idea of a typical day. Would you fancy having a go? Read on to find out what being an MEP's assistant means.
How do you become an Assistant?
"This way": showing constituents the Parliament is one of the assistants tasks There is no single way to become an assistant - the people who work for MEPs come from a wide variety of backgrounds and have come to the Parliament through many routes. What they do share however, is an enthusiasm for politics - and particularly European politics.
Is it necessary to have studied the European Union?
Certainly not, although it may help. This also applies to foreign languages - especially with the Parliament now holding debates in 22 languages to reflect its linguistic make-up. In particular an MEP who is new to the House or may not be fluent in a foreign language may lean heavily on an experienced assistant.
The type of education that may be useful was summed up by a Latvian assistant Guna: "I believe there is no right or wrong education to become an assistant. For example I have a degree in sciences of religion and theology. It is more about personality and the goals one has".
French assistant Anne-Laure says that already having knowledge of the EU institutions "can save you a lot of time".
Do I have to belong to the same political "family" as my MEP?
Many assistants are from the same political party or group as their MEP. Tomé, a Portuguese assistant said he was involved in the "young socialists" back home before coming to the Socialist Group in the Parliament. For Anne- Laure it is "fundamental" to be of the same political persuasion as her boss - she says that sharing the same "values and convictions" is vital.
However, many MEPs are happy to employ people primarily for their skills rather than for their political allegiance. Some MEPs in fact prefer "apolitical" assistants as they feel that dispassionate advice and counsel is more rewarding.
What skills do I need?
A level of experience is the key as is "the desire to do it" says Anne-Claire as the working days are long. Guna, a Latvian assistant, explains that "multitasking is a common part of an assistant's workday, therefore it is necessary to be well organised, to react fast and quickly adapt to new circumstances". For Jeanette a good assistant needs to show "patience and flexibility, be efficient and a problem solver".
If you think you would like to do this, then you could contact your MEP directly or the office of a political party in your own country.
Click the MAP to find a MEP
Assistants have rights too!
Loaded with files in the foyer of the Parliament in Brussels It is important to remember that assistants are not employed by the Parliament but by MEPs. This means they are employed under national law (in their home countries) and work abroad. This can raise complications about social security, pensions, health insurance and so forth.
In a sense it has mirrored the situation of MEPs who were paid the same salary as MPs in their own countries - thus prompting wild disparities between for example Italian MEPs and those from some countries in the Baltic States.
A new pay statute will apply for MEPs after 2009 and many are hopeful that the complicated nature of assistant's salaries and benefits can be simplified and improved. Joeri Hamvas of the European Parliament's Assistants Association is hopeful. "Now that the MEP statute will come into force in 2009, the biggest obstacle to having a statute for assistants has been removed".
One of the Parliament's Vice-President Gerard Onesta has been working on finding a solution to this issue for several years.
After being an Assistant: an MEP?
Several assistants have gone on to become MEPs like Antonio López Istúriz. "When appointed as an MEP in Brussels, you need a certain time to know how to work efficiently in this complex and huge House. As I was an assistant before, I saved a lot of time. As we say in Spain: 'before being a waiter, you have to work in the kitchen".
Kathalijne Maria Buitenweg (also formerly an assistant) agreed: "my previous experience helped me a lot to get through the first few months. I could work from the very first days".
As to other possibilities, Sofia, a former Swedish assistant said: "as an assistant you are used to working in a very intense environment, to prioritising and giving advice on political issues...and communicating it to the electorate. Given all these capabilities, I would say that there are many jobs that would suit an ex-assistant. In Brussels you have the different think-thanks, various organisations or companies, consultants, other EU-institutions..."
Many choose to become EU civil servants by taking the "Competition" to enter the EU Institutions. Former Finnish assistant Hannariikka chose this route and now works for the Information Directorate of the Parliament. “As an assistant you normally get to follow a bit of everything on the EP agenda. To be in the middle of it when decisions take place and legislation is adopted - and to take part in preparing them: what could be a better preparation for a competition than learning by doing?”
Assistants in their own words
All smiles: you can only be an assistant if you enjoy it. You have read what it can be like to be an assistant - but now let's hear what the assistants themselves have to say about it. Here's a selection of quotes to give you a flavour of the work.
"Once I counted an email arriving every 10 seconds".
Gaëlle, assistant to a French MEP
"The work is proportionate to that of the MEP; sometimes we get some funny phone calls, asking for any task - like if the MEP could resolve everything of this world".
Luciano Gaudio assistant to an Italian MEP.
"It is a very intensive working-relationship and you need to multi-task constantly - you are involved in shaping the EU's future".
Lisa Bauer, assistant to a German member.
"Working as an Assistant to an MEP can vary from being very exciting to pretty annoying and frustrating, all depends on the MEP you work with".
Maria Panagiotou, assistant to a Greek MEP
"It's like to be sort of a "deputy without portfolio".
Andrea, assistant to an Italian MEP.
"It's a unique experience and indeed a privileged position, which contributes effectively to widen your knowledge and go much beyond even the European sphere".
Silvia Bartolini, assistant to an Italian member.
It's a very bizarre work, no private life nearly and is very intensive with very long working hours. It's like a "fabrika". (what Polish people call a place you never leave and which determines your private life- ed).
Anonymous Polish assistant
"You spend so much time together, more than with my fiancée....it's like a personal relationship, either it works or it does not".
Cezary Koczerga , assistant to a Polish member.
EN
1
PHOTO
20070329PHT04919.jpg
EN
2
PHOTO
20070329PHT04921.jpg
EN
3
PHOTO
20070329PHT04923.jpg
EN
4
LINK
/members.do?language=EN
EN
5
PHOTO
20070329PHT04925.jpg
EN
6
PHOTO
20070329PHT04927.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
