Zimbabwe : MEPs condemn Mugabe dictatorship
External relations
2007-04-26 - 17:11
In a resolution adopted on Thursday by 68 votes to 1 with 0 abstention, Parliament issues a hard-hitting condemnation of the Mugabe regime. MEPs call on Member States to apply the EU's existing restrictions on Zimbabwe strictly, including the arms embargo and the travel ban. They also urge that all aid to Zimbabwe be delivered exclusively through NGOs, the EU being the most important donor to the country.
In the wake of the violent break-up of the Save Zimbabwe Campaign prayer rally organised on 11 March this year by opponents of the regime - two people were killed and more than 300 were arrested - MEPs strongly condemn the Mugabe dictatorship for "its relentless oppression of the Zimbabwean people, opposition parties and civil society groups and its destruction of the Zimbabwean economy".
The House condemns the murder of opposition activist Gift Tandare and the arrest of Morgan Tsvangirai, chairman of the Movement for Democratic Change, Nelson Chamisa, Grace Kwinjeh, Lovemore Madhuku, William Bango, Sekai Holland, Tendai Biti, Arthur Mutambara and many others treated brutally by the police forces.
Acknowledgment of crisis by neighbouring countries
Parliament takes heart from one new development : "the recognition by SADC that a crisis exists in Zimbabwe and the appointment of President Thabo Mbeki of South Africa to facilitate dialogue between Zanu-PF and the opposition MDC".
EU must apply its own measures in full
However, the EU must play its part too, and Parliament calls on the Council "to ensure that all Member States rigorously apply existing restrictive measures, including the arms embargo and the travel ban". MEPs are also in favour of enlarging the list of banned individuals so that it encompasses even more of Mugabe's power structure, including government ministers, deputies and governors, military, the CIO and police personnel, and the Governor of the Reserve Bank of Zimbabwe.
In addition, Parliament calls on the Council to ensure that no banned persons are invited to, or attend, the planned EU-Africa Summit in Lisbon in December this year.
Aid, say MEPs, must be delivered through genuine non-governmental organisations and must reach the people for whom it is intended without being intercepted in any way by agents of the Mugabe regime. In 2006, the EU donated €193 million in total.
The House backs the initiative of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly to send a delegation to Zimbabwe to "ascertain the situation on the ground". This investigation should be carried out as soon as possible. MEPs insist that the government of Zimbabwe grant access to the country to all members of any such delegation.
Britain and South Africa urged to use their positions on the UN Security Council
Lastly, the resolution calls on the United Kingdom, which assumed the Presidency of the United Nations Security Council this month, "to put Zimbabwe on the agenda of the Security Council", and "anticipates that South Africa will play a constructive role as a non-permanent member of the Security Council".
20070420IPR05699 Full text of resolution will appear here (under 26 April)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
