The third maritime package: where Parliament stands
Transport
2007-04-18 - 15:59
The European Parliament is endorsing Commission proposals to set up a defensive mechanism to protect Europe against the risks of maritime accidents and pollution. MEPs welcome the third maritime safety package (of seven draft directives), which proposes a more proactive policy aimed at restoring conditions for healthy and sustainable competition for those operators who comply with international rules.
Maritime safety has traditionally been a European Parliament priority. Under the previous two maritime safety packages (known as Erika I and Erika II), adopted in the wake of the Erika and Prestige oil-spill accidents, the European Union adopted substantive maritime safety and security legislation. This provides for ship inspections in port, bans the use of single-hull vessels to transport oil, and creates the European Maritime Safety Agency EMSA.
But further measures are needed to prevent accidents and pollution, and to deal with accident aftermaths. The third package includes provisions on flag states' obligations, the inspection regime in EU ports; places for refuge for ships in distress, passenger protection standards, insurance obligations, classification societies and civil liability issues. It aims to create healthy and sustainable competitive conditions for those operators who comply with international rules.
The EP Transport Committee backs the third package, but has substantially amended it. The package consists of seven reports, two of which - on flag state obligations and civil liability - have already been adopted in plenary first reading, at the March 2007 session in Brussels. The other five reports will be adopted during the April plenary session in Strasbourg.
20070417BKG05371
Flag state obligations
The report on flag state obligations by Marta Vincenzi (PES, IT) is a key part of the package. The Commission is proposing that the various International Maritime Organisation conventions should be turned into binding legislation and that the EU Member States must be required to monitor compliance with international standards by ships that fly their flags.
The Council of Transport Ministers strongly opposes this directive, believing that the Community is not empowered to act in this field and that such matters should be left to international law. Parliament, however, urged broad support for the Commission proposal and inserted amendments intended to strengthen the proposed legislation. The general principle is that safety (of Community shipping, of citizens using it, and of operators providing shipping services), should be ensured, and the environment protected, at all times.
MEPs say that the Code of Safe Practices for Ships Carrying Timber Deck Cargoes and for Safe Practices for Solid Bulk Cargoes should be incorporated in all seven directives, because of their special risks for maritime safety. Furthermore, each Member State should ensure the training of flag state surveyors and investigators and should develop a capacity for reviewing, approving and authorising ship construction and equipment designs.
Parliament has made it a requirement for the first registration of a ship in a Member State that the Member State should ascertain that the ship complies with the applicable international rules and regulations and ensure that this is confirmed by documentary evidence. If a ship is not newly built, the Member State must liaise with the previous flag state and request it to pass on the necessary documents and data. MEPs also want the Member States to develop or to maintain a fleet database for their ships, listing the main technical details of each ship. These data bases should include information such as classification and certification, the outcome of the port state control inspections, and details of casualties and infringements of IMO conditions, particularly on ship-source pollution. Parliament also favours appropriate corrective measures for companies that do not comply with Community standards and international rules. EP procedure file on flag state obligations MEPs call for tougher rules to improve safety at sea
Civil liability
At present, for much damage done to third parties by ships, civil liability regimes for ship owners in the EU are not harmonised and no compulsory insurance scheme exists. The draft directive seeks to put in place "core" rules, common to all Member States, governing civil liability, insurance for ship-owners and the liability of any person responsible for operating a ship. It would do this by incorporating the IMO convention on the Limitation of Liability for Maritime Claims (LLMC) in EU law.
Parliament also takes the view that protecting European coasts entails both preventing accidents, by ensuring that only safe ships sail, and providing that victims can, in as short a time as possible, receive compensation fully commensurate with the damage caused by an accident. With the recent maritime disasters in mind, Parliament also gave a definition of gross negligence and clarifies the concept of "conduct barring limitation of liability".
The House also adopted proposals that Member States should monitor compliance with the rules laid down in the directive and should establish penalties. A solidarity fund should be set up to compensate third parties that have suffered damage caused by ships which have sailed in EU territorial waters without being covered by a financial guarantee certificate. Finally, a Community Office should be established to keep a full register of certificates issued, monitor and update their validity and check the existence of financial guarantees by third countries.
The report by EP rapporteur Gilles Savary (PES, FR) was adopted by a large majority of MEPs. EP procedure file on civil liability and financial guarantees of shipowners MEPs call for tougher rules to improve safety at sea
Port state control
This proposal seeks to improve the quality and effectiveness of checks in European ports. The Transport Committee inserted amendments to strengthen the inspection regime, the criteria for selecting ships for inspection, and the parameters needed to calculate a ship's risk profile. It also said that a database showing the risk profiles of ships and indicating all ships due for inspection should be developed by the European Commission.
EP rapporteur Dominique Vlasto (EPP-ED, FR), is proposing, on behalf of the Transport Committee, that an expanded inspection regime should apply to vessels that have a high risk profile and to passenger ships and oil and chemical tankers more than 12 years old. The committee also says that the role of pilots in detecting possible shortcomings on board should be extended, and that if port authorities learn that a ship has anomalies or apparent defects, they should inform the competent authority of the port state concerned. EP procedure file on port state control of the application of international standards
Community vessels traffic monitoring and information system
Establishing a clear and precise legal framework for places of refuge for ships in distress is the key aim of this Commission proposal. On behalf of the Transport Committee, rapporteur Dirk Sterckx (ALDE, BE) says that there should be "no margin of discretion" for Member States in applying this decision on places of refuge, and that an independent authority should be set up to designate ports of refuge for vessels in distress. A majority of committee members took the view that all fishing vessels over 24 metres long (rather than all those over 15 metres long) should be equipped with the Automatic Identification System (AIS). EP procedure file: Community vessel traffic monitoring and information system
Accident investigation
This proposal aims at establishing guidelines on the technical investigations to be carried out following maritime casualties and incidents. The goal of technical investigations is not to determine and apportion civil or criminal liability, but to establish the circumstances and causes of maritime accidents so as to learn all possible lessons from them and to improve maritime safety. According to rapporteur Jaromir Kohlicek (GUE/NGL, CZ), an important element of the proposal is to ensure the independence of the permanent investigation bodies.
The Transport Committee adopted amendments that seek to strengthen the independence of the investigative body and distinguish more strictly between technical and criminal investigations. It also emphasized the need for an effective early warning system, co-operation among Member States and the importance of incorporating findings into the joint methodology. EP procedure file: Community guidelines on the technical independent investigations into accidents and incidents at sea
Liability of carriers of passengers by boat in the event of accidents
The aim of this proposal is to ensure that ship passengers enjoy similar levels of protection to those in other types of transport, i.e. modernised carrier liability rules, a mandatory insurance system and a satisfactory compensation system. The Committee approved the incorporation of the Protocol of 2002 in the Athens Convention, which introduces compulsory insurance to cover passengers on ships and substantially raises liability ceilings in the event of shipping incidents or accidents.
Rapporteur Paolo Costa (ALDE, IT) saw also the proposal approved implementing a right for an advance payment for the passengers in case of death or injury. MEPs feel that there is a need to improve passenger rights in the event of damage suffered during transportation by ship. EP procedure file: liability of carriers of passengers by sea and inland waterways in the event of accidents
Ship inspection and survey organisations
This proposal aims to improve the quality of the work of the so-called "classification societies", the private bodies that Member States can authorise to carry out, on their behalf, inspections, checking and certification tasks relating to ships that fly their flag. Rapporteur Luis de Grandes Pascual (EPP-ED, ES) and the Transport Committee advocate creating an assessment committee, whose tasks should include "certifying the classification societies' quality systems". This committee should be empowered to act independently of the recognised organisations and should have the necessary means to carry out its duties effectively and to the highest possible standards. EP procedure file: recognition of classification societies, organisations which inspect ships and issue ships’ certificates
What happens next?
The House is expected to put the five maritime safety reports to a first-reading plenary vote (co-decision procedure) on Wednesday 25 April 2007 in Strasbourg. Under this procedure, the Council of Transport Ministers will consider the amendments tabled by the EP and will come forward with a common position that introduces the second reading.
German Parliamentary State Secretary for Transport Achim Grossmann told the Transport Committee at its last meeting that he expected noticeable progress on the delicate port state control and vessel traffic monitoring issues. He hoped that the EP votes in March and April would allow a conclusive step to be taken during the EU's German Presidency. MEPs told the Secretary of State that they would insist on the necessity to finalise this co-decision process, but they urged Council not to "cherry pick" and hence ignore important parts of this package.
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5317232
EN
3
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5311632
EN
5
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5309062
EN
6
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5302932
EN
7
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5314242
EN
8
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5314832
EN
9
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5311432
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326IPR04623 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070326IPR04623 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
