The European Parliament hosts the Energy Globe Award 2007 to contribute to a 'new industrial revolution'
Energy
2007-04-04 - 00:01
On 11 April 2007, the European Parliament will host the Energy Globe Award, one of the world's most recognised environmental awards. The international Energy Globe winners for 2007 will be announced at 8.15pm in the Parliament chamber.
The Awards are presented to projects from around the world in the categories Earth, Fire, Water, Air and Youth. The aim of the event is to relay to a large audience the best solutions for today's energy and climate challenges. All submitted projects must make careful and economical use of resources and use sustainable energy sources.
The Award gala will be opened by Hans Gert Pöttering, President of the European Parliament, with an introduction from Franz Fischler (President of Eco Social Forum and former EU Commissioner). The awards themselves will be presented by Mr Pöttering, actor Martin Sheen, UN Good Will Ambassador Waris Dirie, former Environment Minister of India Maneka Gandhi and Bee Gees musician Robin Gibb. Each represents a continent, respectively: Europe, America, Africa, Asia and Australia.
Earlier, at 3pm, the first session of a two-day round table meeting on fair energy will start with a session entitled "Climatise Yourope", hosted by European Parliament Committee on Industry, Research and Energy. Participants will discuss perspectives for a new energy future. The second session on 12 April is entitled "Cool energy for Yourope". Dimitri Zegelis, co-author of the "Stern Review" on climate change, and Jeremy Rifkin, best seller author of "The Hydrogen Economy" are among the high-ranking guests taking part.
A press conference devoted to the event will be held on 11 April at 10:30 am with Hans-Gert Pöttering and Angelika Niebler (Chair of the Industry Committee), Maneka Gandhi (Indian congress member, former Environmental Minister, Energy Globe Jury Chair), Wolfgang Neumann (Energy Globe Director General).
"Carrying out the necessary measures to combat global warming will be a race against the clock" said Mr Pöttering when he addressed the last European Summit in Brussels. "This will entail nothing less then a 'new industrial revolution". The European Parliament is convinced that "the European Union must adopt determined, rapid and responsible measures – and that the European Union should take the lead role in developing an ambitious global cooperation strategy." Parliament has undertaken a series of initiatives with the aim of raising awareness of this issue in the EU and developing a common approach. The decision to host the Energy Globe Award 2007 is in line with this campaign.
Practical information for the media
Press enquires, including interview requests, should be directed to Cezary Lewanowicz. Journalists not already accredited to the EU institutions who wish to cover the event should present their national press credentials and passport or identity card at the press entrance as usual. Television and radio teams should seek accreditation from Kirsten Tingsted. The Gala and the press conference will be shown live on Europe by Satellite - contact the Hotline Newsdesk for more information. See below for all the contact details.
20070329IPR04838 The full programme of the event on the Energy Globe website
EN
1
LINK
http://www.energyglobe.info
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
