13 Nobel Prize winners, MEPs support Estonia / support for Northern Ireland new government
Institutions
2007-05-09 - 17:51
Ahead of the plenary, thirteen Europeans who have been honoured with the Nobel Prize were at the European Parliament. They took part in a discussion on the past, present and future of the European Union. Taking place on Europe Day, the objective was to focus on the scientific, intellectual and cultural achievements of Europeans since 1957. Estonia-Russia relations and the recent developments in Northern Ireland were also debated at the opening of the session in Brussels.
Statements on relations between Estonia and Russia
European Parliament President Hans-Gert Pöttering said "The Schuman Declaration of 9 May 1950 gave Europe the foundation on which partnership could develop in peace and freedom between formerly hostile nations. But 9 May is for others a controversial date, as we have seen in the dispute over the Soviet military memorial in Estonia's capital Tallinn."
President Pöttering pointed out that the European Parliament's resolution of 12 May 2005 stated that "for many nations the end of World War II meant a new tyranny from the Soviet Union".
President Pöttering referred to former MEP Toomas-Hendrik Ilves who is now President of Estonia, who said in connection with the events outside the Estonian embassy in Moscow: "It is unusual in Europe to demand the resignation of the democratically elected government of a neighbouring country. It is unthinkable in Europe to disregard the Vienna Convention on the protection of diplomatic representations".
President Pöttering concluded and said: "The European Union is based on values. Protecting these values is our common task. Where a country of the European Union is put under pressure, we must all stand up to be counted. Estonia can rely on our solidarity".
Estonian MEP Tunne KELAM spoke for the EPP-ED group. He said "what is happening is not a bilateral issue" but "a test case for the EU as a whole". It was important to avoid "wishful thinking": President Putin, in his speech in Munich, had made clear that Russia was now seeking to "regain influence over the Baltic states and then those of the former Warsaw Pact", using the energy boom and Russians outside Russia as his tools. Mr Kelam, however, stressed that "99% of the Russians in Estonia are loyal not to Putin but to the Estonian state". Sovereignty was the key point, he emphasised, including "the right to decide and assess our past". In conclusion, he said, "we need your solidarity and I am very thankful to all of you for demonstrating it".
Johannes Hannes SWOBODA (PES, AT) lent his group's "full support to Estonia and the Estonian people", saying "any outside intervention by Russia should be denounced". A key point was that Russians must come to understand that at the end of the war "many Russians did come as liberators but the regime that they brought with them" also came "as occupying forces and forces of oppression". He wished that citizens on all sides of the borders of the former eastern bloc would acknowledge that "double reality".
On behalf of the Liberals, Estonian MEP Siiri OVIIR spoke of the day on 9 March 1944 when 40% of Tallinn was laid waste by Soviet bombers and the later deportation of many Estonians to Siberia. For such reasons, she said, "the war memorial is associated in Estonian minds with painful experiences". She described the more recent events leading up to the tension around the war memorial before concluding by thanking all those who supported her country's stance.
Brian CROWLEY (IE), on behalf of the UEN Group said: "I would like to join my colleagues in firstly giving our solidarity and support to the Estonian Government and to the Estonian people and, secondly, in denouncing the bully-boy tactics of the Russian Government in what they have attempted to create - the uncertainty and instability, not only within Estonia but in all the Baltic States.
In many ways what we are witnessing is a new form of totalitarianism or authoritarianism by utilisation of mobs in Moscow to attack an Embassy, by utilising the power or strength of energy to try and make people kneel to the influence of the Russian Government and, most importantly of all, by a continuing desire to keep imposing symbols of domination and of subjugation in areas that have gained their independence from totalitarian regimes. Finally, may I say, a most ardent call should go out to the citizens of Estonia to show them that now that they are part of the European Union, they will not be abandoned as they were abandoned previously."
Gabriele ZIMMER (DE) speaking for the GUE/NGL group, said that "the domestic events in Tallinn have been taken out of all proportion." What was "a peaceful demonstration in Tallinn", she continued, "turned into a riot", with regrettable behaviour by the police authorities. "We here in the EP have to shoulder some of the responsibility", she continued, and said that the GUE/NGL group "call upon Russia to respect international convections", for "no obstacles should be placed in the way of the EU-Russia summit."
Nils LUNDGREN (IND/DEM, SE) stressed that "we should be turning to the Russian government and should be saying that Russian minorities do have rights", but reminding Russia that "Estonia is an autonomous country that does not fall within the sphere of influence of the Russian state." Russia therefore "has no right to do what it's doing now." Current events, Mr Lundgren continued, have "nothing to do with Hitler and what happened under Hitler." Mr Lundgren concluded by stating that "Estonia is not a Russian country, it's an independent country."
Bruno GOLLNISCH (FR), speaking for the ITS group, said that it was possible to "understand the humiliation of Russian minorities", yet equally important that we "leave Estonia free" to find a way of honouring legitimate sacrifices during conflicts in which people defended the sovereignty of their nation.
MEP support for Northern Ireland's new government
Speaking at the beginning of the plenary session on the formation of the new government Brian Crowley (UEN) said: "Yesterday saw the inauguration or the installation of a new government in Northern Ireland and the resolution of the devolved assembly in Northern Ireland representing what would have previously been called the extreme opinion of Unionism and the extreme opinion of nationalism has been brought together to form new government for Northern Ireland."
This is after what we heard from the Nobel laureates is a great opportunity for us not only to congratulate those people that have been involved and to encourage them in finding a new way forward of solving conflict and new ways to resolve difficulties that occur between different communities but also to congratulate the European Union for its ongoing commitment and help to the people of Northern Ireland over the last 20 years. When we see John Hume here today and Lord Trimble the reasons such greatness took place yesterday was because the people there yesterday were standing on the shoulders of giants not ... shoulders of John Hume and David Trimble but also the shoulders of Jacques Delors who first came up with the plan and the idea of a peace programme for Northern Ireland to Helmut Kohl and to others.
I also call on us all to reflect and to remember the loss of life the harm and the impairment and injury that was done to so many but rather than laud those losses to continue to fester into poison or dialogue let us understand that was at one time and this is of another. Our task and role now is to ensure that our grandchildren can have better prospects for the future in Northern Ireland. Let us also remember the words of the old poet who said that even though my bones may break and even though my body may bleed within my heart still beats the hope of mankind to find and fulfil all its needs."
President Pottering said: "I would like to inform you that I have sent a letter to the Prime Minister and the Deputy Prime Minister to congratulate them. We look forward to a good future for Northern Ireland, Ireland, Great Britain in the European Union."
Changes to the agenda
MEPs voted to postpone both the Brok report on Annual report 2005 on CFSP and the Lulling report (72 votes in favour to 64 against) on Alcohol and alcoholic beverages: adjust the minimum rates of excise duty to the May plenary in Strasbourg (21-24 May)
Highlights of the Brussels plenary session 9-10 May 2007
The Brussels plenary session starts on Europe Day - today 9 May. Before the plenary officially opened at 3pm, the European Parliament received 13 European Nobel Prize winners to mark Europe Day in the EU's 50th anniversary year. The Northern Ireland peace process features strongly. Joint winners of the Nobel Peace Prize in 1998 John HUME (former MEP) and David TRIMBLE were present. Betty WILLIAMS and Mairead CORRIGAN , who won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1976, and who co-founded Women for Peace, which later became the Community for Peace People were also at the one hour long ceremony which commenced at 3pm.
The plenary session formally opens at 4pm on Wednesday. The debate and vote on roaming is postponed due to further negotiations between the three European institutions and maybe re-scheduled for the May plenary in Strasbourg (21-24 May). The first item for debate is the forthcoming EU-Russia summit to be held on 18 May in Samara. The recent heated debate between Estonia, the EU and Russia is likely to feature highly. The House will also vote on a resolution on this topic.
Later on Wednesday 9 May, the European Parliament will tackle the issue of reform in the Arab world. Any outside attempt to impose reforms, without the partner countries having a sufficient stake in the processes and means employed to achieve them, “is bound to fail”. This is the key tenet of a report on “Reforms in the Arab world: what strategy should the European Union adopt?”, in a report by Michel ROCARD (PES, FR) for the Foreign Affairs Committee.
MEPs also turn their attention to a legislative report on the retrofitting of mirrors to HGVs. The Transport Committee will ask Parliament to approve a first-reading report calling for blind-spot mirrors to be "retrofitted" to heavy lorries in operation since 2000. This would cost €100 - 150 per lorry but could save up to 1,200 lives in Europe by 2020.
Parliament will also be asked to vote at second reading on new rules on public passenger transport services by rail and by road which seek to rebalance the award of contracts for these services between the public and private sectors.
The House then turns its attention to plans to deregulate package sizes for pre-packed products. If this legislation is passed, many everyday consumer products could be sold in a wider range of sizes than at present. Parliament's report has been drafted by Jacques TOUBON (EPP-ED, FR) for the Internal Market Committee.
Malcolm HARBOUR (EPP-ED, UK) will lead the debate on Vehicle Type Approval. The Internal Market Committee will ask Parliament to back new rules on the manufacturing standards of road vehicles. These will raise environmental and safety standards as well as making it easier for producers to sell their vehicles Europe-wide. Thanks to MEPs, the legislation will take more account of the needs of disabled car users.
Diana WALLIS (ALDE, UK) will lead the debate on a resolution tabled by the Petitions Committee calling on Denmark to take belated action in relation to the health consequences of the 1968 crash in Greenland of a US plane carrying nuclear bombs.
The last item on Wednesday evening, MEPs will debate a report calling for minimum levels of duty for alcoholic drinks should be scrapped. Instead, says the Economic Committee, Member States should adopt a code of conduct that encourages them to move towards the EU average level of duty.
On Thursday 10 May, the session starts at 9am with three debates on regional policy focusing on housing, structural policies and EU cohesion and the innovative capacity of the EU.
The House will also vote on the composition of the new Temporary Committee on Climate Change (60 MEPs, one year duration). The House will also vote on a resolution on the strengthening of European legislation in the field of information and consultation of workers.
20070509IPR06501 Briefing for 9-10 May Plenary Session (Brussels) Agenda for 9-10 May 2007
EN
2
LINK
/sce/data/fast_access/doc//326/04%20mai_BRU_CORR_En.pdf
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070424BRI05802 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
