The Week Ahead 14-20 May 2007
Institutions
2007-05-11 - 11:24
Political groups week - Brussels
Michael Chertoff. The US Secretary of Homeland Security will discuss transatlantic data protection issues at a special meeting of the Civil Liberties Committee. He will then give a joint press conference with committee chair Jean-Marie Cavada, German Interior Minister Wolfgang Schäuble and Commission Vice-President Franco Frattini . ( Monday )
Palestine . Palestine's Foreign Minister, Ziad Abu Amr, will attend an extraordinary meeting of the Foreign Affairs Committee. ( Tuesday ).
Religious dialogue. EP Pr e sident Hans-Gert Pöttering will join German Chancellor Angela Merkel and Commission President José Manuel Barroso for a meeting with religious leaders at the Commission, where it will be followed by a press conference . (Berlaymont building, Tuesday)
Pr eparing for the plenary . Political groups will devote most of the week to preparations for the Strasbourg plenary of 21-24 May 2007. Items on the plenary agenda include debates with Jan-Peter Balkenende and Romano Prodi, prime ministers of the Netherlands and Italy respectively, on the future of Europe; the final vote on the Financial Instrument for the Environment (LIFE+), at third reading; the second reading of the Daphne III programme on combating violence; and - probably, the first reading of legislation to cap charges for mobile phone roaming.
Citizens' forums . The latest in Parliament's series of meetings to enable the general public to join the debate on the future of Europe takes place in Essen in Germany ( Monday ), Vibo Valentia in Italy ( Friday ) and Porto in Portugal ( Friday ).
Ascension holiday . Parliament's offices are closed on Thursday and Friday for the Ascension holiday, which means the regular pre-session press briefing, attended by spokespeople for the political groups, will take place in Strasbourg the following Monday 21 May.
E uropean elections in Bulgaria . As Bulgarian citizens are electing their MEPs on 20 May, the EP press room will be open to journalists wishing to follow the election night ( Sunday ) .
20070511IPR06574 The Agenda
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20072000AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
