The Week Ahead 21-27 May 2007
Institutions
2007-05-16 - 20:00
Plenary Session - Strasbourg
Roaming. After a vote in the Industry Committee on Monday night, the proposal to cap charges for using mobile phones when travelling abroad in Europe is due to be put to the plenary (debate and vote Wednesday).
Future of Europe. Two Prime Ministers, Romano Prodi of Italy (Tuesday) and Jan Peter Balkenende of the Netherlands (Wednesday), will debate the future of Europe with MEPs. Meanwhile, the Constitutional Affairs Committee will vote on a report on a road map for the EU’s constitutional process (Monday). José Manuel Barroso, President of the Commission, will debate the same issue with Conference of Presidents of political groups (Wednesday).
Environment. Following agreement in the Conciliation Committee, the Financial Instrument for the Environment (LIFE+) is set for adoption at third reading. Meanwhile, a directive on new water quality standards, notably regarding pesticide and heavy metal residues, comes to first reading. (debates Monday, votes Tuesday).
Preventing violence. A second reading agreement between Parliament and Council on the Daphne III programme will be put to the vote (debate Monday, vote Tuesday).
Health Services. MEPs will debate a report on consequences of the exclusion of health services from the services directive (debate Monday, vote Wednesday).
EU-Russia. Russian opposition politician Garry Kasparov will be in Strasbourg for meetings with EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering (Wednesday), the leaders of Parliament’s political groups and the Foreign Affairs Committee (both Thursday).
Palestine. MEPs will debate the situation in Palestine with the Council and Commission (debate Tuesday, vote Wednesday).
Kashmir. A report on the situation in the territory disputed by India and Pakistan is will be debated by Parliament (debate and vote Thursday).
World Bank. The House will consider the controversy surrounding World Bank President Paul Wolfowitz (debate and vote Thursday).
20070516IPR06789 Full details in The Agenda
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20072100AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
