The Northern Ireland Peace Process in the spotlight with Nobel Prize winners
European citizenship
United Kingdom
2007-05-09 - 20:33
Nobel prize winners at the EP - Northern Ireland peace process in the spotlight
On Europe Day 9 May, the European Parliament welcomed 13 Nobel Prize winners. Four of the winners had won the Nobel Peace Prize for their contributions to the Northern Ireland Peace Process. John HUME and Lord David TRIMBLE who won the Peace prize in 1998 spoke of the recent return of the Stormont government. 1976 Nobel Peace Prize winners Mairead CORRIGAN MAGUIRE, the Palestinian cause was highlighted, whereas joint winner Elisabeth WILLIAMS spoke of the problems of child poverty.
Prof. Sir Timothy HUNT jointly won the Noble Prize in Physiology or Medicine in 2001 for the discovery of cyclins, a class of proteins. He told MEPs that after visits to Paris and Rome in his youth, he had "never understood those of my countrymen who have such a suspicious attitude to the rest of Europe".
Turning to science, he praised "the advent of the ERC" (European Research Council), which he believed "promises to really strengthen European science" but he issued a general appeal for science to be free to pursue its own ends in academic institutions. He was also concerned that people were nowadays "afraid to excel", seeing this as an obstacle to scientific achievement. He concluded by saying "it is a shameful fact that among the top 20 universities in the world, 15 are in the US, 1 in Japan, 3 in the UK and 1 in Switzerland. Think about that!"
John HUME (a former MEP), who won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1998, called the European Union "the best example in the history of the world of conflict resolution." It is based, he said, on three principles: Respect for difference, institutions which respect this difference and the healing process. The countries of the EU are "working together in their common interests." The same principles are "at the heart of the resolution in Northern Ireland", Mr Hume added, because the "identities of both communities are respected." "We are in a stronger position to shape the forces of [the] world", Mr Hume continued, because "the world is a much smaller place." He added that "the essence of our unity is respect for our diversity" and that "the time has come to create a whole world which can be summed up by those...words." Respect for diversity, Mr Hume concluded, will lead to "no war, no conflict any more." "Now that the position in Northern Ireland is in my view firmly and finally settled, we can join in this celebration without embarrassment" said Lord David TRIMBLE , winner of the Nobel Peace Price in 1998. "We must not build a world of competing blocs", Lord Trimble continued, and "we cannot ignore the divisions and conflicts that exist in various parts of the world." Lord Trimble added that the aid that we give should begin to enable economies elsewhere and societies elsewhere in the world to enter into the marketplace on an equal basis." "It would be tragic", Lord Trimble concluded, "if protectionism and locally powerful interest groups prevented Europe from making that progress which at the moment is just beyond our fingers' reach." The co-recipient of the 1976 Nobel Peace Price, Mairead CORRIGAN MAGUIRE , expressed "tremendous solidarity with the people of Northern Ireland" and remarked that today was "surely a day for celebration and to give thanks because we are on the way to peace." Para-militarism, militarism and terrorism, "do not solve deep ethnic problems", Mrs Corrigan Maguire continued, challenging the role of armed forces in Iraq and Afghanistan, who are "struggling with the same problems [.]" Ms Corrigan Maguire concluded: "There are double standards going on here. What the Israelis are doing in Palestine is building an apartheid system. The European Parliament has a responsibility to do more than just pay lip service and rhetoric."
Elisabeth WILLIAMS , who was co-recipient of the 1976 Nobel Peace Prize, focused on the problem of child poverty, reminding the House that "every 6 seconds, somewhere in our world, a child dies of hunger and preventable diseases." It is time, she said, to "turn this unbearable situation of pain and death around." Mrs Williams called upon the European Parliament and her fellow laureates to help with this undertaking. "Common sense should tell us all that if we peace teach to future generations, then peace will indeed be practiced."
20070508IPR06440 More on 9 May and the Nobel Prize winners at the European Parliament More on the Nobel Prize winners at the European Parliament John Hume - MEP from 1979 - 2004
EN
1
PHOTO
20070508PHT06449.jpg
EN
4
LINK
/members/archive/alphaOrder/view.do?language=EN&id=1408
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070507IPR06397 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070507STO06303 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
