EC-Russia agreement on cooperation in fisheries in the Baltic Sea
Fisheries
2007-05-22 - 12:20
The EP adopted a non-binding report recommending the conclusion of an Agreement between the European Community and Russia on cooperation in fisheries and the conservation of the living marine resources in the Baltic Sea. The Agreement has been concluded for an initial period of six years and will not entail any changes to the current structure of the Community fleet in the Baltic Sea nor on the way shared stocks are managed.
The EP introduces a new article to the Commission proposal, stating that prior to the opening of negotiations on its possible renewal the Commission shall submit to the European Parliament and to the Council general assessment reports analysing the impact of the agreement on the conservation of resources and the protection of the environment and the economic and social repercussions of its application. The report, drafted by the Chair of the Fisheries Committee - Philippe MORILLON (ALDE, FR), was adopted by 570 votes in favour, 9 against and 11 abstentions.
The objective of the new Agreement is to ensure close co-operation between the EC and Russia on the basis of the principle of equitable and mutual benefit for the purpose of conservation, sustainable exploitation and management of all straddling, associated and dependent stocks in the Baltic Sea. It sets out provisions on joint management measures, licensing, compliance with conservation and management measures and other fisheries regulations, control and enforcement co-operation, inspections, arrest and detention of vessels, scientific co-operation and anadromous and catadromous species.
This new Agreement will replace the Gdansk Convention, which ceased to apply on 1 January 2007, and the existing bilateral fisheries Agreements between the Member States and the Russian Federation. Following the accession of Sweden and Finland to the Community in 1995 and Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Poland in 2004, elements of the fisheries agreements pertaining to maritime fisheries in the Baltic Sea concluded between these countries and Russia are now managed by the EC.
To achieve the objectives of this Agreement, a Joint Baltic Sea Fisheries Committee will be established, which will act as an important forum for scientific advice on the status of fish stocks in the Baltic Sea and on fisheries management.
Background
With the Russian Federation being responsible for only about 5% of the fishery resources of the Baltic Sea in very limited areas around Kaliningrad and St Petersburg, and with all waters in the Baltic Sea now under national jurisdiction, the Community’s view was that an international Convention between the two Parties was an inappropriate and disproportionate mechanism for discharging the Parties’ obligations to co-operate on fisheries management.
Instead it was considered that the fishery resources in the Baltic Sea should better be managed within the framework of a bilateral fisheries agreement between the European Community and the Russian Federation, which for the time-being should be limited to the Baltic Sea. In accordance with the Treaties of Accession, such an agreement should also integrate the existing bilateral Agreements between Russia and Estonia, Finland, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland and Sweden respectively within a single bilateral agreement.
The Russian Federation at this stage has preferred not to extend the geographical scope of the Agreement beyond the Baltic. There are nevertheless provisions in the Agreement that would allow for a possible extension in the future if this is felt to be desirable by both Parties. It would, however, require a new or amended mandate to start negotiations which could entail fishing rights for Russian vessels in Community waters outside the Baltic Sea.
20070516IPR06761 EC-Russia fisheries and conservation Agreement Text, as adopted by the EP on 22 May, will shortly be available here
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5429662
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
