Balkenende tells MEPs: We need a new treaty and a more democratic EU
Future of Europe/European integration
2007-05-23 - 17:11
Dutch PM Jan Peter Balkenende told MEPs: "The Netherlands is in favour of a more traditional document, in the same vein as the Treaties of Amsterdam or Nice. We need to continue with the Monnet method: moving ahead via small, but significant increments [...] we want an EU that operates more democratically. Secondly, we want an EU that can take decisions and act on them. The Dutch Prime Minister addressed the EP just one day after Italian Prime Minister had also set out his vision to MEPs.
Parliament's President, Hans-Gert PÖTTERING , welcomed the Dutch Prime Minister to the EP and emphasised that the Netherlands had always been at the head of those "who seek to drive forward the European integration process". It was therefore "all the more painful to us" that its citizens had voted against the Constitutional Treaty. Mr Pöttering was, however, convinced that this did not represent a "No to the European Union itself". The Union needed to be made "fit for the challenges of the future" and he believed that a solution could be found which would produce "an effective, democratic and transparent EU".
Dutch Prime Minister, Jan Peter BALKENENDE agreed that the Netherlands had always been "a pro-European country" where "popular support for European partnership has always been above average". In late 2006, 75% of Dutch people had declared their support for EU membership. Still, "a clear majority of voters rejected the Constitutional Treaty in 2005" and now "we must come up with a mutually acceptable solution that does justice to the concerns" this had brought to light.
Reasons for the No vote
First the reasons behind the No vote must be understood. One was the pace of change, for example enlargement. "We have to realise that the public needs time to get used to the EU in its new form. Things have changed quickly. Too quickly for some people’s tastes. We must allow time for a sense of solidarity to grow." He went on to say "The question ‘Are you in favour of the Constitution for Europe?’ was taken to mean ‘Do you want the EU to assume the character of a state?’ or even ‘Should Europe eventually take the place of the national government?’ This was obviously a bridge too far."
There were other reasons for the No vote. "Some believed Europe was making too many rules or doing things best left to the member states. Others accused Brussels of a lack of transparency. Concerns about the Dutch financial contribution was another important factor. Compounding the problem was the fact that people had no real sense of the specific benefits of the European partnership."
The way forward
Moving on to the Dutch government's view of how the EU should proceed on the Constitution, he said the new treaty should have two main goals. "Firstly, we want an EU that operates more democratically. Secondly, we want an EU that can take decisions and act on them."
This would mean focusing on four key points. Firstly, a more gradual approach: "the Netherlands is in favour of a more traditional document, in the same vein as the Treaties of Amsterdam or Nice. We need to continue with the Monnet method: moving ahead via small, but significant increments. This approach throws a spotlight on the improvements, the democratic safeguards and the increased effectiveness".
Secondly, "a more robust subsidiarity test, with an important role for national parliaments". The institutional proposals made in the Constitutional Treaty were a step in the right direction. But there was still room for improvement. "National parliaments must play a more integral part in assessing whether proposed EU legislation conforms to the subsidiarity principle. If a majority of national parliaments are opposed to a given proposal, there must be consequences."
Thirdly, to be more effective the EU needs more qualified majority voting. But "we must recognise that countries are afraid to relinquish their vetoes, afraid that the EU will extend its competences by stealth. On this point we must be clear. The Union can become more effective only if it has public support."
Fourthly, "enlargement criteria should be included in the new Treaty". He stressed that "In the Netherlands there is a perception that the Union does not take its own rules seriously. The criteria are in place, but some would say they are not strictly applied. This erodes public support for the EU. These criteria should therefore be included the new Treaty."
"Europe has come a long way in 50 years", said Mr Balkenende. "Together we can set a good example in tackling climate change, poverty and security issues. Together we can capitalise on Europe’s economic potential in an ever more integrated global economy. All these things require a strong and effective European Union. A Union that has the trust of its people."
Political group speakers
Joseph DAUL (EPP-ED, FR), on behalf of his group, said that the Netherlands was "a country which is perhaps the most open to the European spirit". Despite this, the Dutch people, like the French, had voted No to the constitution. "That certainly means that in the eyes of the majority, the great majority of them, Europe is not sufficiently legitimate, not credible enough, not effective enough".
Consequently, "We must persuade the Europeans that our shared project is not just beneficial but absolutely indispensable". In his view, the draft treaty did in fact contain most of the answers to the concerns voiced by the people. "By enabling ourselves to take decisions both democratically and effectively, we will satisfy the Europeans because we will be able to tackle the real problems".
Mr Balkenende had mentioned the role of national parliaments. Mr Daul agreed but added that it was important to clarify to the public exactly who does what and who is responsible for what, so as to prevent ministers blaming Brussels and vice-versa.
Lastly, on enlargement, he firmly believed that "Europe cannot bring in new members until it has resolved its internal problems". Therefore the priority must be to reach swift agreement on the institutional issues, the key ones being "citizens' rights and the decision-making process".
Socialist group leader Martin SCHULZ (DE) welcomed Mr Balkenende's comment that it was time to “concentrate on what unites us rather than what divides us. Hitherto, it has seemed that the Netherlands was focussing on what divided us – if you are now ready to go for compromises rather than demanding massive changes in Europe, then I am ready to make a deal with you, and defend you in the Netherlands.” He warned that the Dutch Prime Minister would be judged on against his words, commenting that he had not so far “pulled out all the stops in defending Europe.” A Europe of 27, he said, could not operate on the basis of Nice, or “Nice minus”. Europe was unable to act effectively in the Middle East for lack of a foreign minister, because unanimity was needed in Council. He said the point was not symbols like the flags or the anthem, or the title of the treaty, but the content. “Yesterday Mr Prodi said he wanted 100 per cent of the constitution, if you want 50 per cent, we can meet halfway at 75 per cent, with no anthem, no flag and a foreign minister with a different title.”
Graham WATSON (UK), leader of the ALDE group, said that the previous day a great champion of Europe, Romano Prodi, had sketched a vision of an EU that was democratic, transparent and effective – but it would need firm leadership to achieve this. He said the German presidency would need to repeat its success in drawing the states together for the Berlin declaration in order to win the war of public opinion and unite Europeans around a revised treaty. Referring to comments by the Dutch Foreign Minister that people were afraid of losing their jobs, social security and quality of life, Mr Watson agreed, but said these were reasons for more Europe, not less. Tackling energy supply problems or terrorism could not be achieved by retreating into unilateralism. and populism. Failing to unite politically would leave Europe at the mercy of powers like Russia. “We need an end to unscrupulous national vetoes, we need better democratic accountability and European institutions which can change with the times” he said, and none of that was possible without the substance of the constitutional treaty, whatever “cosmetic surgery” was needed. When the debate centred on symbols like flags and anthems rather than substance, it was time to change strategy, he said. “Stop letting the tail wag the dog, lead the Netherlands back to the heart of Europe,” advised Mr Watson.
Speaking for the UEN group, Brian CROWLEY (IE) said he had been struck by Mr Balkenende's espousal of the ideals of compromise and consensus. “Europe's future must be based on consensus – and that means equality between nations and peoples.” We could not all be forced down the same path, that just made it harder to reach agreement. He said Mr Prodi's “threat of a two speed Europe, of those for us and those against us” was more reminiscent of George W Bush than a European statesman. “Future development will not come from telling people look at what they have thrown away, but from us convincing people that this is the right way to follow.” Energy, pensions, immigration, internal security – much could be achieved consensually, “but some things are still best left to Member States”. He criticised Commissioner Kovacs for, as he put it, proposing tax harmonisation when the treaty did not allow for it. This was “ideologically driven - if officialdom can ignore rules why should we follow them, people ask.” The way forward to convince people was through “consensus, compromise and cooperation”.
Kathalijne Maria BUITENWEG (Greens/EFA, NL) welcomed the fact that the Dutch Prime Minister had taken the opportunity to address the European Parliament. However, she said that Prime Minister Balkenende had a "selective hearing".
The people, she said, that had voted against the Constitution in the Netherlands had not done so because they wanted less changes to the EU, "are people really happy with the current EU?" she questioned. Eighty per cent of those that had voted "no" in the Netherlands, she said, had done so because they wanted to make the EU more democratic and more changes were needed.
Erik MEIJER (GUE/NGL, NL) said that only yesterday Prime Minister Prodi had told the European Parliament: "that we need to go back to our constituencies to convince people that we need the original Constitutional Treaty". Mr Meijer argued though for a "bottom-up approach" taking into account the people rather than the concerns of governments.
He said that 85 per cent of the Dutch Parliament was in favour of the Constitutional Treaty. He also stated that it was Dutch national political parties that were in favour of the Constitutional Treaty that had pressed for a referendum yet the Dutch people rejected it. Finally, he remarked that the Dutch Prime Minister was in a "difficult situation" but he should not follow those that wanted to return to the original text.
Bastiaan BELDER (IND/DEM, NL) began by stating that "rather than talking about the Netherlands, we need to be talking to the Netherlands." Mr Belder said that he understood the difficulties Prime Minister Balkenende had with the political aspirations of the Constitutional Treaty, "in particular the idea of having a permanent standing President." Mr Belder therefore proposes the idea of "a tripartite Presidency for a year and a half, which is made up of one large, one medium-size and one small Member State." This would, he said, "avoid the power just remaining in the hands of one and all member States would be given the opportunity to take part in the Presidency."
Mr Belder also emphasised the need to be "clear where we are when it comes to the borders of the European Union", and that "there has to be greater co-operation between the European Parliament and the national parliaments."
For the Identity, Tradition and Sovereignty group, Philip CLAEYS (BE) said that "Dutch voters clearly spoke out against the Constitutional Treaty" and added that "I hope that the voters will be given the opportunity to speak out not just in the Netherlands but in all Member States." Mr Claeys added that one the key issues to be addressed is "not just the institutional question" but "the fundamental question of what the borders of Europe should be." In particular, "whether or not a country such as Turkey should be allowed to accede."
Mr Claeys concluded by saying that "we seem to be acting here in Europe as if there's nothing going on" and yet "we cannot accept the threats and the arrogance that is being expressed in this respect."
"One has to ask how much energy has been wasted on chasing the moonbeams of a European constitution?" asked Jim ALLISTER (UK), speaking for the Non-attached Members. "Part of the reason why the EU institutions are stuck in this rut", Mr Allister continued, "is because of the refusal to take a democratic 'No' for an answer." The debates taking place are "dominated...with demands for strategies to avoid letting the citizens have their say."
Mr Allister spoke of "that which imposes the apparatus of statehood upon the EU" as "the same old tired and tarnished product, already rejected, and upon which citizens must have their say."
British speakers
Andrew DUFF (ALDE, UK) expressed puzzlement and concern at three elements in the PM Balkenende's speech.
"Firstly, your determination to keep the three pillar structure will contribute neither to simplifying nor to making more transparent the system of the Union [applause], nor will it strengthen the capacity of the Union to act effectively.
Secondly, I was quite unable to understand what you were saying upon the issue of clarifying competencies and the transfer of sovereignty. As we all know, sovereignty cannot be transferred and competencies cannot be conferred without the full agreement of 27 Member States.
Thirdly, your demand that national parliaments should be able to block the Union's legislative process seems to me to be a severe assault not only upon the right of initiative of the Commission, but also upon the legislative prerogatives of the Council and the Parliament. The setting up of an effective third legislative Chamber would be quite the opposite of simplifying - an abuse of the principle of the separation of powers and would certainly confuse the public."
Timothy KIRKHOPE (EPP-ED, UK) stated that the June Summit will be an important one, and he believed that the German Presidency is keen to reach an outline agreement then. Agreement will not be easy, he said, as the stated positions of the Member States continue to vary quite substantially and in these circumstances he believed it would be counterproductive to try to force through the wrong sort of agreement in Brussels.
You said recently at your bilateral meeting with the Prime Minister that any new amending treaty should not have the characteristics of a constitution. Mr Kirkhope wholeheartedly agreed that any new amending treaty should not have the characteristics of a constitution. He strongly agreed with the view that the role of national parliaments should be strengthened and he hoped that this will be pursued at the forthcoming Summit. .
Mr Kirkhope agreed with what the Prime Minister stated, which was also stated by David Cameron, leader of the Conservative party in the UK, that there is an urgent need for a greater emphasis on making Europe more competitive, tackling global poverty and dealing with the serious issues of climate change. These issues are what people want us to tackle and Member States can do much more to cooperate in these fields.
Concluding, Mr Kirkhope urged the Prime Minister and his fellow heads of government not to get bogged down in institutional and constitutional debate in Brussels. Instead, he stated, let us begin responding to what people are asking us to do: reforming our economies, tackling global warming and alleviating the crushing poverty that we are seeing now in the developing world.
Richard CORBETT (PES, UK) was quite encouraged by what Mr Balkenende had said. "Mr Balkenende, you could, after all, have come here and done what some over on that side of the House are urging you to do, and say, ‘We said “no”, end of story. Forget it. No new Treaty. No reform’. But you are not. You are coming here and saying, ‘We said “no”, but we recognise that 18 countries have said “yes”, that an overwhelming majority of the European Union wants to go ahead and reform our Union in the way outlined in the Constitutional Treaty."
You are saying yes, we will sit down and negotiate a compromise acceptable to all 27 countries, and on top of that you are saying that you want to salvage some of those useful key reforms that are contained in the Constitutional Treaty. You do not want to throw away everything in that Treaty, you want to drop some things which gave cause for concern, much of it to do with the presentation and the vocabulary of that draft Treaty, but the substance you are willing to negotiate on and to save. I think that is a lesson to the doomsayers, and I am encouraged that a compromise is possible.
Dutch Prime Minister's closing remarks
Responding to the debate, Mr Balkenende said the title of foreign minister and the symbols were not what mattered, the question was whether these sorts of things should be dealt with in a constitution. He did not understand the question about nationalism. The future of the Netherlands lay in Europe and he had no wish to be associated with nationalistic tendencies.
The Union, he said, only had the powers we conferred upon it. That was the point of subsidiarity. And the fact that national parliaments and the European Parliament each had their own role was not a sign of weakness but of strength. Lastly, he was in favour of the Charter of Fundamental Rights but did not think it had to be included in a treaty.
20070516IPR06773 Debate with PM Prodi on Tuesday 22 May 2007
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516IPR06759 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
