Monday in Plenary: Terror victims remembered
Institutions
2007-03-13 - 17:08
March 11: Candles at Milan Cathedral to mark European day for victims
Teenagers from across Europe joined MEPs yesterday to remember the victims of terrorism with a debate on its causes and ways to prevent it and a minute's silence. Parliament's President Hans-Gert Pöttering called terrorism a "major danger to stability and democracy" and an attack on the values of the EU. Monday also saw debates on a proposal to open the music copyright industry to competition and equality between men and women.
Online music: local, European or global?
Music has always had an international appeal although the growth in the online music market has taken this to new extremes. At present those who want to trade music online have to negotiate on a national basis. The European Commission wants to create pan-European licences that would give greater freedom to artists and performers to choose who represents them.
However MEPs in the debate voiced concern about the damage this could do to local and national music markets and artists and publishers. They would prefer controlled competition to encourage modernisation. This could also encourage diversity and creativity.
The Parliament's rapporteur on the issue, Hungarian Socialist Katalin Levai said in the debate that Parliament "wants to make sure that copyrights and related rights are managed properly to the benefit of all stakeholders". Speakers from all the political groups were critical of the Commission's approach which they felt was an attempt to bypass the legislative procedure. The European Commissioner for Employment and Social Affairs, Vladimir Špidla, said that the Commission would take into account the opinions of artists and publishers and keep the Parliament informed
Equality between men and women
There was also a debate on equality between men and women. The report calls for the European Commission to give stronger practical effect to its Roadmap for Equality between Women and Men (2006-2010). MEPs want the principle of equal pay for equal work to be properly applied, paternity leave encouraged, action taken against violence, better integration of immigrant women and promotion of respect for women's rights in the EU's external relations.
The House debated UK Socialist MEP Richard Howitt's own initiative report on Corporate Social Responsibility. MEPs suggest the EU adopt a European standard for product labelling where observance of human rights and fundamental workers' rights are part of the labelling scheme.
Minutes silence to honour victims of terrorism
The opening of the Plenary session was just one day after the European Day for Victims of Terrorism on March 11 - marking the day in 2004 when 192 people died in train bombings in Madrid. Mr Pöttering said the international community must work together to defeat terrorism and use "all the instruments the rule of law allows... this is why we always remind our American friends that ‘Guantanamo’ is not reconcilable with our European principles of the rule of law".
Patricia Cerrada, a student from a school in Madrid, said: "Getting to know other cultures means making the effort to understand them...the best way to fight terrorism in our multicultural society is absolutely to promote communication.....".
British student Amir Deng, said, "We have to ask ourselves how far do we address the roots of terrorism and what have we done to them so they feel the need to use violence? We are the potential victims of tomorrow. Creating an intercultural dialogue and promoting education is vital to counteract terrorism."
Mr Špidla and the chairmen of Parliament's Civil Liberties Committee Jean-Marie Cavada and the Culture Committee, Nikolaos Sifunakis, took part in the debate.
20070308STO03937 Watch live Students in Parliament online music Corporate and Social Responsibility
EN
1
PHOTO
20070313PHT04080.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/eplive/public/freetext_page_direct/20061120FTX00012-2101/default_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070309IPR03992 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070309IPR04001 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070309IPR03999 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
