Euratom: time to be decommissioned?
Energy
2007-02-22 - 11:44
1957-2007: 50 years of European nuclear cooperation
Whilst the 50th anniversary of the Rome Treaty establishing the European Economic Community is receiving much attention this year - 1957 also saw the signature of the Euratom Treaty covering nuclear energy. Whilst the EEC was based on cooperation built on the German and French coal and steel industries, Euratom aimed to coordinate research, supply and the spread of this new form of energy. A recent Hearing in Parliament and a report in March will look at whether the Treaty remains relevant.
Unchanged for 50 years
Unlike the Rome Treaty, Euratom has not been modified over the last half century. Originally signed by 6 countries it now applies to all 27 EU states. The initial universal optimism over nuclear use has also faded - the nuclear arms race and the Chernobyl disaster in 1986 have made nuclear power a controversial subject. Moreover, the question of to what extent a peaceful nuclear programme can be separated from a potential nuclear missile programme is a pressing one. The current diplomatic stand-off between the international community and Iran over their nuclear intentions is a current example of this.
However, with global warning now threatening life on earth and security of supply of fossil fuels becoming ever more pressing, a CO2-free form of energy like nuclear is coming back in favour in some countries. Finland, for example, is currently in the process of completing a new reactor.
EU supports shutting old reactors
While the Finns may be building a new reactor, in many EU states the debate is about closure, decommissioning and how to replace nuclear energy with other sources. Several ex-Communist states that joined the EU after 2004 have Soviet-era nuclear reactors. Given the impact of Chernobyl many people have safety concerns about these reactors and the EU has pushed for many of them to be closed.
To cite just one example, new EU member Bulgaria agreed to close four Soviet-designed reactors at a nuclear plant in Kozloduy. Decommissioning of the old nuclear reactors was a condition for EU accession talks. However, decommissioning is a highly expensive business and there are concerns about electricity shortages if they were to be taken off-line.
Improving nuclear cooperation
At a recent Hearing in Parliament on the Euratom Treaty leading nuclear expert Dr. Doerte Fouquet termed the current debate as a question of "new Treaty, no Treaty or the status quo?" MEPs and experts called the Treaty a "useful basis" for European nuclear cooperation. In particular the way it allows countries to be flexible about cooperating on non-proliferation methods and common European research while choosing the amount of nuclear energy they use on their national grids.
However, the hearing was told that several vital areas are not covered by the Treaty. These include dealing with nuclear waste and decommissioning power stations. Also, nuclear industries in the EU remain primarily national. Finally, MEPs regretted the fact that no aspects of Euratom were under the scrutiny of the European Parliament.
A report drafted by Lithuania MEP Eugenijus Maldeikis (Union for Europe of the Nations group) will be considered by Parliament's Industry Committee in March. It calls for common standards covering security of nuclear energy and for dealing with radioactive waste and decommissioning. It also wants more investment in research and training in the waste management field and a role for the Parliament in legislating on Europe's nuclear industry.
20070209STO02969 European Commission: nuclear energy Hearings (see 1 Feb) Parliament resolution on nuclear waste: Jan. 13 2004 Parliament's Industry, Research and Energy committee 1957 Euratom Treaty
EN
1
PHOTO
20070221PHT03513.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/energy/nuclear/index_en.html
EN
3
LINK
/hearings/default_en.htm
EN
5
LINK
/activities/expert/committees/presentation.do?committee=2354&language=EN
EN
6
LINK
http://europa.eu/scadplus/treaties/euratom_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT TA 20040113 TOC NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
