Strasbourg Plenary session: 12-15 March
Institutions
2007-03-09 - 16:44
Watch debate live from the hemicycle from Monday 1700 CET
The opening of Parliament's March Plenary session coincides with European Day for the Victims of Terrorism and 500 people from around Europe will be in Strasbourg to mark the occasion. In the hemicycle chamber this week some of the debates include the outcome of last week's EU summit, gender equality, the copyright of online music, the draft EU-US deal on air services and recent job cuts at airbus. The upcoming "Berlin Declaration" on Europe will also be debated.
Monday: Commemoration, Corporate responsibility, equality, online music
. Before the session starts, Parliament will hold an event to mark the International Day against Terrorism with around 500 schoolchildren from Strasbourg, London, Madrid and Kreis. Parliament's President Hans-Gert Pöttering will make a statement on to mark the day at 1700 CET on Monday.
The House will debate an own-initiative report on Corporate Social Responsibility which calls for human rights and fundamental workers' rights to be taken into account in the labelling of products.
Monday also sees a debate on a report on the European Commission's "Roadmap for Equality". Among other things MEPs want equal pay enforced and action against violence.
Later on Monday, the Parliament will debate the collective cross-border management of copyright for online music services. The Legal Affairs Committee says there should be binding legislation on the online music market ensuring European cultural diversity is safeguarded.
Tuesday: Commission's annual policy, EU-US agreement, biotech On Tuesday morning, the European Parliament debates the Commission's Annual Policy Strategy for 2008. It outlines the Commission's policy objectives, namely in the four key strategic areas of the Barroso Commission: prosperity, solidarity, security and freedom and a stronger role for the EU in the world.
The House will then debate the recent EU-US draft air services agreement. MEPs will also debate the merits of biotechnology for agriculture. The committee encourages efforts to develop biotechnologies in the EU as one way of making agriculture viable and liveable.
Wednesday: Berlin Declaration, outcome of Council, Bosnia The two key debates of the week take place on Wednesday morning, with German Foreign Minister Frank-Walter Steinmeier and Commission Vice-Presidents Margot Wallström and Günter Verheugen taking the floor on the upcoming Berlin declaration (to be signed on 25 March to mark the 50th anniversary of the signing of the Treaty of Rome) and the outcome of the European Council last week. MEPs will also debate the future of Bosnia Herzegovina after the Foreign Affairs Committee has voiced fears that some political parties are resorting to radical and nationalistic language.
Thursday: Seal products, Human rights debates MEPs turn their attention to the banning of seal products in the European Union. In September 2006 MEPs adopted a written declaration calling on the Commission to immediately draft a regulation to ban the import, export and sale of all harp and hooded seal products. As is usual, the plenary session ends with three debates and votes on resolutions relating to human rights in the world. On this occasion, the topics are Guatemala, Cambodia and Nigeria
20070309STO03966 Strasbourg briefing in depth Watch Plenary online
EN
1
PHOTO
20070309PHT04023.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070228BRI03712 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060904STO10269 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
