Tuesday in Plenary: non-proliferation, air safety, veal, online music
Institutions
2007-03-14 - 12:45
MEPs want online copyright rules to protect local and national music
Day two of the Strasbourg session saw MEPs debate nuclear non-proliferation, more powers for the European Air Safety Agency and a report on the definition of veal. MEPs also voted to adopt a series of reports on gender equality, online music copyright and corporate social responsibilty. Today sees debates on the forthcoming Berlin Declaration on the state of the European Union and the outcome of last week's European Council.
WMD proliferation "potentially greatest threat to European security"
MEPs called on all states whose behaviour violates the non-proliferation regime to cease their activities and comply with the terms of the Non-Proliferation Treaty. (NPT). The Treaty came into force in 1970 and currently has 190 signatories.
The first days of May will see an NPT meeting in Vienna and MEPs would like to send a delegation. A resolution to be voted on Wednesday calls on EU members and the Commission to identify how they intend to strengthen the NPT. In 2003 the European Security Strategy identified the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction as a major threat to world peace. Speaking to the house the European Commissioner for External Relations, Benita Ferrero-Waldner, said that "the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and among them nuclear weapons is potentially the greatest threat to European security". She told MEPs that negotiations with Iran over its nuclear programme had reached a "delicate phase".
More powers for Europe's aviation safety watchdog
MEPs debated increasing the powers of the European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA). Formed in 2002, the Agency is currently responsible for certifying the safety of airplanes, motors and propellers. They also ensure that EU states enforce Community standards for aviation safety. The European Commission has proposed extending this to include the licensing of pilots and checking aircraft from third countries. Parliament's rapporteur, Austrian Socialist Jörg Leichtfried, has backed the proposal. "A further extension of the scope of the EASA's competences to areas such as air port security, flight security and Air Traffic Management could be envisaged" he said.
Keep veal real, says report
The definition of veal may appear fairly straightforward, but apparently not. According to a report by French Socialist Bernadette Bourzai the definition of veal varies considerably across the EU. In particular the age an animal is slaughtered and what it was fed during its lifetime varies from country to country. Ms Bourzai's report is based on proposals from the European Commission (which administers the EU's agriculture policy) to simplify and clarify rules and give precise descriptions to consumers about what they are buying.
Online music
Parliament adopted a report that calls for local artists to be protected in any European legislation that affects online music. It concerns the cross-border management of copyright for online music. The European Commission had pursued a non-binding recommendation on this issue although Parliament has called for a directive under the codecision legislative procedure to be put in place.
In the debate MEPs voiced concern about the damage the original proposal could do to local and national music markets and artists and publishers. They would prefer controlled competition to encourage modernisation. This could also encourage diversity and creativity. The Parliament's rapporteur on the issue, Hungarian Socialist Katalin Levai said Parliament "wants to make sure that copyrights and related rights are managed properly…".
Wednesday
As well as the debates on the Berlin Declaration and the European Council, job cuts at Airbus and the future of Bosnian-Herzegovina will be debated. To see today's agenda and watch the Plenary click on the links below.
20070308STO03939 Live from Strasbourg Open skies MEPs set to debate pay inequality Online music Agenda
EN
1
PHOTO
20070314PHT04131.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/eplive/public/freetext_page_direct/20061120FTX00012-2101/default_es.htm
EN
6
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?language=EN&reference=2007-03
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070308STO03938 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070308STO03932 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070309IPR04001 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
