Open day at the European Parliament - 1 and 5 May
Institutions
2007-04-27 - 13:07
On the 1st and 5th of May the European Parliament will hold open days in Strasbourg and Brussels where members of the public are invited to visit the Parliament and take part in various activities. It marks part of this year's celebration of the 50th anniversary of the signing of the Treaty of Rome. Later in the week, on 9 May, Europe Day will be celebrated in towns and cities across the European Union with celebrations and events based on the theme "Together since 1957".
In Strasbourg - seat of the Parliament - the building will also be open on 1 May with exhibitions, events and performances during the day. On 9 May 750 young people from all the countries of the Europe will assemble in Strasbourg in a special event organised by Euroscola with the theme being "the future of Europe".
Brussels 1000 CET - 1800: Europe area in and around the Parliament
As well as opening its main building (which you can enter from rue Wiertz), the whole area around the Parliament will be turned into a "Europe area" for the day. One of the themes for the event is to allow people to "be a Parliamentarian for the day".
Inside the Parliament there will be exhibitions by the political groups, European associations, cultural organisations and the Parliament's services as well as information stands and activities.
There will also be a "faces of Europe" exhibition by TV broadcaster ARTE in 27 places throughout the building to mark the number of EU members.
The day will also see two debates to mark 50 years of the Rome Treaty. From 1045-1330 the place of Europe in the world and the experience of the last 50 years will feature whilst in the afternoon, there is a look to the future with a debate from 1400-1530 on what the next 50 years may hold.
A jazz band and dance group will be performing in the Parliament throughout the day. The whole event will be inaugurated at 1130 to the left of the old Leopold station by the Vice President of the European Parliament Ms Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou.
UK "50 years" of Europe
In the UK there are a variety of activities throughout the week. On 4 May Birmingham will play host to a reception that will see MEPs, representatives of local and regional government, Universities and voluntary organisations all getting involved. Across the UK schools and colleges have been encouraged to celebrate Europe Day with fact sheets material being widely distributed. Portsmouth University and Solihull Age concern are just two places where members of the Information Office will be making speeches and holding debates on Europe during the week.
In Scotland an event on 9 May at the Winter Gardens in Glasgow is planned. Among those invited to attend are former Erasmus exchange students (to mark 20 years of the programme), young people, local politicians and faith leaders.
Ireland: Events to celebrate 9 May / Imeachtaí in Eirinn do Lá na hEorpa'
In Ireland the Parliament's Information Office have organised a series of events with the main focus being in the South of the country. Here is a flavour of what is on offer: At 1430 on 9 May former President of the European Parliament Pat Cox will make a speech - "reflections on 50 years of European unity" at Glucksman gallery, Cork.
Later in the day there will be a launch of a photo exhibition "An tAontas Eorpach: Caoga Bliain ag Fás" (EU: 50 years a growing) at 17.00 at University College Cork.
For more information on what is happening please consult the links below.
20070420STO05502 Parliament's Information Office in Belgium Parliament's Information Offices in the UK Parliament's Information Office in Ireland Information in Irish
EN
1
PHOTO
20070426PHT06108.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/brussels/
EN
3
LINK
/parliament/public/nearYou.do?country=UK&language=EN#address
EN
4
LINK
/parliament/public/nearYou.do?country=IE&language=EN#address
EN
5
LINK
http://www.europarl.ie/irish/index.html
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
