Tuesday in plenary: safety at sea, AIDS, budget adopted
Institutions
2007-04-25 - 12:09
maritime safety was a key issue on Tuesday
With thousands of miles of coastline and 350 million Europeans travelling by sea each year, unsafe ships can be a real danger. MEPs Tuesday debated five reports relating to safety at sea including more inspections and increased insurance. MEPs also voted to approve most of the EU's 2005 budget through the "discharge" procedure. Members backed a report on the need to fight the growing spread of AIDS in Europe over the next three years.
"A chain of maritime safety needed"
The "Erika" and "Prestige" maritime disasters have in recent years highlighted the dangers to Europe's coast from old or rusting ships getting into distress. The recent sinking of a cruise liner in Greece demonstrates that safety at sea is of prime importance.
The five reports backed by MEPs relate to the European Commission's proposals for a whole cycle of maritime safety.
To prevent accidents a system of inspecting all ships was supported in a report by Dominique Vlasto of the European People's Party. She said this will eradicate the "rusting ships that pollute our seas". To deal with the effects of possible accident compulsory insurance for passengers is supported in a report by Paolo Costa of the Liberal ALDE Group.
The danger of old, heavily laden ships cruising the seas looking for a European port to take them in when in distress is also anticipated. In the past some countries have been unwilling to let ships in distress approach their coastline for fear of an environmental catastrophe. In the debate MEPs supported a report by ALDE member Dirk Sterckx which advocates an independent authority to designate a place of refuge for a vessels in distress.
MEPs also supported a report to improve "classification societies" (private organisations which carry out inspections and certification of ships (drafted by Luis De Grandes Pascual of the EPP) and support technical investigation into maritime disasters. Jaromir Kohlicek for the European United Left drafted the latter. Mr Pascual told his fellow members the measures were necessary as "we need a complete chain of maritime safety".
All these reports will be put to the vote Wednesday. In March MEPs passed two other reports on maritime safety.
Budget approval but many MEPs want more national oversight
Members voted yesterday to give their approval for the €105 billion the EU spent in 2005. This procedure, known as the "budget discharge" is where Parliament approves the overall implementation of the budget. They also granted the discharge to all the EU institutions - including the Parliament - for the discharge of the budget in 2005.
In the debate the rapporteur Salvador Garriga Polledo for the European People's Party told the House that 2005 had been a difficult year in that it was "the first full budgetary year in the enlarged Union" - a reflection of the 10 new countries that joined the EU the year before.
However, the issue of oversight of how EU money is spent again proved to be a contentious point. Mr Polledo praised the UK and the Netherlands for their willingness to make annual statements about the management of EU funds but he criticised the majority of other countries. It was this point that led 161 MEPs from the ALDE and Green groups to vote against the discharge for the Council. ALDE member Jan Mulder led the charge "it was high time that Parliament shows that it does take the correct spending of taxpayer's money very seriously" he said.
HIV/AIDS: treatment and prevention must be a "top priority"
The number of people infected with the AIDS virus has almost doubled since 1998 with more than half of the new cases being in the heterosexual community. Against this background MEPs yesterday adopted a report on the prevention and treatment of the virus over the next three years.
The man who drafted the report - Georgs Andrejevs of the ALDE group called upon EU governments “to put the fight against HIV/AIDS on top of the list of priorities". In a bid to collect date on the spread of the virus he urged all EU countries to report their data on HIV/AIDS to the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control.
Mr Andrejevs also told the House that “access to anti-viral drugs (for treatment) differs from Member State to Member State".
For the Socialist PES Group Michael Cashman was forthright on the issue of prevention: and “to those who say that condom use is not effective in preventing the transmission of the HIV virus, I say they do a great deal of damage and in fact they cost lives". He also called for cheaper more widespread treatment.
Also in the debate Hungarian Socialist Zita Gurmai pointed out that women and children are increasingly affected.
Today in Plenary
MEPs will today debate Croatia's progress towards EU membership, vote on the maritime package and advanced medicinal therapies. There will also be debates on homophobia, the Ukraine, the death penalty and human rights.
20070420STO05494 2005 discharge Anchors aweigh for maritime safety Background: 3rd maritime package About the discharge: an interview with M. Bösch MEPs say fresh boost needed for fight against AIDS
EN
1
PHOTO
20070424PHT05824.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420IPR05544 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070307STO03826 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070417BKG05371 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420STO05493 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420IPR05675 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
