MEPs back rapid response teams to tackle illegal immigration
Security and defence
2007-05-03 - 11:21
Coastguards can be overwhelmed by the numbers of immigrants in boats
MEPs last week gave their backing to new Rapid Border Intervention Teams that will provide assistance should any EU state face a large influx of illegal immigrants. The teams will work under the authority of national border guards and in cooperation with Frontex - the EU's border agency. In 2006 an estimated 20,000 African immigrants landed in Lampedusa in Italy with a further 30,000 in the Canary Islands. The authorities were often unable to cope - especially as many needed medical help.
Trying to reach Europe by sea is also provoking tragedy as many drown as the flimsy boats provided by people traffickers sink en route. This point was explicitly mentioned in the debate by Spanish Socialist Javier Moreno Sánchez who acts as rapporteur for illegal immigration. He told fellow MEPs that "these teams will...save lives, especially in Atlantic and Mediterranean waters, and treat with dignity immigrants trying to enter illegally into the territory of the Union".
Despite the numbers, immigration by sea is estimated to make up only about 14% of the entire amount. The EU also faces migratory pressure by land from the Western Balkans and former states of the Soviet Union which have not joined the Union. A key part of the resolution was that more effective border management could stem the flow of both illegal immigration and people trafficking. The latter is particularly prevalent throughout the Western Balkans.
The type of tasks that the Rapid Border Intervention Team (RABIT) would carry out would be patrolling the border, checking and stamping documentation and interviewing people who wish to cross the border. They would also help with practical issues like translation and first aid.
Parliament gives Frontex more funding
An initial force of several hundred is envisaged with salaries being paid from the country they originate from. All living expenses would be borne by Frontex - whish is why Parliament boosted the Agency's budget by €10 million for 2007.
Speaking in the debate, Parliament's rapporteur on the proposed Intervention Teams, Belgian Liberal Gérard Deprez, said that "it's about organising assistance to those facing a sudden and massive arrival of illegal immigrants...today this problem concerns southern EU members, but nobody can exclude that other, especially south-eastern or eastern borders, will tomorrow face similar sudden and recurrent pressures". Mr Deprez believes that RABIT could be operational by early 2008.
Voting on Thursday the house supported a first reading agreement with the Council by an overwhelming majority.
"Mandatory solidarity" between countries
At the insistence of Mr Deprez the principle of "mandatory solidarity" was inserted in the text. This means that all EU countries would be obliged to help in the deployment of the specially trained guards if Frontex requested them to do so. Their mandate would be to act only if a country faces "urgent and exceptional pressure" on its frontiers.
This point is particularly relevant to the countries in the Schengen area who have abolished internal border controls - so illegal immigrants entering the Schengen area could in theory travel unchecked. The resolution notes: "border control is in the interest not only of the Member State at whose external borders it is carried out but of all Member States which have abolished internal border control".
However, as long as living standards in Europe remain high, the urge of many to risk their lives for a better life will continue.
20070502STO06195 Press Info on the vote Resolution 26 April Immigration: common approach needed 9 February Frontex homepage
EN
1
PHOTO
20070502PHT06269.jpg
EN
5
LINK
http://www.frontex.europa.eu/
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420IPR05693 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0162 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070207STO02857 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
