EU-US relations: open skies, open markets, open minds?
External relations
2007-04-30 - 11:49
EU-US summit on Monday 30 April
Ahead of a meeting between Angela Merkel and George Bush at the EU-US summit in Washington Monday, MEPs last week debated transatlantic relations. There was strong support for a close relationship with the US despite differences over climate change and the treatment of terror suspects. In March MEPs voted to support the "open-skies" aviation agreement on liberalising trans-Atlantic aviation which is due to be signed today.
This could lead to increased trade between Europe and America - a bilateral relationship that currently accounts for 40% of world trade and is estimated to create 14 million jobs.
MEPs stress common interests in relationship
The debate and resolution last Wednesday stressed the common interests that bring the EU and the US together. As well as a strong trade relationship, Washington and Brussels are committed to democracy and the rule of law. The cultural and historic link between the two continents was also stressed with Joseph Daul of the European People's Party (EPP) who said the "reconstruction of Europe wouldn't have been possible without the US". Brian Crowley for the Union of Europe for the Nations group (UEN) said both sides have "more in common than dividing us".
Stress was also laid on the need for a common front to deal with international problems including Afghanistan, the Middle East, nuclear non-proliferation and Kosovo. Angelika Beer for the Greens said Europe must be more proactive in relation to Kosovo and that we "cannot wait for the Americans to solve our problems for us". The resolution said cooperation with NATO remains important but asked for further explanation of the proposed US missile defence system, which could be based in the Czech Republic and Poland.
Some MEPs were cautiously optimistic that relations were on an upward path due to the election of a new Democrat Congress. Dutch Socialist Jan Wiersma spoke of a "new wind blowing in Washington" whilst Joseph Daul suggested that Nancy Pelosi, the new speaker of the US House of Representatives, should be invited to the Parliament.
Fight against terrorism
The debate and resolution made it clear that differences remain. The resolution called again for the Guantánamo base to be closed and the inmates charged or released. It also called for the CIA's secret detention programme to be ended. In the middle of last month MEPs from the Civil Liberties Committee held talks with US lawmakers on several issues - notably the fight against terrorism.
A report critical of the CIA's renditions programme of terrorist suspects was condemned in a report supported by the European Parliament in February this year. Another source of differences with Washington is Parliament's insistence on strong legal safeguards regarding personal data - particularly in relation to air passengers.
Graham Watson of the Liberal ALDE bloc told MEPs that the EU must talk to Washington about torture, secret prisons and that it must acknowledge the problem of 2 million Iraqi refugees.
Climate change
The US and EU are the two largest emitters of CO2 in the world. The EU has signed up to the Kyoto protocol (although not all members have met its standards) but the Bush Administration has refused to ratify the treaty. With Kyoto due to run out in 2012, MEPs called on the US to ratify it and work towards a new treaty.
The resolution also stressed the need for cooperation as "the EU and the US, representing 38% of world energy consumption, should take the lead through joint efforts to develop alternative energy production and energy efficiency".
Visas: "transatlantic Schengen" called for
With citizens from 12 EU countries still needing visas to travel to the US, a major demand from MEPs is that agreement be reached so as to ease travel across the Atlantic. Graham Watson called for a "transatlantic Schengen" to help business and leisure travellers.
Finally, the resolution calls for President of the World Bank, Paul Wolfowitz to resign in order to "prevent the Bank's anti-corruption policy from being undermined".
20070430STO06128 EU-US debate in full Resolution CIA report "Open skies" Parliament's resolution on SWIFT, Passenger Name Recognition Transatlantic Legislators Dialogue
EN
1
PHOTO
20070430PHT06162.jpg
EN
7
LINK
/intcoop/tld/default_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070420IPR05683 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA 20070425 SIT-02 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070216STO03274 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070308STO03938 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0039 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
