Cartoonists sketch out their peace ideas in Parliament
Human rights
2007-05-08 - 11:53
Cartooning for peace - Plantu in Parliament
As well as making people laugh, cartoons have the power to deliver powerful, uncomfortable and shocking messages. The furore over the cartoons of the Prophet Mohammed printed in a Danish newspaper in 2005 was a stark reminder of the impact a cartoon can have. In a hearing organised by Parliament's Human rights committee and the UN their role in promoting peace was debated. Present was cartoonist "Plantu" of "Le Monde" who founded "cartooning for peace" in the wake of the Danish controversy.
The hearing was an unusual mix of debate and drawing with Plantu treating those present to a live drawing of one of his creations on an overhead projector. He was one of 8 cartoonists present who brought their experiences from Europe, the Middle East, Africa and the US. The hearing was timed to coincide with World Press Freedom Day - 3 May.
Cartoonists have "no weapon other than a pen and paper"
Plantu spoke for them all when he said "we, as cartoonists, are very different, but we all agree we are cartoonists for peace, against intolerance". Dilem from Algeria - who has been arrested 5 times, told the hearing that "we just like to speak out things what we find unacceptable or untrue". He added that we have "no weapons other than a pen and paper whereas others kill thousands of young people".
On the controversy over the cartoons of the Prophet Mohammed, Spanish Green MEP Raül Romeva i Rueda asked if there were limits to the freedom of expression and if the cartoonists had any taboos. Plantu responded saying that he hopes "politically incorrect" cartooning would continue but "without transmitting hatred". He noted what he thought was a mutual lack of comprehension between cultures, East and West.
Speaking later exclusively to the Parliament's website he commented specifically on the Danish controversy saying: "it's useless to pour oil into fire. That's why the "Jyllands Posten" (the Danish newspaper at the heart of the controversy) decided not to publish more cartoons of Mohammed to avoid killings in Pakistan or elsewhere. But, of course, it is a must to keep publishing cartoons against Hamas or Al Qaida."
"Laughter has the power to defeat totalitarianism"
The importance of cartoons as an avenue of freedom of expression was widely spoke of in the hearing. French Green MEP Hélène Flautre who chairs the Human Rights committee said that "without freedom of expression neither democracy nor full human rights are possible".
Recalling his experience in Communist Poland, Liberal ALDE member Bronislaw Geremek told the MEPs and cartoonists that "when there are authoritarian regimes, it is important for there to be laughter...laughter has the power to defeat totalitarianism". Alojz Peterle, a Slovenian member of the European People's Party thanked the cartoonists as "what you do speaks louder than the words of politicians".
"Cartooning for peace" was established in the wake of the Danish cartoon controversy and a controversial exhibition on the Holocaust in Iran in 2006. An exhibition of cartoons by Plantu and other cartoonists who support the initiative can be seen the Belgium Centre for Comic Strip Art until 02/07/07.
20070507STO06305 Press info Documents of the hearing Cartooning for Peace
EN
1
PHOTO
20070508PHT06431.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/meetdocs/2004_2009/documents/fd/droi20070502_cartoo/droi20070502_cartoons.pdf
EN
4
LINK
http://www.cartooningforpeace.org/
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070430IPR06172 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
