Questions to Parliament's budget rapporteurs
Budget
2007-04-23 - 17:27
Ville Itälä (above) and Kyösti Virrankoski
Two Finnish MEPs - Ville Itälä (EPP) and Kyösti Virrankoski (ALDE) - are Parliament's rapporteurs for the 2008 EU budget. Last year the total figure came to €115 billion - a mark of the range of activities the Union undertakes. Mr Virrankoski reports on the annual policy strategy for the entire 2008 budget while Mr Itälä deals with the budget of the EU institutions. Ahead of a debate today and vote on Tuesday at noon on the Virrankoski report, we talk to both men.
The 2007 budget for all the other institutions - including Parliament - is €2.6 billion. This is included in the overall budget. This week's vote will also be an indicator of where MEPs believe the EU should be concentrating its efforts, which should help the European Commission in drawing up a draft budget.
Ville Itälä, what should the EP budgetary priorities be in 2008?
"The year 2008 comes just before EP elections. It is important to show taxpayers that we take care of things responsibly. Responsibility and confidence come via budgetary discipline. There are no specific reasons (such as enlargement, new languages) in 2008 to raise the budget so we try to keep it at 2007 level, 2008 will be the taxpayers' year!"
Kyösti Virrankoski, what about the EU budget on the whole?
"First of all, it will be important to focus on an early start for the programmes. 2007 is the first one under the EU's 7-year financial framework and its central element is the reconstruction of the new Member States. The financial framework is Europe's biggest effort. New Member States will receive approximately €20 billion a year. Now the question is will they be able to use it? It would be a pity, if they couldn't manage it in an efficient and speedy manner, as there will hardly be another opportunity like this."
He continues, saying "another priority should be the Lisbon strategy; to improve EU's competitiveness. Investing in research and development is vital for the EU. Programmes should get running fast and R&D administration should be clarified and enhanced. Great challenges like globalisation assume strengthening competitiveness and education."
How can the EP make sure European citizens get value for money?
Ville Itälä: "no money for communication will be enough if we don't seek the citizens' confidence via our actions and show we work responsibly. Any news on the misuse of money damages our credibility and undermines our work on big issues."
Kyösti Virrankoski: "better and simpler administration are the key. Legislation needs to be simplified and streamlined, administration made more efficient and division of labour clarified. Human resources must be better allocated and use of money controlled efficiently."
How do we increase citizens' EU awareness before the 2009 European elections?
"Let's get close to the citizen", Mr Itälä suggests. "It's done best by committing the MEPs to invite more of the small local media to Brussels and Strasbourg. They don't have the resources for that. People follow these media the best, so the most efficient way to promote awareness is to try to get positive EU stories in them."
Mr Virrankoski: "bureaucracy is the thing angering citizens most. Pruning it is key. The result will have to be a clearer and simpler regulation, more efficient administration with less money, as well as decentralising responsibility. The EU needs a face! And we give it one by clarifying administration and the 'who does what'. One could even say it's about promoting the Nordic administrative model in the EU."
Preparing the budget is...an ongoing process
The Commission is in charge of the budget's implementation, although in practice around 80% is administered by EU members. The annual budget round officially starts this year on 2 May when the Commission will present its draft preliminary budget.
The Council will then come forward with its budget proposal in July and the real twist on figures starts off in September. The budget has two readings in Parliament and the Council. The December Plenary session usually sees the final adoption of the budget.
Messrs Itälä's and Virrankoski's job will however, not be over by the end of the year. They will also prepare, during 2008, necessary amendments to the budgets already approved. "It's a hard, almost full-time job of two years" is how Mr Itälä describes his rapporteurship.
The Itälä report on Parliament's budget, which puts the focus firmly on making communication more efficient to raise awareness among EU citizens, was adopted on 29 March.
20070420STO05491 Itälä report Virrankoski report Focus on budget
EN
1
PHOTO
20070420PHT05669.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/sidesSearch/search.do?type=REPORT&language=EN&term=6&author=28313
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A6-2007-0123 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061106FCS12347 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
