Actor Martin Sheen at the EP: “We have to wake up”
Energy
2007-04-11 - 17:37
Martin Sheen at the EP for the Energy Award 2007
American actor and environmental campaigner Martin Sheen was in the European Parliament yesterday, 11 April, to take part in the Energy Globe Awards ceremony at which green energy projects from across the world will be recognised at a gala prize-giving event. Mr Sheen took a moment to answer our questions about his commitment to the fight against global warming and worldwide environmental degradation. He did not mince his words on the need for his own country to do more.
What made you come to the EP to participate in the Energy Globe Awards?
I think this Award gives the ordinary citizen and NGOs who have no voice and no access to this kind of media or attention, the chance to show us the things which are necessary for all of us. It’s fascinating that it’s third world countries which are making the greatest contributions, because they seem to suffer the most from lack of clean air, lack of clean water, and access to big business or profits from the environment. This event really focuses on the little guys, and that’s what makes it so valuable.
Why do you campaign against environmental destruction?
I’m a concerned citizen and I believe that having offspring makes us hostages for the future. My children, my children’s children and their children will inherit what we have given them and what we are giving them is not very good. So as a steward of the Earth, I have to accept the responsibility to do all that I can, for as long as I can, to awaken whoever will listen to what’s coming down, and get people to join the fight for the environment.
What position does America have towards climate change?
We have to wake up! The only thing we lack in America is leadership, which is the most important thing. We have enough people who are concerned and active citizens, but we do not have the support of the government. This administration has been lacking; it’s very upsetting and very discouraging. We can only hope they’re gonna to wake up before it’s too late. We’re not anticipating anything from this administration; but maybe the next one. Public opinion in America is starting to wake up, no thanks to this administration, but thanks to the environmentalists in America who are taking the leadership.
Can Europe and the USA work together on controlling climate change?
They absolutely must! We’re part of the same world, we can not separate ourselves. Europeans are far more aware and Europe is doing far more than we are. So I hope we’ll catch up with you very soon; but we need a new administration in Washington to do that!
Forecasts about climate change are dire and much damage is already done: is it too late?
Oh no! Of course many people, even those with scientific opinions, say that it’s too late, that we have reached the point of no return. I personally do not believe that: I think we are capable of making it better, of repairing what has been destroyed.
Europeans often characterize Americans as wanton consumers of energy, drivers of gas-guzzlers: is this fair?
Yes, definitively. I think we’re over privileged: we have a lot, we use and we waste a lot, and we don’t think about the needs and concerns of anyone else. We have to begin to focus on the needs of the third world now. We think of the third world as the child of a lesser god, and it has no relation to us. But we have to wake up and understand that we all breathe the same air, our children inherit the same future.
If you had a magic wand so you could make one practical change to affect climate change, what would it be?
I would start with water. I think the fresh water issue is the main issue: the lack of clean water is one of the greatest environmental dangers we have to face now. It is the centre of most of the health problems in the third world. It causes so many diseases and destroys the hopes of so many children in so many of these countries. Hydrology is the energy of the future.
20070329STO04904 Watch the gala live Wednesday at 2015 CET Water – 71% of the Earth's surface, but still scarce Press info on the Energy Globe Award 2007
EN
1
PHOTO
20070411PHT05170.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/eplive/public/freetext_page_direct/20061120FTX00012-2101/default_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070329STO04903 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070329IPR04838 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
