Better protection for performing artists working outside their home country
Culture
2007-06-07 - 12:51
The employment conditions for performing artists who move around Europe as part of their work should be improved, and they should be better informed on how to transfer their social rights. This was the message of the report adopted by the European Parliament, calling for better protection for artists and the introduction of a special electronic social security card.
In the own initiative report on the social status of artists by Claire GIBAULT (ALDE, FR), MEPs explains that many artists in Europe, be it singers, musicians or - like the rapporteur herself - conductors, have experienced problems when trying to perform in other countries, or trying to transfer their social rights. International co-productions of live performances, circus or audiovisual productions have been increasing the mobility of many artists, and thus increasing the need for a clearer legal status for the European artists.
Artists should be better informed
MEPs highlight the fact that in some Member States certain categories of artist do not enjoy legal status. Often, they are not aware of their rights under existing EU legislation. Therefore the Parliament urges the Commission - in cooperation with the sector - to draw up a practical handbook for European artists, where they can find information about sickness insurance, unemployment benefits and similar issues. The European Parliament also wants the Commission to launch a pilot project introducing a European electronic social security card, specifically intended for European artists.
In order to facilitate the mobility of the artists, the report proposes that the Commission and the Member states introduce a ‘European professional register’, in line with the Europass, an initiative launched in 2004 to make it easier to get qualifications recognised in other Member States. This register would list the status of the artist as well as his or her previous contracts.
The report also stresses the importance of the teaching of artistic activities and calls on the member states to step up training of arts teachers, and to create specialised training structures for those working in the cultural sector.
Visas for visiting artists from third countries
The report also raises the problems that third country artists are facing in getting visas and work permits, when for instance Russian musicians or Brazilian dancers come to Europe. Therefore, MEPs call on the Commission to reflect on a regime applicable to artists and begin to draw up Community rules in this area which could lead to the introduction of a specific temporary visa for European and third country artists, as it already is the case in some Member States.
20070606IPR07548 The social security status of artists
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5398742
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
