Garry Kasparov at the European Parliament
External relations
2007-05-29 - 17:15
Garry Kasparov in the Hemicycle in Strasbourg
Garry Kasparov - chess master turned Kremlin critic was at Parliament last week to set out his views on Russian politics. Invited by Parliament's President Hans-Gert Pöttering as a sign of support for 'those who are working to bring about democracy' he met MEPs on the Foreign Affairs committee and on the EU Russia delegation. Given his stature and activities in Russia (where he was recently arrested), MEPs gave him a respect hearing - a 'listening and hearing' mood prevailed where he spoke.
In this focus you can read about his meeting with President Pöttering, read the reactions of MEPs on the Foreign Affairs Committee and the Parliament's delegation with Russia. Finally, we have an exclusive interview with the former chess master himself.
Born in Baku to an Armenian-Jewish family Kasparov made his name as one of the greatest Soviet chess champions - his games with Kremlin favourite Karpov received global attention. In 2005 he quit the game and turned to politics creating the United Civil Front which aims to preserve electoral democracy in Russia. His movement is now in coalition with the Other Russia movement of which he is the leader. Mr Kasparov's criticisms of the Kremlin were direct and blunt. He believes the Kremlin had "weakened Russian democratic institutions" and marked a return to the ruling elites and illiberal habits of the past Mr Pöttering explained that "the invitation of Garry Kasparov to the European Parliament is an expression of our obligation as freely elected MEPs to support all those who are working to bring about democracy and rule-of-law in Russia and in the world. They deserve our full support and solidarity".
On 10 May MEPs adopted a resolution which set out the Parliament's views on the situation in Russia. The former chess master told MEPs that his strategy is to unite the various factions of Russian opposition ahead of Parliamentary elections in December 2007 and Presidential elections in March 2008. Kasparov said he was leading the fight not to win the elections, but to ensure they took place at all Pledging to hold non-violent protest he sees street protests and the use of the internet as the key to mobilising support. The main argument his group intend to use is "defence of Constitutional rights".
20070524FCS07079
Garry Kasparov at the Parliament: "Europe must stand up for what it believes in"
Garry Kasparov makes his point MEPs on Parliament's Foreign Affairs Committee and its Delegation for Relations with Russia questioned Garry Kasparov closely on the political situation in Russia, and his role in current affairs last Thursday 24 May. In his replies, Kasparov painted a gloomy picture. The leader of the United Civil Front urged the EU 'to stand up for what it believes in' and welcomed the firm EU attitude towards Russia taken during the recent EU-Russia summit.
Elections rather than farce
The Chair of Parliament's delegation for relations with Russia -Mrs. Ria Oomen-Ruijten (Dutch EPP-ED) and German PSE Klaus Hänsch, were interested above all in the plans of the 'Other Russia' coalition (led by Kasparov) for the upcoming legislative and presidential elections. What candidates would be put forward? What was the programme of "Other Russia"?
Replying, Mr Kasparov underlined that at this stage the coalition is more preoccupied with ensuring free and fair elections rather than in candidates or specific political programmes. According to the former world chess champion, his role would be that of moderator, coordinator and strategist.
French Green Mrs. Hélène Flautre was interested in chess master's view on how the EP can be more effective in its work towards Russia, apart from resolutions and delegations sent.
"Europe must stand up for what it believes in", underlined G. Kasparov, stressing his favourable view of the stance taken by European leaders at the recent EU-Russia summit in Samara.
Pipelines and economy
When discussions turned to Russia's accession to the World Trade Organisation, Kasparov said that although he was in favour of his country's joining, in his view the current Russian government "will not apply the WTO's rules".
Chairman of Parliament's Foreign Affairs Committee Jacek Emil Saryusz-Wolski (EPP-ED) quizzed Mr Kasparov on energy relations with Russia – signing of the Energy Charter and future of Gazprom, while Czech PSE member Libor Rouček raised wider economic issues due to be covered in an EP report due to be adopted in the June sitting of Parliament. He expressed concern about restrictions for Western companies to invest in "39 strategic sectors" of the Russian economy.
According to EPP-ED member Mrs. Jana Hybášková, the Samara Summit showed that Vladimir Putin made the EU speak with one voice. She asked the chess grandmaster's opinion on the Russian pipeline projects to Hungary and under the Batic Sea.
Hans-Gert Pöttering and Garry Kasparov Garry Kasparov slams Vladimir Putin's Russia EP resolution of 10 May 2007 on the EU-Russia Summit Time to relaunch energy dialogue with Russia EU-Russia relations in spotlight ahead of Summit
The 10-minute interview: Garry Kasparov
During his visit to the European Parliament during its May sitting, we took the opportunity to put some questions to Mr Kasparov about his view of the current situation in Russia. As was the case throughout his visit, he expressed himself in forthright terms.
Do you accept the premise, put forward by some, that the Russian nation needs a strong hand to be governable?
The premise itself is faulty. Where is it written that strong leaders cannot be democratically elected? Or is that supposed to be the case only in Russia? After World War II, many doubted that Japan and Germany could flourish under democracy. Russia’s transition away from totalitarian Communism will require many strong hands, but those hands should be selected by the hands of the voters, the citizens of Russia, in free and fair elections. A leader can be strict while still being fair and respecting democratic institutions and the individual rights of the people.
In your political campaigns in Russia, you have used street protest and the internet to communicate your message. Does this indicate a lack of belief in the political institutions of the Russian Federation?
I believe in our Constitution, but our government does not. We go to the streets and to the internet because there are no official avenues for political opposition or dissent against the current administration today. Legal and illegal barriers of all sorts are set against anyone who does not agree with the Putin government. Opposition parties are declared ineligible or are banned outright. Opposition candidates and other voices are barred from the airwaves and the print media. Opposition activists are harassed, often arrested and beaten. In this environment, even the political institutions that are still left on paper are worthless.
Will the presidential elections of 2008 bring about change? Do you intend to stand? If your movement wins, what would be its first move on the political chessboard?
They will bring change, but at this point we have no way of knowing in which direction that change will move Russia.
My purpose right now is to serve as a sort of moderator in this grand coalition we call the Other Russia. Because of my background – outside of politics but always representing my country – I am in a unique position to help such a diverse coalition stay together despite our many ideological differences. To that end I have put any personal ambitions aside. This summer we will propose a program endorsed by our potential candidates. Later in the year we will try to run a type of primary election, which will be difficult under the circumstances, with so much government pressure on our activities. It is very important that we stay together as a united democratic force in case the coming battles in the Kremlin lead to collapse. If that happens, a credible, independent group such as the Other Russia will be ready to step into the gap.
Our first and only goal right now is to see honest and open elections. If one of our movement comes to power, his own beliefs and experience will lead him. What we all agree on is that building strong democratic institutions is more important than our differences on social and economic issues. Without true democracy we all suffer.
You have brought your campaign to the European Parliament today. What is it that you think the EU and EP can and should do in their relations with Russia?
We do not so much ask for your action as for your honesty. Stop providing Putin with democratic credentials he has in no way earned. Stop receiving him and his allies as democratic equals. Stand up to authoritarianism instead of quietly endorsing it.
Nobody denies the necessity of doing business with Russia. The EU also does business with China, for example. But you do not provide the Chinese leadership with the trappings of democratic comradeship as you do with Putin. Every summit, every collegial meeting, is played on state-controlled Russian television as a way of discrediting the pro-democracy opposition of which I am a member. They say, “see, Putin is welcomed and treated as an equal by Europe’s leaders. He is a democrat too.”
The idea that Putin’s Russia will be slowly brought over to the side of human rights by appeasement has by now been thoroughly discredited. The Kremlin takes every concession as a sign it can go further in cracking down on dissent and demolishing democratic structures. If you believe a democratic Russia is important, it is past time to stand up and say so.
Parliament hears voice of independent Russian media
EN
1
PHOTO
20070529PHT07115.jpg
EN
2
PHOTO
20070529PHT07117.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/president/defaulten.htm
EN
8
PHOTO
20070524PHT07063.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070521IPR06880 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0178 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070521IPR06882 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070514STO06590 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061123STO00262 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
