Darfur: action in face of unfolding crisis urged by MEPs, Nobel winners
External relations
2007-06-05 - 19:54
Refugees fleeing the fighting in Darfur
Tuesday in Parliament saw leading representatives of parliament's political groups debate the situation in Darfur with former Nobel peace Prize winners Desmond Tutu and Jody Williams - the latter who had just returned from the troubled region of Sudan. In the debate MEPs lamented the inaction of the international community in the face of the unfolding crisis. There was consensus that the EU needed to put on a common front in its dealings with the Sudanese government.
This focus contains all the remarks made in the debate as well as interviews with Desmond Tutu and Jody Williams.
20070601FCS07344
Darfur: MEPs meet Nobel Prize winners Desmond Tutu and Jody Williams
Jody Williams and Desmond Tutu In a special meeting of the full European Parliament on 5 June, two winners of the Nobel Peace Prize offered MEPs their advice on how Europe should act confronted with the Darfur crisis. Former Archbishop Desmond Tutu, winner in 1984 for his role in fighting apartheid, spoke passionately on behalf of his native continent, calling for UN sanctions against Sudan. Jody Williams, who won the Prize in 1997 for her campaign against landmines called for deeds rather than words.
Desmond Tutu: a "proud African"
The Archbishop paid tribute to EU leaders' concern about the "most ghastly example of inhumanity" unfolding in Darfur. He enumerated the terrible catalogue of human suffering - murder, human rights abuses, rape, destruction of crops and property, displacement from home - endured by the people of the region. But this was not a time to give in to pessimism or "donor fatigue", he said. It was a time to support all those acting to help: the UN, the African Union, the media and many NGOs.
As a "proud African", Tutu wanted Sudan to "stand tall" and this could happen if the international community used carrot and stick measures.
Archbishop Tutu called on the EU to send a message to Khartoum that they should:
Allow UN peace keeping force unimpeded access.
Disarm the Janjaweed militia.
Allow humanitarian aid unimpeded access.
"Let us not give up", "change can happen in Khartoum", Archbishop called, citing South Africa as an example of change.
Jody Williams on Sudan "How many times have they lied?"
Ms Williams warned of the importance of being "careful in believing Khartoum". "How many times have they lied?" - asked Mrs Williams who has been refused a promised Sudanese visa 20 times.
She told MEPs that after the Rwandan genocide the international community said "never again", in Darfur everyone had failed to protect the people. People in the camps ask for protection and security, and they are not getting it she said.
Ms Williams had a series of suggestions for the EU. She said it should;
Push for a unified coordinated peace initiative, unified voice - take own steps, don't wait for the US.
Provide assistance, mediation, funding, consistent, not part-time diplomatic effort.
support peacekeepers of the African Union.
Put consistent pressure on China (connecting to Beijing Olympics and Burma) and Japan. Spoke about morality of investment.
Isolate Sudan economically and politically.
Involve women, many of which were used as weapons of war.
Help to conduct negotiations outside Sudan. As long as rebel groups are fractured there are no negotiations.
"When you speak about Darfur, speak about Burma", she appealed. The rest of the world should not be forgotten she said.
Reaction of MEPs
MEPs held discussions on Darfur and voiced a number of responses on what the EU and the international community should do.
Jürgen Schröder for the European People's Party and European Democrats said to Desmond Tutu that "when the Berlin wall was still there, your name was frequently cited. We heard about the peaceful transition in your country, and we had one". He told that the EP would soon be sending a delegation to Darfur and called for stepping up of criticism towards China.
Glenys Kinnock for the Socialist PSE Group called Darfur "a tragic story of unkept promises". With impunity you never overcome the scars", she said, calling for bringing the perpetrators to justice. Mrs Kinnock agreed on targeted sanctions, but stressed first of all a functioning ceasefire as a prerequisite for progress and to allow aid workers in the country. She also called for a more co-ordinated multinational approach.
Graham Watson for the Liberal ALDE Group said that the "EU has to uphold values" and support EU High Representative Solana's proposition further targeted sanctions.
He called for action saying that "if you are passive you are with the oppressor" and said that Europe should be leading a Marshal plan for Africa starting with Darfur.
Ryszard Czarnecki for the Union of Europe for the Nations Group said that "Darfur cannot wait but Europe cannot wait too, because lack of reaction from our side is a shame, is a sin of neglect. Our own inaction is a disgrace" he told MEPs.
Daniel Cohn-Bendit for the Greens /EFA called for the international community to put pressure on China (which is believed to be an ally of Sudan) is to threaten action against the forthcoming Olympic games in China.
Luisa Morgantini for the European United Left (GUE/NGL), cited a book called "Kassandra" by Christa Wolf where it is stated that "between killing and dieing there is a 3rd option: to live", while speaking about Darfur, she said the main problem is poverty due to a failure of the government to listen to the needs of the population and make the right political choices.
Non attached MEP Irena Belohorská called for focus on the children in refugee camps as many times they are neglected, suffer of hunger, violence, intolerance and rape. "The whole world has a duty to protect Darfur civilians, particularly the children" she told MEPs.
On a final note Jody Williams said that "If you really care about the issue but you do nothing to take your action to change it, save your emotions (...) go have a beer and watch soccer match". Archbishop Tutu implored people to "act and give hope not just in words".
American peace activist Jody Williams: "tired of rhetoric without action"
Prof. Jody Williams In 1997, Jody Williams became the 10th woman to receive the Nobel Peace Prize in its almost 100-year history. She is a founding coordinator of the International Campaign to Ban Landmines (ICBL) - an unprecedented coalition of NGOs - which made the Mine Ban Treaty a reality in less than 7 years. Ms Williams is now trying to bring about change in Darfur. She recently headed a UN Mission on Darfur, which issued a critical report on 7 March.
In less than 7 years an unprecedented coalition of NGOs - International Campaign to Ban Landmines (ICBL) - achieved the Mine Ban Treaty. Will "people power" work in Darfur's case?
Probably not in the quite same way. The land mine treaty was very specific; we were able to pressure governments to specifically negotiate a treaty. In the case of Darfur there's no consistent international pressure on Khartoum to stop its counterinsurgency war, therefore it does whatever it wants. Unless there's international pressure, Khartoum will continue to lie.
People power is working in different ways than governments that are either incapable or unwilling to exercise their responsibility to protect, outlined in at least three UN resolutions. People are pushing for divestment, and at least in the US a number of states have taken their pension funds out of companies that do business with Khartoum and thereby deal with the war. I think we're going to be stepping up international pressure on companies.
Why does this tragedy still seem to capture world attention less than others?
In the US, Darfur has a very high profile. In my view it shows complete failure by the international community to exercise its "responsibility to protect" (first elaborated in the Millennium Summit in 2000). Primarily, responsibility to protect its own citizens from ethnic cleansing, war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide lies with a state itself, but when the state cannot protect its own people, responsibility lies with the international community. It was all the result of the Rwanda genocide, after which the world said "never again", but "never again" doesn't seem to apply with Darfur. There's something wrong with an international community that makes the pronouncement and then doesn't follow it through. If they are not going to do it, they should just shut up.
Inaction by the international community is one thing, but do you think outside powers actively share in the responsibility for creating the man-made disaster in Darfur?
Not for creating the disaster, but the states that continue to invest in Khartoum share responsibility. China does, Japan does. Japan is a huge buyer of Sudanese oil. China is one of the biggest investors in Khartoum, and a huge percentage of Khartoum's oil is consumed by China. Companies and shareholders have their responsibility too. The attitude "if we don't invest somebody else will" is unacceptable. Where is the morality in that?
Until recently China insisted on its policy of non-interference. What seemed to hit China's nerve more than anything else was an opinion piece that appeared recently in the Wall Street Journal. It was titled "Genocide Olympics" and written by UNICEF goodwill ambassador Mia Farrow. China was really upset and considered it an attack on the Olympics. Unless China takes a more proactive role in dealing with Khartoum to end its impunity and bring about change, I think it's appropriate to have this debate
You participated in the "Landmine information day", organised in the European Parliament 2 years ago and you are back today. What can the EP do to fight for a more humane world more effectively?
Can I answer that honestly? I'm really tired of listening to Europeans complaining about the US instead of having a united front. When the US says jump, they say - "how high"? If the EU really wants to be a counterweight to the US, it has to be one. Public posturing without consistent action is empty. I am really tired of rhetoric without action, whether by states, individuals or NGOs. Governments need to represent the views of their people, that means really doing something.
What do you think about the celebrity band wagon - Darfur becoming a "fashionable" cause? Is it a good or bad thing?
I think celebrities have every right to get involved. They can make a real contribution. However, I don’t like when uneducated or ignorant celebrities get involved and their opinions are heard ahead of others. In the case of the landmine treaty, there was a conscious decision not to involve them. It can make the general public fail to understand that the real work is done by activists every day. Curriculum Vitae Report of the High-Level Mission on the situation of
human rights in Darfur European Parliament resolution on the situation in Darfur Jody Williams at EP Landmine Information Day, 16 June 2005 EP and Juanes say "no" to landmines
Archbishop Desmond Tutu: No end to the challenges in Africa
Desmond Tutu Desmond Mpilo Tutu is a South African Archbishop and activist who received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1984 and rose to worldwide fame as a leading opponent of apartheid. The 76-year old Anglican Archbishop was at the European Parliament on 5 June to discuss the Darfur conflict with MEPs. He took time out of his schedule to talk to us about, "one of the most ghastly situations in the world", and about Africa's problems more generally.
Why have you decided to take up the invitation to come to the European Parliament? How can this occasion help people in Darfur?
The situation in Darfur is one of the most ghastly situations in the world. The EP is a very significant institution in the world. If it wants to turn the spotlight on one of the most horrendous situations in the world, it can do so. I am glad to be able to participate in any effort that might ameliorate the situation.
It is estimated that since the beginning of the Darfur conflict more than 200,000 have died and a further 2.5 million have been displaced. The EU is already engaged in the region with humanitarian aid of several hundred million euros, with further funding in support to the mission of the African Union. What else can the EU do to help?
Well, obviously we need considerable support for the African Union peacekeeping force. The force is simply not large enough and that is why it UN efforts to significantly augment it are so important. It is also hamstrung by its lack of resources.
We hope to encourage the EU to augment its support to this force so that it becomes effective in doing its most important work, which is the protection of civilians - the unarmed population of women, children and old people (like me!).
You received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1984 for fighting against apartheid and in favour of peace. Now, when the politics of apartheid are over, what are the main challenges that Africa faces?
Of course it is important that we are able to show some victories: that we have overcome apartheid in South Africa, overcome colonialism in many parts of that continent. But challenges do not end.
Europe is reasonably prosperous, it is reasonably peaceful, but Europe has also come out of a very serious history: the holocaust, dictatorships in Spain, Portugal and Greece, and, very recently, ethnic cleansing. It also has a very serious situation in Northern Ireland.
We believe that just as Europe has been able to rise like a phoenix from the ashes, so Africa will be able to rise from the ashes to face the very many complex problems we have. One of the most serious is AIDS/HIV, as well as the fact that climate change is beginning to make malaria a very serious threat to the health of most Africans. It exacerbates problems such as the scarcity of water, the incidents of drought and the fact that people are beginning to become less food-productive. These are all issues that in the long run will make the continent unstable. If we can face up to those problems, just as we overcame apartheid, surely we will overcome them.
There are also problems such as corruption and governments that are not accountable. We've seen some of the most awful things happening in Zimbabwe. We are hoping that all the initiatives underway are going to help Africa get back its former glory.
EN
1
PHOTO
20070604PHT07431.jpg
EN
2
PHOTO
20070605PHT07520.jpg
EN
3
PHOTO
20070605PHT07522.jpg
EN
4
LINK
http://nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/peace/laureates/1997/williams-cv.html
EN
5
LINK
http://www.ohchr.org/english/bodies/hrcouncil/docs/4session/A-HRC-4-80.doc
EN
7
LINK
http://www.icbl.org/content/download/19500/381580/file/EUP_OPENING_REMARKS_JODY_WILLIAMS.pdf
EN
9
PHOTO
20070605PHT07528.jpg
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2006-0387 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060418STO07401 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
