The week ahead in the European Parliament
Institutions
2007-06-04 - 13:55
This week : (clockwise from top left). Tutu, Darfur, Solana and Pöttering
This week sees a Plenary session where MEPs will discuss the situation in the Middle East and the proposed EU Constitution. The crises in Darfur will also be in the spotlight as leaders of the Parliament's political groups hold talks with Nobel Peace Prize winners Archbishop Desmond Tutu and Jody Williams. The week begins with Parliament's President Hans-Gert Pöttering on a two-day visit to Poland where he will meet the Prime Minister, President and leaders of the country's minority groups.
Plenary Session 6-7 June
New Bulgarian MEPs: when the Plenary session opens at 1500 CET on Wednesday the first task of President Pöttering will be to welcome the 18 newly-elected Bulgarian MEPs who officially begin their term of office on Wednesday.
EU Constitution: just prior to the European Council MEPs will hold a debate on Wednesday on the proposed European Constitution. The debate will centre on a report that calls for EU's leaders to set out a "roadmap" for agreement on institutional reforms when they meet in June. The report was jointly drafted by MEPs from Parliament's two largest groups: Elmar Brok of the European People's Party and European Democrats (EPP-ED) and Enrique Barón Crespo for the Socialist PSE group.
Middle East: with Hans-Gert Pöttering just back from a tour of the region MEPs will debate the latest developments in the Middle East on Wednesday. They will first hear a statement from Javier Solana - the EU's High Representative for Common Foreign and Security Policy.
Other topics on the Plenary agenda include a report on the social status of artists, cross border cooperation - in particular looking at the visa information system - and reform of the EU's fruit and vegetable sector.
All debates and votes in the Plenary can be seen live here - there will also be full reports into the days developments published on the Parliament's website.
Darfur: Group leaders, Desmond Tutu and Jody Williams hold talks
With the crises in Darfur showing no signing of abating a special open meeting of the leaders of the Parliament's political groups will be held on Tuesday. Present will be iconic anti-Apartheid activist Archbishop Desmond Tutu (who later chaired South Africa's Truth and Reconciliation Committee) as well as Jody Williams who won the Nobel Prize in 1997 for her campaign against landmines. Archbishop Tutu has previously called for UN sanctions to be imposed on Sudan whilst Mrs Williams has recently returned from the region as part of a UN delegation.
You can watch this discussion live here on Tuesday 1330-1530 CET.
President Pöttering in Poland
Monday and Tuesday sees Parliament's President visit Poland where he will hold talks with President Lech Kaczynski and Prime Minister Jaroslaw Kaczynski. Also on his agenda are meetings with members of the political opposition and leaders of the country's Jewish groups.
Public Hearing on Tsunami reconstruction and human rights in Sri Lanka
A public hearing divided into two parts will look at efforts in Sri Lanka to recover from the devastating Tsunami of 26 December 2004 and also the human rights situation in the country.
As well as MEPs, Sri Lankan Ministers and NGOs will attend the hearing to be held on Tuesday from 1500-1830 CET. On Thursday the Parliament's website will publish a full round up of the hearing.
Also this week MEPs meet European Transport ministers to try and reach agreement on a rail package that includes issues such as passenger's rights and certification of train drivers.
In Parliament's Committees' MEPs on the Employment committee will be voting on a report on "Qualifications framework for lifelong learning" on Thursday.
20070601STO07339 Live Broadcast Press agenda Briefing Agenda of the part-session
EN
1
PHOTO
20070604PHT07415.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/eplive/public/freetext_page_direct/20061120FTX00012-2101/default_en.htm
EN
5
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?language=EN&reference=2007-05
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20072300AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070510BRI06564 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
