Post-Briefing - 21-24 May 2007 - Strasbourg
2007-05-29 - 12:39
Selected highlights of the Strasbourg plenary 21-24 May 2007 include:
MEPs deliver on cheaper roaming: calling rates to drop by the summer holidays
The European Parliament voted through a first-reading compromise agreement by an overwhelming majority on "Roaming on public mobile networks", the fruit of recent talks between MEPs and the Council Presidency. In doing so – and in negotiating a prompt entry into force of the regulation – the EP and the other EU institutions are working to ensure that consumers can benefit from cheaper roaming rates in time for the summer holidays.
Future of Europe - Debates with Italian PM PRODI and Dutch PM BALKENENDE
Italian Prime Minister Romano Prodi told MEPs that Europe’s future is at stake between now and the 2009 European elections in a debate in the European Parliament in Strasbourg on Tuesday, 22 May. The following day Dutch PM Jan Peter Balkenende told MEPs that what was needed was a new treaty and a more democratic EU. " MEPs expressed diverse views from pressing on with much of the existing Constitution, to a smaller Treaty, to advocating no change to the status quo.
Opening of the plenary session - Hydrogen economy declaration adopted - statement by EP President Hans-Gert PÖTTERING
Opening of the plenary session - Appeal for missing Madeleine McCann - statement by Gary TITLEY (PES, UK)
Kashmir
MEPs welcome and encourage bilateral talks between India and Pakistan to find a solution to the Kashmir conflict, while criticising Pakistan for lack of progress on democracy and human rights. The own-initiative report by Baroness Emma Nicholson of Winterbourne (ALDE, UK), passed by an overwhelming majority in the plenary in Strasbourg. (522 votes in favour 9 against with 19 abstentions).
Estonia is a "test case for the EU's solidarity," say MEPs
In a resolution adopted, MEPs condemned Russia's belligerent rhetoric and its failure to protect Estonia's embassy in Moscow, while also calling for reconciliation with the Russian-speaking minority in Estonia.
Daphne III set to combat violence against children, young people and women
Daphne III, the EU's specific programme to prevent and combat violence against children, young people and women. The third phase of Daphne covers the period 2007-2013 and has a budget of €116.85m. and is open to administrations, local municipalities, NGOs, research centres and other related bodies from all the Member States, candidate countries, EFTA states and the countries of the Western Balkans.
Environment issues
- Biodiversity loss is as important a threat as climate change
- Chemical pollution: clean surface water by 2015
- Conciliation agreement reached with the Council on 27 March 2007 on the funding arrangements for the EU's environmental policy. MEPs managed to ensure in the negotiations with Council that the new financial instrument (known as Life+ ) will continue to provide "EU added value."
MEPs urge EU action on health services
The EP adopted a report on the consequences of excluding health services from the Services Directive, urging the Commission to propose "an appropriate instrument" to codify the case law of the Court of Justice, but stopping short of calling for separate legislation on health services.
External/International Trade
- Economic Partnership Agreements: MEPs call for less onerous conditions imposed on ACP countries
- Aid for trade should focus on Least Developed Countries say MEPs
Employment Policy
MEPs gave strong backing to a report by the Employment and Social Affairs Committee which seeks to promote decent work for everyone, both inside and outside the EU. The report urges EU Member States and candidate countries to ratify and fully implement all relevant conventions of the International Labour Organisation (ILO) and calls for a decent work development programme and minimum wages.
Organised crime
MEPs call for "significant legislative progress" in the fight against organised crime. The author of the report, Bill NEWTON DUNN (ALDE, UK), says that changes need to be made in areas such as "the obtaining of evidence and its admissibility, or financial information for the purpose of identifying and then neutralising the proceeds of crime."
Human rights: Venezuela, Syria, Sudan
Parliament adopted three resolutions on human rights, democracy and the rule of law. MEPs criticised the Venezuelan Government's decision not to renew the licence of Radio Caracas Televisión, highlighted the situation of political prisoners in Syria and condemned the harsh sentences imposed by the courts in Sudan.
Agriculture
- Organic food: EP votes for stricter rules
- Maize: Parliament against sudden abolition of intervention system
- CAP: yes to simplification, no to policy changes by the back door
Fisheries
EC-Russia agreement on cooperation in fisheries in the Baltic Sea
Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the EC, Denmark and Greenland
Adopted text from the Strasbourg plenary session 21-24 May 2007 can be found here :
The draft agenda for the Brussels plenary 6-7 June 2007 can be found here : 20070516BRI06749
EN
1
A
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
2
A
/sides/indexPartSession.do?reference=2007-05&language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Future of Europe/European integration
Prodi tells MEPs - Europe's future is at stake between now and the 2009 European elections
2007-05-29 - 12:39
Italian Prime Minister Romano Prodi told MEPs that Europe’s future is at stake between now and the 2009 European elections in a debate in the European Parliament in Strasbourg on Tuesday, 22 May. MEPs expressed diverse views from pressing on with much of the existing Constitution, to a smaller Treaty, to advocating no change to the status quo. The debate on the future of Europe with Romano Prodi, Prime Minister of Italy and former President of the European Commission, was introduced by European Parliament President Hans-Gert PÖTTERING who emphasised the challenges facing the EU and the need for successful reforms. Mr Pöttering pointed out that 18 countries had ratified the treaty. He welcomed the support being given by Italy to the constitutional process and stressed that "it would be a misinterpretation of the people's will" to respond to the two failed referendums with a solution that "limits democracy and transparency in the European Union".
Romano PRODI , Prime Minister of Italy, expressed the firm view that "Europe’s future is at stake between now and the 2009 elections". He disagreed with those who contrast "the need to achieve results" with "the need to enhance European institutions", saying "It is to achieve results that I have always wished and worked for stronger and more effective common institutions!"
He argued that: "In the last two years, only the hesitations have been heard". It was now time "to listen to those who ratified the 2004 Treaty". He saw overcoming the constitutional impasse as the EU's "top priority."
In pushing ahead with European integration, "we always have to make efforts to understand the views of others, to take them on board." But, he went on, "we expect the same attitude from 'the others'. We expect them to take on board our wish for a more closely integrated union."
It was important that, in 2009, European voters should know, for example, what the European Parliament's role and tasks would be. For this reason, the mandate of upcoming Intergovernmental Conference on the constitution must be "specific and selective." It must focus on "the few significant points at issue" and the need for solutions.
Italy's sticking points
Since Italy had supported the current text of the Constitutional Treaty, we "cannot now accept radical changes", said Mr Prodi. Key points to be preserved were "the strengthening of foreign policy and common security by means of a European Foreign Minister, a stable Presidency of the Council, the extension of qualified majority voting, the abolition of three-pillar structure, the Union’s legal personality."
He also wished " to warn against the appeals to 'realism' usually issued on the eve of an important European Council, which are invariably linked to minimalist solutions." In fact, "the only true realism is to build a Europe able to keep up with challenges" he emphasised.
These challenges included, at domestic level, the European social model and the creation of a European space of freedom, security and justice; in foreign policy, fighting international terrorism and global challenges of energy and climate change; and, for the sake of clarity and public understanding - the abolition of the three-pillar structure. On all these points, said Mr Prodi, "the 2004 Constitutional Treaty gives convincing answers."
A "vanguard" as the last resort?
But what can be done if the 27 Member States cannot agree? For Mr Prodi - though he did not welcome the idea - "we do not necessarily have to proceed all together at the same speed. Already now, some significant European projects, such as the euro and Schengen, have been implemented by only some Member States. Not 'against' anybody and not to 'exclude' anyone, but always keeping the door open."
Therefore, said Mr Prodi, on the one hand "Italy will give the fullest possible support to the German and then the Portuguese presidencies." However, if the resulting agreement does not convince Italy, "we will not sign it." In which case "a vanguard of countries could be the best way to proceed towards a more integrated union, on condition that the door remains open to those countries willing to join later."
In the end "We must be aware that we cannot fail", otherwise Europe will decline and "risk reverting to being the small western appendage of the Asian continent."
Political group speakers
For the EPP-ED group, Joseph DAUL (FR) told the House that because of a range of issues, from climate change to the talk of a single immigration policy, "European integration is speeding up". After a long hiatus the constitutional issue was coming back into focus. Fortunately the newly-elected French President, Nicolas Sarkozy, had been given a mandate for change, and it was important to build on this "new dynamic".
The key questions to be settled were double majority voting, wider use of qualified majority voting, subsidiarity, a stable presidency, a single voice on the world stage and the Charter of Fundamental Rights. The EPP was keen for Europe to act together on economic and trade issues and to prevent unfair competition between Member States, especially on taxation. "Pragmatism must win out over dogmatism".
Turning to the EU-Russia summit, he said it should not be seen as a "failure" as some thought. On the contrary, the EU had "stood up for its convictions and ideals" notably on Estonia, Kosovo and energy.
Lastly, his group wished to stress "the importance of the Mediterranean dimension". This would "decide the success or failure" of the European project and it must be seen as a "major strategic priority".
For the Socialist group, Martin SCHULZ (DE) said he had nothing to add, as Mr Prodi had expressed exactly the opinion of his group. “If you take that clarity to the negotiations, then at least there will be one strong head of state or government who is not prepared for compromise at any price, as this would be a defeat for the work for European unity.” Mr Schulz referred to the experience of his colleague Paul Nyrup Rasmussen, now an MEP sitting next to him, but in 2000 Danish Prime Minister and thus a participant at the Nice summit. He said all the leaders had left the summit saying that the Nice treaty was not enough to make enlargement work. It had been a minimal compromise, but they had agreed to create the Convention to make rules really suitable for a Europe of 27. The Constitution was a good text, but it was rejected – OK, said Mr Schulz, but did that mean that what was true in 2000 was no longer true? “We have gone through enlargement with an insufficient basis. To continue in this way would destroy Europe,” he warned. He stressed that countries representing more than half the EU's population had ratified the treaty: “That is the truth of European democracy.”
The EU had a successful model, he said, achieving peace, social stability, and economic growth and was now able to export its values to the international sphere. To maintain that success, meant major changes to the existing treaties, he concluded, using the words of Lampedusa “Everything must change in order for everything to stay as it is.”
Graham WATSON (UK), leader of the ALDE group, began by saying to the Italian Prime Minister: “Welcome back. You have returned Italy to its rightful place at the heart of Europe.” Despite doubts from some commentators, Mr Prodi had led the Commission which brought both enlargement and the introduction of the euro, both major successes, said Mr Watson, and already under his premiership, Italy had led the European force into Lebanon while others hesitated, and pressed for a moratorium on the death penalty. Europe's future, he said, led not in insulating itself from external injustice, but from exporting its domestic achievements of the last 50 years. There was no better model than the Community method for creating consensus. He agreed that Europe's leaders needed self belief, grit and determination to face the future.
“We need more Europe, not less as the key to competitiveness, more Europe not less to obtain security and more Europe not less is the key to a just world.” Only strong institutions, he concluded, could build a stronger Europe.
Speaking for the UEN group, Cristiana MUSCARDINI (IT) said it was urgent to adopt a new treaty which would make the EU simpler and easier to understand, but the text should not be too general and ambiguous. Citizens wanted something realistic and pragmatic. “Without new choices we won't make progress. We need the right solution at the right time.” A high level compromise can be what works, she added, listing priorities including more respect for sovereignty, action against terrorism, for competitiveness, for more mobility, for the social model and a common approach to legislation on crimes against children. “People won't trust governments who say one thing in Brussels and another at home,” she said. EU policy on immigration was confusing, and immigrants themselves were the first to suffer from this, she said, but this had not been resolved, partly because the Italian government could not agree on its own line. Fewer words were needed, she concluded, and more action.
Monica FRASSONI (IT), speaking for the Greens/EFA group, said that experience has shown that those who say 'no' were often the most vociferous. There was no way that the Greens/EFA group could accept a compromise in a "downwards direction". Ms Frassoni insisted that national parliaments should play a role in the EU constitutional process. The EU had to face up to public opinion and build public support rather than getting involved in "internal machinations". Any debate on the Constitution should be held in open.
Speaking for the GUE/NGL group, Francis WURTZ (FR) said that even by simply changing the terminology away from the world "constitution", it would be necessary to consult the people. Even liberal economists, he said, wondered what the consequences would be of "unfettered globalisation". Mr Wurtz also called for a statute for the European Central Bank.
Mr Wurtz also questioned what role politics and political institutions had to play in facing up to the challenges of economic globalisation, a question he said, that was "never answered" by any of the other leaders. Finally, Mr Wurtz said that Mr Sarkozy had to slim down his ambitions for Europe in order to get support from the French people.
Nigel FARAGE (IND/DEM, UK) began by saying that Prime Minister Prodi, in his "usual rousing style" had "confirmed [his] belief in a United States of Europe."
Mr Farage made reference to the recent arrest of former KGB agent Andrei Lugovoi for the murder of Alexander Litvinenko, and referred also to Mario Scaramella, the academic who met with Litvinenko on the day he was poisoned. Mr Farage said that the Italian academic "tried to warn Mr Litvinenko of what would happen to him" but had "languished now in an Italian jail for six months." Mr Farage asked: "If you're suggesting we give up common law and habeas corpus for that sort of European system, my answer to you is no thank you."
Concluding, Mr Farage said of the future of the Constitution: "Let the people decide on their own future, don't impose it upon them."
For the ITS group, Jean-Marie LE PEN (FR) said that the Sarkozy's victory in the French presidential elections "means that the EU constitution is back on track." Mr Le Pen said that in rejecting the Constitution, "the French people also rejected the institutional part that people are trying to get us to swallow today", which would lead, he continued, to "a European bureaucratic and omnipotent superstate." Mr Le Pen added that Sarkozy was the favourite for the European Parliament "because he will ensure that the constitution will be ratified by Parliament rather than in a referendum." By supporting the constitution, "Sarkozy is betraying the 55% of French people from the Left and the Right who voted against the constitution."
The Constitution is "a document which is very difficult to understand", said Jana BOBOŠÍKOVÁ (CS) for the Non-attached Members. It was, she continued, "penned by people engaged in social engineering" and has "given rise to unnecessary dispute and conflict." Mrs Bobosikova added that the ongoing debate on the future of the Constitution in Europe "reminds us of how small are the mental horizons of its leaders who still haven't realised that this is dead in the water." Such a debate, she concluded, serves only as "a very good opportunity to learn from our failures."
PM Prodi - Response to the debate
Responding to the group leaders Prime Minister PRODI said the debate had been "brief and constructive", illustrating the fact that there were very divergent views on the way forward. Due to this divergent views, the EU needed strong rules, he said. It was paramount to reach a new compromise although Prime Minister Prodi underlined that the draft Constitution itself was a compromise. "It was signed by all the governments of the EU, including London". "We have to again achieve a compromise but not as the risk of destroying Europe, that is the red-line." Prime Minister Prodi said that Europe needed a European Foreign Minister given Europe divisions on foreign policy in the past. "We have responsibilities to ourselves and our children", he concluded.
British Speaker
Timothy KIRKHOPE (EPP-ED, UK Conservative) said: "We are once again debating constitutions and institutions when the citizens of Europe are really more interested in jobs, prosperity, the environment and global poverty. It is a myth that the European Union is in a crisis or paralysed and incapable of taking decisions, and this is the pretext that some governments are using to demand that the Constitution should be back on the table, and I know that you, Prime Minister, believe this as well.
It is not a constitutional crisis. Even the British Government has said that the EU is able to take decisions based on current treaties, and the period of reflection following the French and Dutch ‘no’ votes should, in my view, have been used to take a long, hard look at the reasons for the rejection of the constitution. Instead, the discussions now seem solely focussed on what parts of it can be kept at all costs."
As someone who believes in my nation’s membership of the European Union and the potential for good that Europe possesses, I am saddened by this debate. I have always believed there was a need to simplify and make more transparent the decision-making processes and institutions of Europe, as the Laeken Declaration envisaged. The enlargement of the EU may, indeed, require some amendments to existing treaties or new treaties from time to time, but I cannot accept that this Constitution is required, nor is it desirable at this moment. There is no doubt that the British people will demand a referendum on any new treaty that might propose additional powers for the EU, and my party would support that. We will watch with great interest the actions of the British Government in the weeks to come. Mr Blair will attend the Brussels Summit on the very eve of his retirement and he must not commit his successor in his absence. Gordon Brown should insist that he attend the summit alongside Tony Blair and take full responsibility for whatever his Government signs up to.
I hope that this kind of realism will guide Mr Brown’s actions in the difficult times that lie immediately ahead."
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Future of Europe/European integration
Balkenende tells MEPs: We need a new treaty and a more democratic EU
2007-05-29 - 12:39
Dutch PM Jan Peter Balkenende told MEPs: "The Netherlands is in favour of a more traditional document, in the same vein as the Treaties of Amsterdam or Nice. We need to continue with the Monnet method: moving ahead via small, but significant increments [...] we want an EU that operates more democratically. Secondly, we want an EU that can take decisions and act on them. The Dutch Prime Minister addressed the EP just one day after Italian Prime Minister had also set out his vision to MEPs. Parliament's President, Hans-Gert PÖTTERING , welcomed the Dutch Prime Minister to the EP and emphasised that the Netherlands had always been at the head of those "who seek to drive forward the European integration process". It was therefore "all the more painful to us" that its citizens had voted against the Constitutional Treaty. Mr Pöttering was, however, convinced that this did not represent a "No to the European Union itself". The Union needed to be made "fit for the challenges of the future" and he believed that a solution could be found which would produce "an effective, democratic and transparent EU".
Dutch Prime Minister, Jan Peter BALKENENDE agreed that the Netherlands had always been "a pro-European country" where "popular support for European partnership has always been above average". In late 2006, 75% of Dutch people had declared their support for EU membership. Still, "a clear majority of voters rejected the Constitutional Treaty in 2005" and now "we must come up with a mutually acceptable solution that does justice to the concerns" this had brought to light.
Reasons for the No vote
First the reasons behind the No vote must be understood. One was the pace of change, for example enlargement. "We have to realise that the public needs time to get used to the EU in its new form. Things have changed quickly. Too quickly for some people’s tastes. We must allow time for a sense of solidarity to grow." He went on to say "The question ‘Are you in favour of the Constitution for Europe?’ was taken to mean ‘Do you want the EU to assume the character of a state?’ or even ‘Should Europe eventually take the place of the national government?’ This was obviously a bridge too far."
There were other reasons for the No vote. "Some believed Europe was making too many rules or doing things best left to the member states. Others accused Brussels of a lack of transparency. Concerns about the Dutch financial contribution was another important factor. Compounding the problem was the fact that people had no real sense of the specific benefits of the European partnership."
The way forward
Moving on to the Dutch government's view of how the EU should proceed on the Constitution, he said the new treaty should have two main goals. "Firstly, we want an EU that operates more democratically. Secondly, we want an EU that can take decisions and act on them."
This would mean focusing on four key points. Firstly, a more gradual approach: "the Netherlands is in favour of a more traditional document, in the same vein as the Treaties of Amsterdam or Nice. We need to continue with the Monnet method: moving ahead via small, but significant increments. This approach throws a spotlight on the improvements, the democratic safeguards and the increased effectiveness".
Secondly, "a more robust subsidiarity test, with an important role for national parliaments." The institutional proposals made in the Constitutional Treaty were a step in the right direction. But there was still room for improvement. "National parliaments must play a more integral part in assessing whether proposed EU legislation conforms to the subsidiarity principle. If a majority of national parliaments are opposed to a given proposal, there must be consequences."
Thirdly, to be more effective the EU needs more qualified majority voting. But "we must recognise that countries are afraid to relinquish their vetoes, afraid that the EU will extend its competences by stealth. On this point we must be clear. The Union can become more effective only if it has public support."
Fourthly, "enlargement criteria should be included in the new Treaty". He stressed that "In the Netherlands there is a perception that the Union does not take its own rules seriously. The criteria are in place, but some would say they are not strictly applied. This erodes public support for the EU. These criteria should therefore be included the new Treaty."
"Europe has come a long way in 50 years", said Mr Balkenende. "Together we can set a good example in tackling climate change, poverty and security issues. Together we can capitalise on Europe’s economic potential in an ever more integrated global economy. All these things require a strong and effective European Union. A Union that has the trust of its people."
Political group speake rs
Joseph DAUL (EPP-ED, FR), on behalf of his group, said that the Netherlands was "a country which is perhaps the most open to the European spirit". Despite this, the Dutch people, like the French, had voted No to the constitution. "That certainly means that in the eyes of the majority, the great majority of them, Europe is not sufficiently legitimate, not credible enough, not effective enough".
Consequently, "We must persuade the Europeans that our shared project is not just beneficial but absolutely indispensable". In his view, the draft treaty did in fact contain most of the answers to the concerns voiced by the people. "By enabling ourselves to take decisions both democratically and effectively, we will satisfy the Europeans because we will be able to tackle the real problems".
Mr Balkenende had mentioned the role of national parliaments. Mr Daul agreed but added that it was important to clarify to the public exactly who does what and who is responsible for what, so as to prevent ministers blaming Brussels and vice-versa.
Lastly, on enlargement, he firmly believed that "Europe cannot bring in new members until it has resolved its internal problems". Therefore the priority must be to reach swift agreement on the institutional issues, the key ones being "citizens' rights and the decision-making process".
Socialist group leader Martin SCHULZ (DE) welcomed Mr Balkenende's comment that it was time to “concentrate on what unites us rather than what divides us. Hitherto, it has seemed that the Netherlands was focussing on what divided us – if you are now ready to go for compromises rather than demanding massive changes in Europe, then I am ready to make a deal with you, and defend you in the Netherlands.” He warned that the Dutch Prime Minister would be judged on against his words, commenting that he had not so far “pulled out all the stops in defending Europe.” A Europe of 27, he said, could not operate on the basis of Nice, or “Nice minus”. Europe was unable to act effectively in the Middle East for lack of a foreign minister, because unanimity was needed in Council. He said the point was not symbols like the flags or the anthem, or the title of the treaty, but the content. “Yesterday Mr Prodi said he wanted 100 per cent of the constitution, if you want 50 per cent, we can meet halfway at 75 per cent, with no anthem, no flag and a foreign minister with a different title.”
Graham WATSON (UK), leader of the ALDE group, said that the previous day a great champion of Europe, Romano Prodi, had sketched a vision of an EU that was democratic, transparent and effective – but it would need firm leadership to achieve this. He said the German presidency would need to repeat its success in drawing the states together for the Berlin declaration in order to win the war of public opinion and unite Europeans around a revised treaty. Referring to comments by the Dutch Foreign Minister that people were afraid of losing their jobs, social security and quality of life, Mr Watson agreed, but said these were reasons for more Europe, not less. Tackling energy supply problems or terrorism could not be achieved by retreating into unilateralism. and populism. Failing to unite politically would leave Europe at the mercy of powers like Russia. “We need an end to unscrupulous national vetoes, we need better democratic accountability and European institutions which can change with the times” he said, and none of that was possible without the substance of the constitutional treaty, whatever “cosmetic surgery” was needed. When the debate centred on symbols like flags and anthems rather than substance, it was time to change strategy, he said. “Stop letting the tail wag the dog, lead the Netherlands back to the heart of Europe,” advised Mr Watson.
Speaking for the UEN group, Brian CROWLEY (IE) said he had been struck by Mr Balkenende's espousal of the ideals of compromise and consensus. “Europe's future must be based on consensus – and that means equality between nations and peoples.” We could not all be forced down the same path, that just made it harder to reach agreement. He said Mr Prodi's “threat of a two speed Europe, of those for us and those against us” was more reminiscent of George W Bush than a European statesman. “Future development will not come from telling people look at what they have thrown away, but from us convincing people that this is the right way to follow.” Energy, pensions, immigration, internal security – much could be achieved consensually, “but some things are still best left to Member States”. He criticised Commissioner Kovacs for, as he put it, proposing tax harmonisation when the treaty did not allow for it. This was “ideologically driven - if officialdom can ignore rules why should we follow them, people ask.” The way forward to convince people was through “consensus, compromise and cooperation”.
Kathalijne Maria BUITENWEG (Greens/EFA, NL) welcomed the fact that the Dutch Prime Minister had taken the opportunity to address the European Parliament. However, she said that Prime Minister Balkenende had a "selective hearing".
The people, she said, that had voted against the Constitution in the Netherlands had not done so because they wanted less changes to the EU, "are people really happy with the current EU?" she questioned. Eighty per cent of those that had voted "no" in the Netherlands, she said, had done so because they wanted to make the EU more democratic and more changes were needed.
Erik MEIJER (GUE/NGL, NL) said that only yesterday Prime Minister Prodi had told the European Parliament: "that we need to go back to our constituencies to convince people that we need the original Constitutional Treaty". Mr Meijer argued though for a "bottom-up approach" taking into account the people rather than the concerns of governments.
He said that 85 per cent of the Dutch Parliament was in favour of the Constitutional Treaty. He also stated that it was Dutch national political parties that were in favour of the Constitutional Treaty that had pressed for a referendum yet the Dutch people rejected it. Finally, he remarked that the Dutch Prime Minister was in a "difficult situation" but he should not follow those that wanted to return to the original text.
Bastiaan BELDER (IND/DEM, NL) began by stating that "rather than talking about the Netherlands, we need to be talking to the Netherlands." Mr Belder said that he understood the difficulties Prime Minister Balkenende had with the political aspirations of the Constitutional Treaty, "in particular the idea of having a permanent standing President." Mr Belder therefore proposes the idea of "a tripartite Presidency for a year and a half, which is made up of one large, one medium-size and one small Member State." This would, he said, "avoid the power just remaining in the hands of one and all member States would be given the opportunity to take part in the Presidency."
Mr Belder also emphasised the need to be "clear where we are when it comes to the borders of the European Union", and that "there has to be greater co-operation between the European Parliament and the national parliaments."
For the Identity, Tradition and Sovereignty group, Philip CLAEYS (BE) said that "Dutch voters clearly spoke out against the Constitutional Treaty" and added that "I hope that the voters will be given the opportunity to speak out not just in the Netherlands but in all Member States." Mr Claeys added that one the key issues to be addressed is "not just the institutional question" but "the fundamental question of what the borders of Europe should be." In particular, "whether or not a country such as Turkey should be allowed to accede."
Mr Claeys concluded by saying that "we seem to be acting here in Europe as if there's nothing going on" and yet "we cannot accept the threats and the arrogance that is being expressed in this respect."
"One has to ask how much energy has been wasted on chasing the moonbeams of a European constitution?" asked Jim ALLISTER (UK), speaking for the Non-attached Members. "Part of the reason why the EU institutions are stuck in this rut", Mr Allister continued, "is because of the refusal to take a democratic 'No' for an answer." The debates taking place are "dominated...with demands for strategies to avoid letting the citizens have their say."
Mr Allister spoke of "that which imposes the apparatus of statehood upon the EU" as "the same old tired and tarnished product, already rejected, and upon which citizens must have their say."
British speakers
Andrew DUFF (ALDE, UK) expressed puzzlement and concern at three elements in the PM Balkenende's speech.
"Firstly, your determination to keep the three pillar structure will contribute neither to simplifying nor to making more transparent the system of the Union [applause], nor will it strengthen the capacity of the Union to act effectively.
Secondly, I was quite unable to understand what you were saying upon the issue of clarifying competencies and the transfer of sovereignty. As we all know, sovereignty cannot be transferred and competencies cannot be conferred without the full agreement of 27 Member States.
Thirdly, your demand that national parliaments should be able to block the Union's legislative process seems to me to be a severe assault not only upon the right of initiative of the Commission, but also upon the legislative prerogatives of the Council and the Parliament. The setting up of an effective third legislative Chamber would be quite the opposite of simplifying - an abuse of the principle of the separation of powers and would certainly confuse the public."
Timothy KIRKHOPE (EPP-ED, UK) stated that the June Summit will be an important one, and he believed that the German Presidency is keen to reach an outline agreement then. Agreement will not be easy, he said, as the stated positions of the Member States continue to vary quite substantially and in these circumstances he believed it would be counterproductive to try to force through the wrong sort of agreement in Brussels.
You said recently at your bilateral meeting with the Prime Minister that any new amending treaty should not have the characteristics of a constitution. Mr Kirkhope wholeheartedly agreed that any new amending treaty should not have the characteristics of a constitution. He strongly agreed with the view that the role of national parliaments should be strengthened and he hoped that this will be pursued at the forthcoming Summit.
Mr Kirkhope agreed with what the Prime Minister stated, which was also stated by David Cameron, leader of the Conservative party in the UK, that there is an urgent need for a greater emphasis on making Europe more competitive, tackling global poverty and dealing with the serious issues of climate change. These issues are what people want us to tackle and Member States can do much more to cooperate in these fields.
Concluding, Mr Kirkhope urged the Prime Minister and his fellow heads of government not to get bogged down in institutional and constitutional debate in Brussels. Instead, he stated, let us begin responding to what people are asking us to do: reforming our economies, tackling global warming and alleviating the crushing poverty that we are seeing now in the developing world.
Richard CORBETT (PES, UK) was quite encouraged by what Mr Balkenende had said. "Mr Balkenende, you could, after all, have come here and done what some over on that side of the House are urging you to do, and say, ‘We said “no”, end of story. Forget it. No new Treaty. No reform’. But you are not. You are coming here and saying, ‘We said “no”, but we recognise that 18 countries have said “yes”, that an overwhelming majority of the European Union wants to go ahead and reform our Union in the way outlined in the Constitutional Treaty."
"You are saying yes, we will sit down and negotiate a compromise acceptable to all 27 countries, and on top of that you are saying that you want to salvage some of those useful key reforms that are contained in the Constitutional Treaty. You do not want to throw away everything in that Treaty, you want to drop some things which gave cause for concern, much of it to do with the presentation and the vocabulary of that draft Treaty, but the substance you are willing to negotiate on and to save. I think that is a lesson to the doomsayers, and I am encouraged that a compromise is possible."
Dutch Prime Minister's closing remarks
Responding to the debate, Mr Balkenende said the title of foreign minister and the symbols were not what mattered, the question was whether these sorts of things should be dealt with in a constitution. He did not understand the question about nationalism. The future of the Netherlands lay in Europe and he had no wish to be associated with nationalistic tendencies.
The Union, he said, only had the powers we conferred upon it. That was the point of subsidiarity. And the fact that national parliaments and the European Parliament each had their own role was not a sign of weakness but of strength. Lastly, he was in favour of the Charter of Fundamental Rights but did not think it had to be included in a treaty.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Information society
MEPs deliver on cheaper roaming: calling rates to drop by the summer holidays
2007-05-29 - 12:39
The European Parliament voted through a first-reading compromise agreement on "Roaming on public mobile networks", the fruit of recent talks between MEPs and the Council Presidency. In doing so – and in negotiating a prompt entry into force of the regulation – the EP and the other EU institutions are working to ensure that consumers can benefit from cheaper roaming rates in time for the summer holidays. The compromise was adopted by an overwhelming majority of members in a show of hands. The crux of the package reflects the very same issues which held the key to the roaming dossier from the outset: caps on wholesale and retail charges, the choice between ‘opt-in’ and ‘opt-out’ models, transparency requirements, entry into force and future review of the legislation. However, inasmuch as the issues are the same, the solutions – in the spirit of compromise – are slightly different.
Prices
According to the compromise, the average wholesale charge (excl. VAT) that a "visited" operator can levy on a roaming customer’s "home" operator for the provision of roaming calls will be capped at €0.30 per minute. (The Council, at the outset of negotiations, had proposed placing a cap of €0.36 on the average wholesale price)
The cap, in line with MEPs’ proposals, will decrease automatically by 2 eurocents per year over a three-year period after the regulation's entry into force. The maximum retail charge (excl. VAT) for regulated roaming calls, meanwhile, will be capped at €0.49 per minute for calls made and €0.24 per minute for calls received.
(The Industry Committee had voted, in its original report, for caps of €0.40 for calls made and €0.15 for calls received. The Council, meanwhile -- having initially called for caps of €0.50 for calls made and €0.25 for calls received -- entered negotiations with the EP by proposing caps of €0.60 and €0.30, respectively.)
The cap for outgoing calls will decrease automatically by 3 eurocents per year; the cap for incoming calls will decrease by 2 eurocents after the first year and 3 eurocents after the second year.
As MEPs insisted, home providers will have to offer the Eurotariff to all their customers – and to do so actively, clearly and transparently. (In addition to the Eurotariff, reads the compromise text, every home provider could also offer "a fair use, all-inclusive monthly flat-rate to which no charge limits apply". Such a flat rate would include both voice and data roaming services (including SMS and MMS).
Summary table
Retail outgoing (per minute)
Retail incoming (per minute)
Wholesale (per minute)
€
€
€
Commission proposal
0.44 (x) 0.30 (y)
0.15
0.34(x) 0.23 (y)
IMCO report
0.50
0.25
0.25
ITRE draft report
Council Presidency
0.50
0.25
0.30
Council Presidency (19.4.07)
0.60
0.30
0.36
ITRE final report
0.40
0.15
0.23
Council - European Parliament compromise
0.49 (2007) 0.46 (2008) 0.43 (2009)
0.24 (2007) 0.22 (2008) 0.19 (2009)
0.30 (2007) 0.28 (2008) 0.26 (2009)
x - outgoing roaming calls made outside a visited network
y - outgoing roaming calls made inside a visited network
Opting
One of the greatest bones of contention in the Parliament's negotiations with the Council was the issue of whether to make the Eurotariff subject to an "opt-in" or an "opt-out" model. The former leaves customers with their old roaming tariffs, unless they deliberately choose to "opt into" the new EU system of price caps; the latter ensures that the Eurotariff would apply by default (unless the customer chooses otherwise). The majority of the Industry Committee having voted in favour of the "opt-out", the EP's delegation defended this model vigorously throughout negotiations with the Presidency.
According to the compromise package adopted today, operators will have a month following the entry into force to make the Eurotariff (or any other roaming tariff) available to its customers. The customer, the moment he or she is given such a choice, will have two months to decide whether or not to opt for the new roaming tariff. If the customer does make a choice, his or her operator – from that moment on – will have up to a month to activate the new tariff. If the customer does not make a choice, the Eurotariff will apply automatically at the end of the two months mentioned above.
(At the same time, roaming customers who have already made "a deliberate choice of a specific roaming tariff or package" before the regulation's entry into force "shall remain on their previously chosen tariff or package" – unless they choose otherwise. Operators, according to the text, must remind such clients of the terms of their contracts)
In theory, therefore – assuming their operators waste no time in offering and activating the new rates and they themselves waste no time in choosing them – customers may be able to benefit from the Eurotariff immediately after the regulation's entry into force.
The cap on the average wholesale price, meanwhile, will automatically take effect 2 months after the entry into force.
Opting - timetable
Assuming one makes the choice to switch into the Eurotariff at the earliest possible time, he or she can end up with it as soon as the date of entry into force or as late as two months afterwards.
All normal customers who make no choice will receive the Eurotariff automatically by, at the very latest, 3 months after the entry into force.
Information requirements and future regulation
As to ensure that customers are fully aware of what they pay for roaming services under the different tariff plans, MEPs propped their compromise package with a series of transparency provisions. Home providers, they decided, will provide their customers with "personalised pricing information on the retail charges" to outgoing and incoming roaming calls.
The Commission, according to the compromise text, will review the impact of the roaming dossier and report to the European Parliament and the Council "no later than eighteen months" after the regulation's entry into force. It will also keep track of developments in wholesale and retail charges for data communication services – including SMS and MMS – and, if necessary, make recommendations regarding the need to regulate in this area. Despite the fact that the compromise foresees the expiration of the roaming regulation after three years, it will also be up to the Commission to assess – in light of market developments and consumer protection concerns – whether there is need to propose a legislative act extending this period.
Paul RÜBIG (EPP-ED, AT), the European Parliament's draftsman on roaming stated during the debate on Wednesday 23 May in Strasbourg: "People are hoping that when they're on holiday, or on business, they'll be able to make telephone calls safe in the knowledge that they're not going to end up getting a telephone bill at the end of the month that is higher than the cost of their accommodation." He was, he said, "very glad that it's not just in everyday telephone communications that we're going to get this kind of transparency, but also in data communications." The package being put forward, Mr Rübig continued, was a " user-friendly way of doing things in the whole area of roaming" that provided "new opportunities to act...in the interest of consumers" and was, above all, "a contribution to the overall future of telecommunications."
Following the vote in plenary today on mobile roaming charges, the President of the European Parliament, Hans-Gert PÖTTERING stated:
"By adopting the report of Parliament's rapporteur Mr. Rübig, the European Parliament once again has exercised with responsibility its legislative powers as given to it by the treaties.
The compromise agreement reached after difficult negotiations with the Council demonstrated that the EP's representatives can make a real difference in jointly shaping EU legislation with the Council.
Parliament has succeeded in finding a broad compromise involving all political groups and four parliamentary committees. The final deal will improve price transparency and will lead to a reduction in prices for millions of roaming customers all over Europe."
During the debate, numerous MEPs took the floor to make the case for an accelerated adoption of the dossier. Roaming, an € 8.5 billion industry, affects 147 million consumers, said Šarūnas BIRUTIS (ALDE, LT). Eighty percent of roaming customers, said Joseph MUSCAT (PES, MT) citing a Commission paper, stand to benefit from new rates under the Eurotariff.
The countdown to cheaper roaming
The evening prior to the vote, Paul Rübig (EPP-ED, AT) issued a statement, in which he urged a speedy adoption of the dossier "to deliver its benefits to European citizens already by this summer". A "more than realistic" timetable, he remarked, "would include formal endorsement of the agreement by the Telecoms Council on 7 June". Urging the Council to make all possible efforts to ensure a fast-track entry into force, he underlined that the regulation can be published in the Official Journal "within 24 hours of its official signing by both institutions, the Parliament and the Council."
The roaming law's prospective entry into force was also one of the most important issues covered during today's plenary debate. Joachim Wuermeling, speaking on behalf of the German Presidency, told MEPs that the Council secretariat "will pull out all the stops" to have the regulation in place "as fast as possible" – or, as he later explained, "on the 29 June". This, argued Viviane Reding, Commissioner for Information Society and Media, is not necessarily enough. Publication (in other words, entry into force, should take place "not at the end of June, but well before that.")
British speakers in the debate preceding the vote
Nigel FARAGE (IND/DEM, UK) questioned whether this was just a giant publicity stunt. Continuing he stated: "You want the EU to be loved, so you are telling people they are going to be better off. Frankly, it smacks of Communist central planning when bureaucrats and politicians think they know what the right market price is. They are always wrong. This will lead to higher costs for domestic consumers. It will lead to less competition and innovation in the market place. It is yet another giant EU folly."
Giles CHICHESTER (EPP-ED, UK) stated that "we owe it to innocent tourists and consumers to save them from suffering that nasty shock when they come back from travelling on holiday – or even business – of being charged for receiving a call and having a huge bill. We owe it to them to fix it. We may hope for something like 60% savings on the average charge for a roaming call, and this is of material benefit to our consumers. Mr Chichester was glad that his amendment requiring the operators to give information, the ‘icon’ amendment, has been incorporated into the text. He paid tribute to the consensus across Parliament between the groups, along with the Commission, the Council, consumer groups, and the regulators, in supporting this measure.
Alyn SMITH (Greens/EFA; UK) echoed the Commissioner’s phrase ‘a Europe of results’. Roaming is, he said, clearly best dealt with at EU level, as we have a need to act. There is a clear case of market failure. Our citizens, he said, are clearly losing out because of it. Something had to be done.
The package before us today, Mr Smith continued, is a proportionate response supported by his group. It will impose transparency, rights to information and a protective tariff which will see reductions of up to 70%, and will protect vast swathes – hundreds of millions – of our citizens. Crucially, it is time-limited to three years to specifically correct the market failure, whereupon we will revisit the subject. At a time when we hear too much talk of institutional minutiae, Mr Smith stated that he will have no difficulty commending this Europe of results to his constituents in Scotland.
Arlene McCARTHY (PES, UK) stated that consumers will see the cost of calls halved under this new law. They will receive automatic information on the cost of making and receiving calls and they will benefit from an automatic Eurotariff. The Internal Market Committee first raised this issue in 2005 when in a hearing we responded to consumer complaints on excessive charging and now in 2007 this Parliament has shown it can deliver for consumers.
We want consumers, she stated, to continue to benefit from this, even after the three years when the law will lapse, but consumers should be aware that the costs of using their mobile phone for internet access or texting is still excessive. She asked the Commissioner to act in this area. The industry itself should move to reduce these prices. We have, she concluded, shown that we will act here on behalf of consumers if they are being ripped off and she hoped the industry will take this message seriously.
Eluned MORGAN (PES UK) stated that many mobile operators have been charging customers extortionate prices and, in Parliament’s view, very unnecessary tariffs. She warned them to put their house in order. We gave them, she said, the chance to do the right thing but they persisted and it is for that reason that we have had to introduce legislation that gives protection to anyone who uses a mobile while abroad.
Let this be a lesson to other industries, she warned. One of the things that was discovered in discussions with mobile companies was that much roaming traffic is kept in-house as customers are directed on to partner networks. So for many roaming companies, wholesale prices are simply a way of ensuring different parts of the same company benefit. When we understand this, she said, the market price for consumers becomes even more exorbitant. This is a victory for consumers, a victory for the European Parliament and a victory for the European Union, she concluded. Adopted text
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0199 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Opening of the May Strasbourg Session - Hydrogen economy declaration adopted / Appeal for Madeleine McCann
2007-05-29 - 12:39
At the start of the May Strasbourg plenary session, European Parliament President Hans-Gert Pöttering announced that a written declaration on the hydrogen economy had been signed by the requisite number of MEPs (over half the component Members of Parliament) as laid down in Rule 116 of the Rules of Procedure and would, therefore, be sent to the institutions and bodies mentioned in it. The House also heard an appeal for missing 3 year old Madeleine McCann. The House made one change to the week's agenda, MEPs decided overwhelmingly that Parliament should not vote on a resolution following the debate on Tuesday, 22 May on Palestine.
Appeal for missing Madeleine McCann
Gary TITLEY (PES, UK) said at the opening of the session in Strasbourg: "18 days ago a 3-year-old girl, Madeleine McCann, of British parents, was abducted from her hotel in Portugal. So far, despite extensive police searches, she has not been found. There has been extensive coverage of this in the United Kingdom, Portugal and Spain, but I am not sure that there has been coverage in other Member States. The suspicion is that she has been abducted and transported out of Portugal.
Firstly, I hope I speak on behalf of this House in expressing our sympathy to the family, but I would also ask that all national authorities give publicity to this case. As we know, there is a serious danger of there being trafficking in minors and we would hope this is not the case in Madeleine’s case, but we would urge all national authorities to be on the alert to see if we can possibly find this girl before anything serious happens to her."
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Daphne III set to combat violence against children, young people and women
2007-05-29 - 12:39
The European Parliament adopted at the second reading Daphne III, the EU's specific programme to prevent and combat violence against children, young people and women. The third phase of Daphne covers the period 2007-2013 and has a budget of €116.85m. The programme is open to administrations, local municipalities, NGOs, research centres and other related bodies from all the Member States, candidate countries, EFTA states and the countries of the Western Balkans. Daphne is a Community's programme, the aim of which is to prevent and combat all forms of violence against children, young people and women and to protect victims and groups at risk. The programme also regards as victims of violence children, young people or women who witness a near relative being assaulted.
Initially the Commission proposed a single programme covering both "Daphne" and "Drugs and Prevention and information" but on Parliament's request it was split into two programmes. Rapporteur Lissy Gröner (PES, DE) also believed that was the only way to ensure enough visibility for the Daphne programme.
Many other amendments from the first reading were also taken on board by the Council, in particular the amendments aiming at improving the transparency of the programme, reducing bureaucracy, and thus alleviating access to the programme for NGOs, and providing services to assist them in the preparation of the project proposals. Also the EP has ensured that the highly successful helpdesk service will continue, and that a think-tank providing expert advice is to be set up. As part of the compromise, the EP and Council call on the Commission to consider a possible initiative for a European Year against violence against children, adolescents and women.
Daphne III is the third phase of Daphne and will build on the policies and objectives laid down in the Daphne I (2000-2003; €20m.) and Daphne II (2004-2007; €50m.) programmes. The programme is open to all the Member States as well as candidate countries, EFTA States and the countries of the Western Balkans.
The decision enters into force on the day following its publication in the Official Journal. Text, as adopted by the EP on 22 May
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Estonia is a "test case for the EU's solidarity," say MEPs
2007-05-29 - 12:39
The European Parliament expressed its full support and solidarity with Estonia in a resolution adopted by an overwhelming majority (460-31-38) in Strasbourg today. MEPs condemned Russia's belligerent rhetoric and its failure to protect Estonia's embassy in Moscow, while also calling for reconciliation with the Russian-speaking minority in Estonia. Parliament expressed its support and solidarity vis à vis Estonia, and noted that it regarded "attacks targeting one of the smallest EU Member States as a test case for the European Union’s solidarity." MEPs considered "inadmissible the various attempts to interfere in the internal affairs of Estonia by the Russian authorities, and reminded Russian authorities that their "indiscriminate and hostile rhetoric" would impact EU-Russian relations.
The House also called on the Russian government to respect the Vienna Convention on the protection of diplomats, expressing its alarm at the "inadequate protection of the Estonian Embassy in Moscow," and condemned Russia's use of economic pressure on Estonia as an instrument of foreign policy. It also called on the Commission and Member States to assist in the analyses of cyber-attacks on Estonian websites, and to present a study on how such attacks can be addresses at a European level.
The resolution also calls for an "Estonian domestic dialogue," which could "bridge existing gaps between the different communities" and "create new opportunities to integrate Russian-speaking Estonians," as recently suggested by Estonian President and former MEP Toomas Hendrik Ilves. It also asks the Russian government to engage in "an open and unbiased dialogue [...] on the history of the 20th century," especially the crimes against humanity perpetrated by totalitarian communism. Adopted text
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert.do#
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Environment
MEPs adopt written declaration on establishing a green hydrogen economy and a third industrial revolution
2007-05-29 - 12:39
The European Parliament adopted a written declaration on establishing a green hydrogen economy and a third industrial revolution in Europe through a partnership with committed regions and cities, SMEs and civil society organisations with 420 MEPs signing the declaration. The President of the European Parliament Hans-Gert Pöttering announced at the beginning of the session in Strasbourg, that with more than half of all MEPs signing the declaration it had been adopted. The written declaration calls upon the EU Institutions to:
- pursue a 20% increase in energy efficiency by 2020,
- reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 30% by 2020 (compared to 1990 levels),
- produce 33% of electricity and 25% of overall energy from renewable energy sources by 2020,
- institute hydrogen fuel cell storage technology, and other storage technologies, for portable, stationary and transport uses and establish a decentralised bottom-up hydrogen infrastructure by 2025 in all EU Member States,
- make power grids smart and independent by 2025 so that regions, cities, SMEs and citizens can produce and share energy in accordance with the same open-access principles as apply to the internet now.
Global warming and costs of fossil fuels, say MEPs, are increasing and having regard to the debate launched by the European Parliament and the Commission on the future of energy policy and climate change. A post-fossil fuel and post-nuclear energy vision should be the next important project of the European Union.
The declaration says the five key factors for energy independence are: maximising energy efficiency, reducing global-warming gas emissions, optimising the commercial introduction of renewable energies, establishing hydrogen fuel-cell technology to store renewable energies and creating smart power grids to distribute energy.
What's next
The written declaration will be forwarded, together with the names of the signatories, to the Commission and the Member States. The declaration will be included in the minutes of the sitting. Publication in the minutes closes the procedure. Written Declaration on establishing a green hydrogen economy and a third industrial revolution in Europe through a partnership with committed regions and cities, SMEs and civil society organisations
-//EP//TEXT WDECL P6-DCL-2007-0016 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Environment
Biodiversity: will our grandchildren still eat fish?
2007-05-29 - 12:39
In Europe today, 52% of freshwater fish species, 45% of reptiles and butterflies, 42% of indigenous mammals, 30% of amphibians and 800 plant species, inter alia, are threatened with extinction. On the high seas, stocks of cod, haddock and halibut are dying out. Much remains to be done if the European Union is to achieve its aim of stemming the decline in biodiversity by 2010. In 2001 the EU Heads of State or Government decided "to halt the decline of biodiversity by 2010" and "to restore habitats and natural systems". With three years to go to the target date, MEPs voiced their "profound concern at the continuing loss of biodiversity" and stressed "the urgent need for an effort to meet commitments". Because according to an own-initiative report drafted by Adamos ADAMOU (GUE/NGL, CY) and adopted on 22 May with amendments, biodiversity loss is as important a threat as climate change.
Member States short of political will
Mr Adamou says that "If we do not move towards sustainable use, there will be no fish left for our grandchildren". Plenty of initiatives have been taken, "but they are not getting adequate results", according to the rapporteur and to other MEPs speaking before the vote in the committee: "there is too little funding and too little political will among the Member States". A view that is shared by the European Commission itself.
Among the existing initiatives, the Natura 2000 network, which protects natural habitats, today protects 18% of the territory of the EU-15. For over ten years now, the common agricultural policy (CAP) has included environmental measures. But MEPs consider that CAP-driven specialisation and intensification have eroded biodiversity in recent decades.
The current reform of the fisheries policy also seeks to reduce pressure on the marine environment, but fishing still too often uses destructive and non-selective technologies. Many pieces of legislation are in the pipeline to safeguard air, water and soil quality and to cut pollution. And in 2006 the Commission proposed a broader action plan on biodiversity.
Maintaining biodiversity demands unprecedented efforts
MEPs welcome this plan but consider that it "will be insufficient to conserve biodiversity and sustain ecosystem services in the longer term." "Ecosystem services" include the production of food, fuel, fibre and medicines, regulation of water, air and climate, maintenance of soil fertility and cycling of nutrients. These services provided by nature are the basis of sustainable development and of many economic activities.
According to the report, Natura 2000 must be strengthened not only to safeguard species but also to restore them. Biodiversity considerations must be further integrated into agriculture and fisheries policies and into spatial planning at national, regional and local levels.
MEPs also urge a Community response to the threat posed by the introduction - whether voluntary or accidental - of "invasive alien species and alien genotypes" (this is the second threat, after the destruction of habitats). The Commission acknowledges that at present it does not have information on actions taken by the Member States to combat alien species and MEPs underline the decisive role that immuno contraception could play against these species. They ask the Commission to ban the introduction of these species and to evaluate the potential risks that genetically-modified organisms could pose to biodiversity.
They call for measures to regulate deep sea bottom trawling, and to ensure adherence to scientific recommendations when setting catch quotas.
MEPs stress the need to reduce imports of tropical woods and the adverse impact that biofuel production could have on tropical forests. They also advocate stepping up the biodiversity research effort, which they say is currently "far too low."
However clever humans are, they can never make up through artificial means for the natural resources they are destroying. Hence, halting the decline in biodiversity will require "unprecedented efforts in adapting our activities to the needs of natural systems" says Mr Adamou. Not the opposite. Text, as adopted by the EP on 22 May, will be available here in due course
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Environment
Chemical pollution: clean surface water by 2015
2007-05-29 - 12:39
Parliament adopted by 672 votes to 13 with 10 abstentions a first-reading report toughening up proposed rules on improving the quality of surface water. This represents another step on the road to cleaning up Europe's water, following the directives on bathing water in 2005 and groundwater in 2006. This report drafted by Anne Laperrouze (ALDE, FR) deals specifically with the quality of surface water (rivers, lakes and coastal waters) and is one of a number of daughter directives stemming from the framework water directive of 2000. In the two previous cases - bathing water and groundwater - MEPs were obliged to go all the way to conciliation in order to amend the legislation in ways they believed were important.
Almost 70 controlled substances
The Commission proposed fixing environmental quality standards (EQS) for 41 pollutants likely to be found in surface water: pesticides, heavy metals and others. These substances may endanger the survival of ecosystems, and via the food chain, human health itself.
Parliament has now added a number of additional substances to the Commission's list or priority substances. It asks the Commission to ascertain whether these additional substances should not also be classified as "priority hazardous substances" and to make a proposal to Parliament for their final classification not later than 12 months after the directive enters into force.
The Commission had highlighted the co-existence of other legal provisions, in order to avoid getting into too much methodological detail. Parliament wants it specifically to carry out a formal assessment of the consistency and effectiveness of all Community legislative acts with a direct or indirect impact on water quality. And whereas the Commission suggested leaving national authorities more latitude with regard to control methods, MEPs ask it to propose techniques to be used by Member States.
In the vicinity of pollution sources, it will not be possible to comply quickly with environmental quality standards. So the proposed directive provides for "transitional areas of exceedance" close to pollution sources and advocates their progressive reduction, without going into further detail. MEPs demand more, saying that Member States must reduce these areas progressively in order to reach the quality standards by 2018 at the latest.
In its initial proposal, the Commission had suggested limiting checks to surface water, i.e. not biotas (living organisms) and sediments, except for three substances that are more hazardous than others when they accumulate in the food chain: mercury, hexachlorobenzene, and hexachlorobutadien. Here MEPs would instead like the Commission to make a new legislative proposal on the standards applicable to biotas and sediments once Member States have listed the emissions and pollutants in their water.
Under the directive, the environmental quality standards are to be met by 2015 and direct discharges of pollutants into surface water must cease by 2025. Text, as adopted by the EP on 22 May, is available here
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN#
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Environment
EU environment policy stays “European” as EP adopts conciliation deal
2007-05-29 - 12:39
The House approved a conciliation agreement reached with the Council on 27 March 2007 on the funding arrangements for the EU's environmental policy. MEPs managed to ensure in the negotiations with Council that the new financial instrument (known as Life+ ) will continue to provide "EU added value." Life+ will group together environmental programmes which until now came under different procedures and funding arrangements: the former Life programme, Forest Focus, the programme for sustainable urban development and the support programme for environmental NGOs. This new general framework is intended to ensure more efficient, flexible and less bureaucratic management. Life+ is intended to fund environmental programmes for the period 2007-2013.
European dimension safeguarded
In its draft legislation, the Commission proposed that 80% of the funding be delegated to the Member States, without sufficiently emphasising European added value, according to MEPs. The Member States (the Council) wanted a form of indirect management in which the Commission's role would have been limited to approving projects submitted by governments.
MEPs have successfully pushed for a number of guarantees to ensure that this delegated management does not turn into a "re-nationalisation" of environmental policy:
• projects will be selected by the Commission in line with a list of common criteria and priorities;
• lists of projects submitted to the Commission by the Member States will be "indicative" only, even though the Commission is supposed to "take them into account";
• Member States must try to ensure that at least 15 percent of the budget dedicated to project action grants is allocated to transnational projects;
• the share of the budget delegated to Member States will be 78%, with 2% for the Commission to cover administrative costs relating to the central role that MEPs want it to play.
Support for Natura 2000
MEPs also successfully demanded a reorganisation of the way the funds will be spent. The draft legislation had envisaged only two sections: one for implementation of policies and governance, the other for information and communication. The EP has added a third part - "nature and biodiversity" - which should account for at least 50% of the operational budget.
For MEPs, this was a way to increase the funding for Natura 2000, a network of areas where biodiversity is protected, which today covers 18% of the surface area of the EU-15. The annual cost of this network was estimated in 2004 to be €6,100m. Given the reduced budget for Life+, most of the EU funding for Natura 2000 will continue to come from the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF) and the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development (EAFRD).
Projects can now go ahead, even if budget is seen as too modest
The conciliation agreement was approved unanimously on the EP side. Rodi Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou (EPP-ED, EL), who led the EP delegation, said "This deal will enable us to breathe life into Life+ as soon as possible. Interested parties will be able to apply for EU funds very quickly."
"This funding is only a drop in the ocean compared with the Union's annual budget", pointed out rapporteur Marie-Anne Isler Béguin (Greens/EFA, FR), who conducted the negotiations for Parliament and managed to squeeze out a slight increase of €40 million, bringing the total amount for Life+ to some €1.951 billion for the period 2007-2013 (the total EU budget is over €125 billion per year). In the Financial Perspective for 2007-2013, environmental expenditure was cut sharply.
According to Ms Isler Béguin, "It was important for us to preserve the principle of Community management, with common criteria for project selection, a central role for the Commission and with a large proportion of the funds being earmarked for transnational projects - at least 15% - and for biodiversity - at least 50%". Text, as adopted by the EP on 22 May, is available here
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Agriculture
Organic food: European Parliament votes for stricter rules
2007-05-29 - 12:39
Parliament adopted, by 611 votes in favour to 61 against with 23 abstentions, the resolution on organic food products which accompanies the detailed - but non-binding - legislative amendments it adopted in late March. On 29 March MEPs voted for stricter rules governing organic food products on the basis of a consultation report by Marie-Hélène Aubert (Greens/EFA, FR) drawn up in response to the Commission's draft legislation revising the rules on organic products. However, they decided not to vote on their final resolution in order to continue negotiations with the Council so as to have their demands better taken into account. The Member States refused to accept Parliament's demand for a right of co-decision in this legislation, even though it will also affect processed foods, which according to the Treaty come under this procedure.
This week, however, MEPs decided that enough of Parliament's amendments had been accepted by the Council, including some on stricter controls and certification, especially for imports, the clarification of rules on the use of logos and the consultation of interested parties.
"Unfortunately, the latest talks did not lead to progress on key points", commented Mrs Aubert, citing in particular the Council's refusal to agree to co-decision and to drop the derogations it wishes to include on the subject of additives produced by GMOs. "But you can count on me to follow this subject closely over the coming months", she added.
The report as adopted by Parliament thus makes a number of amendments to the Commission's draft legislation (although these amendments are not binding on the Council). In addition to toughening up the controls and clarifying the rules on the use of logos, it recommends lowering to 0.1% the tolerated threshold for accidental contamination by GMOs and strengthening the rules on the use of plant-health and veterinary products.
MEPs had called by an overwhelming majority for the regulation to be subject to co-decision between Parliament and Council, since it does not cover only agricultural production (on which the EP only has the right to be consulted). They also say the regulation should cover the catering industry and not just retail sales. Text, as adopted by the EP on 22 May, is available here
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Agriculture
Maize: Parliament against sudden abolition of intervention system
2007-05-29 - 12:39
Parliament called for more flexibility in the Commission's plans for scrapping the Community intervention system for the maize market from this year. A three-year transition period, reducing this annual public purchase system to zero, would be better for the sector, MEPs concluded. With the plenary vote, the European Parliament has departed from the position advocated by rapporteur Béla Glattfelder (EPP-ED, HU) and the Agriculture Committee, who wanted to reject the Commission's proposal. The full Parliament instead voted for a package of amendments tabled by Socialist, Liberal and Green MEPs seeking to reduce public buying-in of maize gradually over a three-year period.
MEPs believe the sudden abolition of the intervention scheme as of this year would hit the new Member States hard, when spring sowing has already begun. They propose to cap the amounts of maize bought into intervention at 2 million tonnes for 2007/2008, 1 million tonnes in 2008/2009 and zero tonnes from 2009/2010.
Parliament also calls on the Commission to present by 31 December 2008 a report evaluating trends in the maize market, the economic situation of the sector and the possible abolition or extension of the intervention scheme, accompanied by fresh legislative proposals if appropriate.
During the debate preceding the vote, Benita Ferrero-Waldner, speaking on behalf of Agriculture Commissioner Mariann Fischer-Boel, said the Commission would be "prepared to discuss a phased reduction in intervention stocks." The EP - whose amendments are not binding on the Council, which will soon adopt the draft regulation - has thus moved close to recent compromise proposals made to the Member States by the German presidency. This subject could be on the agenda of the next Agriculture Council on 11 and 12 June.
Differing views on the market situation
The EU intervention system for cereals (maize, wheat, barley and sorghum) consists of a single price of €101.31 per tonne paid to farmers who sell their crops into public storage if they cannot sell them on the market.
According to the Commission, Community stocks were 5.6 million tonnes in 2005/2006 and could reach 15.6 million tonnes by 2013. It stresses that growers in regions where production costs are lower and who are further from the main areas of consumption (chiefly Hungary) have an interest in selling into intervention rather than trying to export.
Parliament's rapporteur argued, on the basis of professional forecasts, that the Commission's analysis assumes a linear increase in stocks which does not reflect market trends: a currently high market price of around €120/tonne, a lower than average crop yield in 2006 and a fall in intervention stocks to 4.28 million tonnes at the end of 2006, together with an expected increase in world consumption and a growing biofuels market, which is set to be an important market for maize.
The EU-27 produces over 60 million tonnes of maize per year. France is the biggest grower with around 13 million tonnes, followed by Italy and Romania (about 10 million each) and Hungary (9 million). Adopted text
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert.do#
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Agriculture
CAP: yes to simplification, no to policy changes by the back door
2007-05-29 - 12:39
Parliament approved on 24 May the European Commission's proposal to simplify the EU's common agricultural policy by merging the 21 existing sector-specific market organisations (CMOs) into a single regulation. However, MEPs say this decision should be solely "an act of technical simplification" and must not introduce reforms through the back door. Parliament's report, drafted by Niels Busk (ALDE, DK) and adopted under the consultation procedure by 468 votes to 14 with no abstentions, confirms the position of the EP Agriculture Committee of 8 May. MEPs agree that the new regulation should give the Commission powers to adopt market management decisions of a technical nature, i.e. secondary acts previously adopted by the EU Council of ministers. This will enable decisions to be taken swiftly and effectively.
Keep pig market intervention, include wines and fruit and vegetables later
All political provisions, however, should continue to be adopted by the Council after consulting the European Parliament, the committee insists. For this reason, Members reject the idea of scrapping the intervention scheme for pig meat as part of this simplification.
Moreover, MEPs argue that CMOs currently under revision, namely the fruit and vegetable and wine sectors, should not be incorporated into the new regulation yet, as this would prejudge the outcome of the reforms.
Four management committees to ensure sectoral expertise
According to Parliament, establishing a single management committee for all agricultural sectors as suggested by the Commission would raise doubts as to how to ensure that the necessary sectoral expertise is available. The report therefore calls for the setting up of four management committees, one for meat, one for dairy products, one for vegetables and one for perennial crops.
Keep carcass classification system and import licences
Parliament recommends that the carcass classification system should continue to be established by the Council and not by the Commission.
Mandatory import licenses should continue to be required for cereals, sugar, rice, flax and hemp, as well as products from the milk, beef and veal sectors and the olive sector, with derogations only for cereal products, sugar or rice and then only under certain conditions.
Contracts for sugar beet, interbranch organisations
MEPs also say that framework rules governing contractual relations between buyers and sellers of sugar beet should only lay down minimum guarantees because of the difficulty of providing for uniform purchase terms throughout the Community.
Lastly, they suggest that the new regulation should refer to "organisations of an interbranch nature" rather than "interbranch organisations" to ensure that all sectoral bodies are targeted, whatever their designation or status.
The ball is now in the court of the agriculture ministers, who are due to debate this matter at their next Council meeting on 11 and 12 June in Luxembourg. Adopted text
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert.do#
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Fisheries
EC-Russia agreement on cooperation in fisheries in the Baltic Sea
2007-05-29 - 12:39
The EP adopted a non-binding report recommending the conclusion of an Agreement between the European Community and Russia on cooperation in fisheries and the conservation of the living marine resources in the Baltic Sea. The Agreement has been concluded for an initial period of six years and will not entail any changes to the current structure of the Community fleet in the Baltic Sea nor on the way shared stocks are managed. The report, drafted by the Chair of the Fisheries Committee - Philippe MORILLON (ALDE, FR), was adopted by 570 votes in favour to 9 against with 11 abstentions.
The EP introduces a new article to the Commission proposal, stating that prior to the opening of negotiations on its possible renewal the Commission shall submit to the European Parliament and to the Council general assessment reports analysing the impact of the agreement on the conservation of resources and the protection of the environment and the economic and social repercussions of its application.
The objective of the new Agreement is to ensure close co-operation between the EC and Russia on the basis of the principle of equitable and mutual benefit for the purpose of conservation, sustainable exploitation and management of all straddling, associated and dependent stocks in the Baltic Sea. It sets out provisions on joint management measures, licensing, compliance with conservation and management measures and other fisheries regulations, control and enforcement co-operation, inspections, arrest and detention of vessels, scientific co-operation and anadromous and catadromous species.
This new Agreement will replace the Gdansk Convention, which ceased to apply on 1 January 2007, and the existing bilateral fisheries Agreements between the Member States and the Russian Federation. Following the accession of Sweden and Finland to the Community in 1995 and Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Poland in 2004, elements of the fisheries agreements pertaining to maritime fisheries in the Baltic Sea concluded between these countries and Russia are now managed by the EC.
To achieve the objectives of this Agreement, a Joint Baltic Sea Fisheries Committee will be established, which will act as an important forum for scientific advice on the status of fish stocks in the Baltic Sea and on fisheries management.
Background
With the Russian Federation being responsible for only about 5% of the fishery resources of the Baltic Sea in very limited areas around Kaliningrad and St Petersburg, and with all waters in the Baltic Sea now under national jurisdiction, the Community’s view was that an international Convention between the two Parties was an inappropriate and disproportionate mechanism for discharging the Parties’ obligations to co-operate on fisheries management.
Instead it was considered that the fishery resources in the Baltic Sea should better be managed within the framework of a bilateral fisheries agreement between the European Community and the Russian Federation, which for the time-being should be limited to the Baltic Sea. In accordance with the Treaties of Accession, such an agreement should also integrate the existing bilateral Agreements between Russia and Estonia, Finland, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland and Sweden respectively within a single bilateral agreement.
The Russian Federation at this stage has preferred not to extend the geographical scope of the Agreement beyond the Baltic. There are nevertheless provisions in the Agreement that would allow for a possible extension in the future if this is felt to be desirable by both Parties. It would, however, require a new or amended mandate to start negotiations which could entail fishing rights for Russian vessels in Community waters outside the Baltic Sea. Text, as adopted by the EP on 22 May, is available here
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Fisheries
Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the EC, Denmark and Greenland
2007-05-29 - 12:39
With a view to replacing the Fisheries Agreement of 1985, the European Community, Denmark and Greenland have negotiated a new Fisheries Partnership Agreement which provides EC fishermen with fishing opportunities in waters in the exclusive economic zone of Greenland for a period of six years. The EP approved the conclusion of this Agreement with some amendments. In a report by Joop POST (EPP-ED, NL), MEPs adopted amendments to the Commission proposal concerning the compensation involving fishing opportunities and the right to adjust the quotas after 2010 in case they are found not to be in line with the EU’s own policy on sustainability.
In order to evaluate whether the compensation paid by the EU is properly accounted for and does in fact promote the sustainable use of fishery resources in Greenland, the Commission should report annually to the Parliament. MEPs also add that vessels that do not comply with the most basic requirement, reporting what they catch, should not benefit from financial support from the EU.
The proposed new Fisheries Partnership Agreement, which will be valid for a period of six years, beginning on 1 January 2007, differs from the previous agreement in a number of ways. The changes can be summarised as:
– reduction of the redfish, Greenland halibut East and snow crab quota in accordance with the scientific advice;
– increase in the quotas of Greenland halibut West of 1.000 tonnes and the shrimp East by 1.325 tonnes;
– removal of the direct fishery for roundnose grenadier in accordance with scientific advice as well as underutilisation by only allowing by-catches of this species;
– introduction of a cod quota of 1,000 tonnes in 2007 to be increased to 3,500 tonnes from 2008 and onwards.
The Agreement’s main objectives are to set out the principles and rules governing EC - Greenlandic fishery issues by encouraging economic, financial, technical and scientific co-operation in the fisheries sectors, promoting responsible fishing in Greenlandic waters, developing the fishing sector in Greenland, allowing Community fishing vessels access to the Greenlandic exclusive economic zone (EEZ), setting out the arrangements for regulating Community vessels operating in the EEZ, regulating measures aimed at conserving and managing fish stocks, preventing illegal, undeclared and unregulated fishing and encouraging partnerships between companies the purpose of which is to encourage fishing activities of common interest.
As far as the financial contribution is concerned, the EC proposes €15,847,244 per year. This includes a financial reserve of €1,540,000 to be paid in case the Community receives fishing opportunities for cod and/or capelin in addition to the quotas already set out in the Annex of the Agreement. An annual financial support of €3,261,449 will be earmarked for defining and implementing a sectoral fisheries policy in Greenland. On top of the financial contribution from the Community budget, the ship owners’ fees, fixed for each species as 5% of the average reference prices paid to Greenland, could amount to around €2m.
The minimum quantities for maintaining Greenlandic fishing activities are set, per year, as:
- Snowcrab: Western stock: 4,000;
- Cod: Western stock and Eastern stock: 30,000;
- Redfish: Western stock: 2.500; Eastern stock: 5,000;
- Greenland halibut: Western stock: 4.700; Eastern stock: 4,000; and
- Shrimp: Western stock: 25,000; Eastern stock: 1,500.
Background
The EC-Greenland Fisheries Agreement has acted as the main conduit for European financing programmes, be they fisheries related or not. Recognising the indistinct nature of such an arrangement the Council, acting upon advice from the Court of Auditors and the European Parliament, has urged the Commission to propose a new comprehensive partnership with Greenland upon the expiry of the Fisheries Agreement on 31 December 2006. The future comprehensive strategy will be based on a two pillar system:
- a Fisheries Agreement, entailing a clear identification of the payment corresponding to effective fishing possibilities – the purpose of the present proposal; and
- a specific Decision governing co-operation between the EU and Greenland which is not related to fisheries. Text, as adopted by the EP on 22 May, is available here
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Free movement of services
MEPs urge EU action on health services
2007-05-29 - 12:39
The European Parliament adopted a report on the consequences of excluding health services from the Services Directive, urging the Commission to propose "an appropriate instrument" to codify the case law of the Court of Justice, but stopping short of calling for separate legislation on health services. The own-initiative report, as amended, was backed by 514 votes in favour to 132 against with 8 abstentions. Anticipating possible legislation on patients' mobility in the EU and reacting to a Commission consultation document on "Community action in the field of health care services", MEPs voted on a series of recommendations on EU action in the health sector.
Bearing in mind the progressive increase in cross-border mobility of patients and health professionals, MEPs agree that - with regard to access to health services - Member States should treat all EU residents on an equal basis, "regardless of whether they are private or public patients".
Noting how difficult it is to obtain clear and precise information on health care, the Parliament called for the creation of "single points of contact" for patients, health professionals and healthcare institutions.
Since "Treaty rules [...], as well as the jurisprudence of the European Court of Justice (ECJ), apply to health services, health service providers are fully entitled to establish and provide services in any Member State, following national and EU rules" says the report.
In the same vein, the EP turned down the rapporteur's call for a separate directive on health services, choosing instead to ask the Commission to propose "an appropriate instrument with a view, in particular, to codifying the [pertinent] case law of the ECJ". "Given that the Commission proposal to deal with health issues in the Services Directive was not accepted by the European Parliament and the Council", says the text, the EP "insists that further action is now required to preserve existing rights [and] calls on the Commission [...] to guarantee the safeguarding of those rights:" MEPs, in that vein, also call "for the adoption of a European charter of patients' rights." Text adopted
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert.do#
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External/international trade
Economic Partnership Agreements: MEPs call for less onerous conditions imposed on ACP countries
2007-05-29 - 12:39
The EU needs to reach new trade agreements with the African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) countries - known as Economic Partnership Agreements - by 1 January 2008. These would replace the current system of generalised preferences, which is incompatible with WTO rules. Given the delay in the talks and the lack of readiness on the part of the ACP countries. MEPs call in a report, adopted by 550 votes in favour to 59 against with 59 abstentions, for the Commission to make the conditions for the agreements less onerous for these countries.
The three objectives of these agreements - to facilitate access for ACP products to the European market via a free-trade area, to develop South-South trade and to support the process of regional integration - are causing concern in ACP countries, so the own-initiative report, drawn up by Robert STURDY (EPP-ED, UK) calls for the "pacing, timing and scope of liberalisation to be gradual and flexible in order to improve ACP regional integration and competitiveness."
MEPs ask for "duty-free, quota-free market access for the ACP as well as simplified, liberalised and more flexible rules of origin in EPAs that is the case under EBA [the 'Everything but Arms' initiative]".
Safeguard mechanism
If agreements are not reached by 1 January 2008, when the derogation granted by the WTO comes to an end, the House asks the Commission "not to exert undue pressure and […] to make efforts at WTO level to seek to ensure that disruption of existing ACP exports to the EU is avoided pending a final settlement."
The EP also urges the negotiators not to work under excessive pressure or in a hurry on such complex and extremely important negotiations". The state of advancement of the negotiations differs substantially between the various regions concerned. Talks with Central Africa, West Africa, East Africa, the Caribbean and Pacific countries are making slow progress, while the group of southern African countries has moved ahead more quickly. MEPs call for the special case of the EU countries’ overseas regions and territories to be taken fully into account in the EPA negotiations, especially the outermost regions referred to in Article 299(2) of the EC Treaty.
To counter the effects of ending the system of non-reciprocal preferential tariffs, MEPs are calling for safeguard mechanisms to permit ACP regions to react to surges in imports from the EU, particularly of agricultural products. On the liberalisation of key services such as water, transport and energy, the report asks that this should respect the right of each country freely to regulate its public services.
The House calls for "the ACP to bring forward, with appropriate EU-assistance where required, detailed, costed proposals of how and for what additional EPA-related funds are needed, particularly with regard to: regulatory frameworks, safeguard measures, trade facilitation, support in meeting international SPS (Sanitary and Phytosanitary) and IP (Intellectual Property) standards, the composition of the EPA monitoring mechanism."
Rapporteur Robert Sturdy said: "This report highlights the complexity of establishing a forward programme for trade relations between the EU and the ACP, two very different and largely unequal groups which share a common goal to strengthen trade as a means of real development. Idealistic as this may sound, I have received a great deal of support from both the Commission and the representatives of the ACP regions and, despite the many concerns expressed by NGOs and political groups, they and I, and I am sure the Commission, remain optimistic.
My report makes a number of recommendations: simplified, liberalised and more flexible rules of origin, full duty-free, quota-free market access for the ACP, workable safeguards, dispute settlement and monitoring mechanisms with transparent provisions and a real power to act in the event of changes caused by EPAs having a harmful effect on sectors of ACP economies. These are the positive aspects and need to be correctly framed in negotiations. We need to know how these mechanisms will work and to build trust and ensure that Europe will be as keen to help implement these mechanisms as the ACP countries."
Singapore issues - basic public services and parliamentary scrutiny
But the House is also worried about the impact of falling customs revenue on ACP budgets, which could entail public spending cuts in key sectors such as education or health; calls on the EU to set up the compensation mechanisms required to avert consequences of this sort. MEPs recall the fact that 77 poor countries opposed the inclusion of negotiations on Singapore issues in the DDA agenda. Bilateral negotiations on trade in services must abstain from pressuring ACP countries into offering any liberalisation of basic public services. Concerning Labour standards, MEPs want to ensure the implementation of Article 50 of the Cotonou Agreement, which includes a specific provision on trade and labour standards and which confirms the parties' commitments to core labour standards.
Finally, the report calls for the creation of a Parliamentary Oversight Committee on EPAs, to be made up of EU and ACP parliamentarians, which would meet alongside the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly, rather than as a separate institution. Additional parliamentary scrutiny is recommended with a regular follow-up by the relevant Committee of the JPA and by European and ACP parliamentarians in plenary sessions. Text adopted
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert.do#
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External/international trade
Aid for trade should focus on Least Developed Countries say MEPs
2007-05-29 - 12:39
In a report adopted by 598 votes in favour to 33 against with 32 abstentions, drafted by David MARTIN (PES, UK), the EP says that Aid for Trade is needed to enable all developing countries, particularly least developed countries (LDCs) to better integrate into the multilateral trading system and to use trade more effectively in promoting the overarching objective of poverty eradication in the context of sustainable development. According to the EP, the principles of the 2007 Joint European Strategy on EU's Aid for Trade (Aft) should be to prioritise LDCs and the most vulnerable developing countries. Aft should be expeditiously implemented regardless of the conclusion of the Doha Round. Country ownership is crucial : Aft must be recipient-driven and be designed and implemented as an integral part of developing countries' own economic and developmental strategies. Another issue underlined by the report is the timeliness and predictability of the delivery of funding. AfT should be delivered in time to address both short- and long-term priorities.
Financial resources to be allocated
The report recalls that the EU has committed to increasing its overall ODA to 0,56% of GDP by 2010, which corresponds to EUR 20 billion in additional aid (49). The EP calls on the Commission to explain in a specific work programme how it is going to implement its pledge to increase current and planned Community funding to support AfT from the current average of approximately EUR 850 million per year to EUR 1 billion per year 52).
David MARTIN (PES, UK, Labour), rapporteur said: "On the substance, Aid for Trade is a vital tool for linking developing countries to the global economy. However, I want to stress at the outset that it is not a substitute for the Doha Development Round, but a complement to it. It is clear that liberalising markets is not sufficient in itself to link developing countries into the global economy. You just have to look at the experience of the last 40 years: LDCs have seen their share of world trade almost halved from 1.9% to 1%, and this is despite tariff reductions following the Uruguay Round and other tariff reductions and recent efforts such as the European Everything but Arms scheme, which gives duty-free and quota-free access to developing countries. Therefore, liberalisation, which I would argue is important, clearly of itself has not been enough to engage the developing countries fully in the global economy.
I also do not argue – and I want to make this clear – that Aid for Trade is of itself a panacea. However, it is quite clear that there is now a growing consensus on the benefits that Aid for Trade might bring. The WTO ministerial meeting in Hong Kong in December 2005 set out an ambitious work programme for Aid for Trade and called for more assistance to help developing countries into the global economy. This followed Mr Barroso’s commitment at the G8 Summit in Gleneagles of GBP 1 billion of European Union money and GBP 1 billion of Member States’ money to assist in the Aid for Trade budget line."
MEPs recognise, however, that as the pledge is only to be in relation to trade related assistance, there is a danger that available finance may be pushed toward this narrower strand of AfT in order to fulfil this target, and may prevent AfT being genuinely demand-led where countries or regions prioritise trade related infrastructure and adjustment; calls on the Commission to address this concern in the joint strategy. Text adopted
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert.do#
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Employment policy
More effort needed to promote decent work for all
2007-05-29 - 12:39
MEPs gave strong backing to a report by the Employment and Social Affairs Committee which seeks to promote decent work for everyone, both inside and outside the EU. The report urges EU Member States and candidate countries to ratify and fully implement all relevant conventions of the International Labour Organisation (ILO) and calls for a decent work development programme and minimum wages. The own-initiative report voices disappointment that most countries have not ratified the ILO Conventions on health and safety at work, maternity protection and migrant workers.
It argues that the implementation of ILO conventions should be part of the EU's neighbourhood and external policies and also calls for a decent work development programme funded by the EU in cooperation with the ILO.
In addition, the EU should consider setting up mechanisms to monitor the parallel evolution of trade and decent work at European and international level.
Trade preferences with countries "which seriously and systematically breach fundamental social rights" should be temporarily suspended, says the report. It also proposes that the ILO be authorised to submit expert reports to the World Trade Organisation (WTO) in cases where the violation of international conventions is disputed and where the ILO's decisions have to be taken into account. Moreover, compliance with international work standards should be part of the negotiations for the accession of new member states to the WTO.
To improve working conditions within the EU, MEPs call for broader access to lifelong learning, greater harmonisation of pension schemes and minimum wages "as a safety-net to prevent people from being exploited".
The report was drafted on behalf of the Employment Committee by Marie Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou (EPP-ED, EL). Text adopted
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert.do#
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External relations
MEPs call for a common European foreign policy more in line with citizens' wishes
2007-05-29 - 12:39
The European Union must bring its foreign policy goals in line with its citizens' wishes, says a report adopted by a large majority in the European Parliament on Wednesday, 23 May. It emphasises the need for internal steps, such as implementing certain measures proposed in the Constitutional Treaty, and setting external priorities, for example the fight against poverty, in order to have a common European voice in international affairs. The own-initiative report by Elmar BROK (EPP-ED, DE) on the annual report from the Council on the Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP) in 2005, was adopted by a large majority (526 votes in favour to 118 against with 14 abstentions). It suggests that the EU's foreign policy "should target a limited number of areas which better connect with the wishes and concerns of European citizens and their expectations of the role to be played by the Union in international affairs." Members particularly emphasised that "much more should be done from an external action perspective to halt the spread of poverty in the world." They also underline energy security and addressing the root causes of immigration as important priorities.
On non-proliferation, the report specifically expresses its concern "regarding the first test of an anti-satellite weapon carried out by China in January 2007." MEPs were also concerned by recent declarations of Russian President Vladimir Putin regarding the planned anti-missile shield installations in Poland and the Czech Republic, especially Russia's unwillingness to continue abiding by the CFE Treaty (Conventional Forces in Europe). On this matter, MEPs called on the United States to improve its efforts on consulting NATO members and Russia on its plans for a missile defence system. The Parliament also stressed the need to "implement the international non-proliferation system in all its aspects," in particular the CWC (Chemical Weapons Convention), the Ottawa Treaty (banning landmines) and the CTBT (Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty).
The House calls for maintaining "the enlargement of the Union as a key objective of the Union's political agenda in 2007, albeit one which must be consistent with the Union's capacity to integrate new Member States." Members also noted some priorities for areas far outside of Europe, calling for more EU action in Afghanistan, the Middle East, Kosovo and in strengthening the transatlantic partnership.
The Constitutional Treaty and CFSP financing
"Without the Constitutional Treaty, [...] the European Union cannot shape a foreign policy that can at least partially meet the most important challenges," the report says. It argues in favour of establishing a mutual assistance clause, an office of Minister of Foreign Affairs, a European External Action Service, and an EU Diplomatic Academy. The House also took the view that "without the introduction of qualified majority voting in CFSP matters, the coherence, effectiveness and visibility of the external action of the Union will be deeply undermined."
On the issue of the CFSP budget, MEPs regret that "that the specific article within the CFSP budget chapter devoted to European Union Special Representatives does not avoid the proliferation of envoys of that kind," which the Parliament thinks undermines the role of the Commission's delegations on the ground. The House therefore pointed to the need to establish criteria for the appointment and evaluation of EU Special Representatives.
Furthermore, the EP is unsatisfied with the fact that "the new Inter-institutional Agreement does not change the existing rules on European Security and Defence Policy (ESDP) operations, such as the principle that 'costs lie where they fall'," which in effect places the financial cost of any military operation on the Member State who provides the troops to accomplish it. This is a disincentive for governments to pledge troops, and could be avoided if such operations were financed directly from the EU's budget, the report argues.
Improving European Parliament oversight
The House also stresses the need to involve the Parliament more closely in the elaboration and oversight of CFSP goals. "The Council's practice of merely informing Parliament and submitting a descriptive list of CFSP activities carried out in the previous year, instead of really consulting Parliament at the beginning of each year [...] constitutes a de facto infringement of the very substance of Article 21" of the EU treaties says the report. It therefore calls for more active consultation of the Parliament on the CFSP in general, while also calling for additional powers, for instance "by conferring on Parliament the authority to appoint, and dismiss, the Counter-Terrorism Coordinator and the Directors of SitCen, the EU Satellite Centre (EUSC) and Eurojust." Adopted text
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert.do#
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External relations
MEPs support bilateral talks, urge action on democracy and human rights in Kashmir
2007-05-29 - 12:39
MEPs welcome and encourage bilateral talks between India and Pakistan to find a solution to the Kashmir conflict, while criticising Pakistan for lack of progress on democracy and human rights. The own-initiative report by Baroness Emma Nicholson of Winterbourne (ALDE, UK), passed by an overwhelming majority in the plenary in Strasbourg. (522 votes in favour 9 against with 19 abstentions). MEPs emphasised that the recent "earthquake has had an immense impact on the lives of the Kashmiris on both sides of the Line of Control (LoC)," although "the size and impact of the earthquake had a much greater effect on the Pakistani side." They recommended that the EU consider favourably any further requests for assistance for reconstruction in the area, while also emphasising that the EU "take a firm stance in upholding the democracy and human rights clause in its agreements with both India and Pakistan."
The report welcomes the increase in the number of visas issued for travel between India and Pakistan, as well as the re-opening of truck and bus services, but adds that it is vital to remove "all obstructions and hindrances for all Kashmiris to travel freely to the entire state." It also argues for setting up exchange programmes, including a common University.
Political settlement
The House believes that the "resolution of the continuing conflict along the LoC can best be achieved jointly by a constant engagement between the governments of India and Pakistan, involving the peoples of all parts of the former princely state." It also commended both countries on the peace moves underway, and welcomed the restoration of bilateral talks. The report reaffirms that "all peoples have the inalienable right of self-determination," while pointing to the fact that "the pre-conditions for invoking the plebiscite have not been met at present."
Human rights and democracy
Although stressing that India and Pakistan (along with China) are both important EU partners, MEPs also note that "India is the world's largest secular democracy and has devolved democratic structures at all levels," while "Pakistan still lacks full implementation of democracy in AJK, [...] has yet to take steps towards democracy in Gilgit and Baltistan," and "President Musharraf has not been able to implement his undertaking made in 1999 that 'the armed forces have no intention of staying in charge any longer than is absolutely necessary to pave the way for true democracy to flourish in Pakistan.'"
MEPs also regret the "negative chain of events set in motion by the suspension of Chief Justice Iftikhar Muhammed Chaudhry" and deplored the recent outbreaks of violence in Pakistan They also regretted the "continuing ambivalence of the current Government of Pakistan with regard to the ethnic identity of Gilgit and Baltistan." The report calls on Pakistan to ensure free and fair elections in the AJK, Gilgit and Baltistan.
The House also expresses concern at "documented human rights violations by Pakistan" in Gilgit and Baltistan and at reports of torture and mistreatment, discrimination, and corruption in AJK. It also calls on the Indian government to "put an end to all practices of extrajudicial killings, 'disappearances', torture and arbitrary detention in Jammu and Kashmir," and to establish an independent commission of inquiry into serious violations of human rights by Indian security forces. MEPs call on both governments to allow international human rights groups access to the region for investigations, and stressed "the risk of maintaining the death penalty in a complex political situation" such as the one in the region, arguing for a moratorium to be established.
British speakers in the debate preceding the vote - 24 May 2007
An "enlightened and balanced report" on the situation in Kashmir, which "highlights the common heritage shared by India and Pakistan" and "makes clear its support for the current peace process", was presented by the rapporteur Baroness NICHOLSON OF WINTERBOURNE (ALDE, UK), at the opening of the debate.
Baroness Nicholson said that the report, "correctly contrasts the situation" between India, a democracy which has "evolved structures at all levels", and Pakistan, which "still lacks full implementation of democracy [.]" The report expresses concerns that Pakistan "has encouraged militants to commit atrocities on the Indian-administered side" and stresses that the report "takes a firm line on human rights abuses."
Shared values
The report focuses on promoting an appreciation of the "pluralism, multiculturalism and multi-faith nature and secular traditions" of Kashmir, in addition to promoting the "economic integration of commerce between peoples on both sides of the border" with a system "along the lines of the European Union model."
The report is also "strong on human rights" and "denounces terrorism and those who support terrorism." It therefore "reflects many principles of the European Union" and is of great importance to the European Parliament, which is "keenly interested in all aspects of the situation."
Charles TANNOCK (EPP-ED, UK) began with a reference to the "tragic and bloody dispute" between India and Pakistan, which "is one of the oldest in the world." He congratulated Baroness Nicholson on the "content and quality" of the report, in particular the "accurate tone" in which it was written. The report, Mr Tannock continued, "highlights the lack of genuine democracy" in the region. The EU should help the process towards "a just and enduring peace", he said, "but only if both sovereign governments ask for our help."
James ELLES (EPP-ED, UK) "warmly welcomed" the debate on Kashmir and yet said that the report contained "still some areas where I remain unhappy." Mr Elles expressed concern over "the question of machine-readable Pakistan passports" and warned that "we have to be careful to keep the report factual." Despite these concerns, Mr Elles welcomed the report as "a positive message of shining a light on the problems which are faced on a daily basis by the people of Jammu and Kashmir."
Richard HOWITT (PES UK) began by stating that "our role in relation to Kashmir should be to support peace processes and to uphold international law." The approach taken, he said, should be "balanced, constructive, diplomatic [.]" Mr Howitt was disappointed with the report, claiming of the rapporteur that "she has done only harm."
Sajjad KARIM (ALDE, UK), said that "my group's passion must be self-determination, self-determination, self-determination." The EU must "support the positive ideas now coming forward", Mr Karim said, and stressed that "it is not for us to take any options off the table." The EU's role should be to "protect the most vulnerable in the short-term and secure their livelihoods in the long-term", with the "core goals" of "peace, justice and self-determination for the generation of Kashmiris to come."
Jean LAMBERT (Greens/EFA, UK) said that conditions for a plebiscite "should not be set aside." The conflict over Kashmir has, she continued, "brought the world nearer to nuclear conflict than anything else since the 1960s", and therefore the issue is "hugely important." What is needed is the "normalisation of relations at every level, grass roots to political" and the "softening of the border as an interim measure."
Neena GILL (PES, UK) said that in time the report "will become an authoritative report on the issue." It has "brought out into the open for the first time the conditions prevailing not only in Kashmir but also in northern areas." She added that "one of the outcomes I hope will be more democracy and greater democratic structures" and hoped that the report "will lead to improvements on all fronts for the people of Kashmir."
Elizabeth LYNNE (ALDE, UK) supported the amendment calling for "the Kashmiri people to exercise their right to self-determination to a plebiscite in the future", adding that "all people should have a right to determine their own destiny." The report, she said, "seemed to be concentrating a great deal on the shortcomings of the Pakistan Government within Pakistan, rather than taking a balanced approach relating to both India and Pakistan's failures in Jammu and Kashmir generally." She concluded by saying that "no solution can be achieved without the Kashmir people having the final say themselves." Text adopted
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert.do#
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Economic and monetary affairs
Proposal on excise duties on alcohol rejected - issue referred back to committee
2007-05-29 - 12:39
After a series of close votes on amendments to the Commission's proposal to increase the EU-wide minimum levels of excise duty on alcoholic drinks in line with inflation, Parliament voted to reject the proposal altogether at the final vote - there were 198 votes in favour, 355 against and 39 abstentions. Under Parliament's rules, the issue was, therefore, referred back to the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee. The rapporteur - Astrid LULLING (EPP-ED, LU) - had proposed to scrap the minimum levels of duty altogether, while amendments from the Socialist group aimed at increasing the levels of duty by less than the Commission originally proposed, in line with inflation since the 2004 enlargement rather than since the minimum levels were first introduced in 1992.
Parliament's position on the issue - as is normally the case for taxation matters - is consultative. In such cases, where MEPs vote against a proposal, and the Commission does not immediately withdraw it, the issue is automatically referred back to the relevant committee.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Budget
Financial aid for transport and energy networks
2007-05-29 - 12:39
Parliament approved the Council common position on Community financial aid in the field of trans-European transport and energy networks, thus winding up the process at second reading. This regulation adapts existing financial instruments and will allow for a higher Community co-financing rate, especially for projects which are of a cross-border nature, have a transit function or cross natural barriers. It should lead to a better use of the existing networks, the removal of bottlenecks and the completion of missing links, thus increasing efficiency and competitiveness, reducing saturation points and enhancing the long-term viability of such networks.
Key points of the compromise agreed between EP and Council, including successes for Parliament, include the following:
- Community co-financing levels are set at:
. a maximum of 20% for TEN-T of the eligible cost
. 30% for cross-border projects and 30 priority projects
. 10% in the field of energy.
- Delayed projects can now be cancelled after four years instead of the two years Council wanted. The European Investment Bank will, in addition to the public-private partnership system, offer new instruments in the form of loan guarantees for a maximum of €500m until 2013.
Parliament's rapporteur was Mario MAURO (EPP-ED, IT). The regulation will enter into force on the twentieth day following its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union. Adopted text
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert.do#
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-024-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Justice and home affairs
MEPs call for "significant legislative progress" in the fight against organised crime
2007-05-29 - 12:39
Existing legislation needs to be adapted in order to "bolster investigatory strategies" in the fight against organised crime, according to a report adopted by the EP. The author of the report, Bill NEWTON DUNN (ALDE, UK), says that changes need to be made in areas such as "the obtaining of evidence and its admissibility, or financial information for the purpose of identifying and then neutralising the proceeds of crime." The report states that the relevant authorities must "urgently adapt the means and methods available" to them.
Action needed to "catch up with the reality"
The report urges that Council "call on the Member States to extend, as soon as possible, the use of special investigation techniques and promote the creation of joint investigation teams" as part of a drive to catch up with the "ultra sophisticated cooperation between the various criminal groups." To improve understanding of these criminal phenomena, the report calls for more effective "information channels between actors" which, together with "focusing and networking statistical tools" will ensure that "the intelligence disseminated not only provides an accurate assessment of organised crime but is comparable and proposes intelligible strategies and recommendations for action which the agencies active on the ground can apply."
Europol and Eurojust
The report also calls for "the necessary autonomy" to be given to the European Police Office (Europol) and the European Union's Judicial Co-operation Unit (Eurojust), by granting them "full powers of initiative within their respective fields of responsibility", thus enabling them to become "leaders in the fight against organised crime on a Europe-wide scale." The report cautions however that the extension of such powers must not undermine the activities of national authorities or lead to "imbalances or duplication", and thus any such expansion must be carried out with "genuine Parliamentary oversight."
Terrorism
Member States should continue to maintain "the utmost vigilance with regard to possible links between terrorist organisations and organised criminal groups, particularly in connection with money laundering and the funding of terrorism", the report says. In addition, the report urges to Council to "continue and intensify the [efforts] to [develop] a genuine ‘Internal Security Architecture’."
The Council is also asked to adopt "a strict framework including binding guarantees as regards fundamental rights" when drawing up EU policy on tackling organised crime.
Public support
The support of the general public towards such measures is "one of the conditions for success in the fight against organised crime" and the report calls for a "significant effort to inform the general public of the successes achieved through good cooperation between the various law enforcement agencies and legal bodies" highlighting the need to raise awareness of "the value added by EU initiatives in this area of vital importance for citizens." Adopted text
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert.do#
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-025-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Research and innovation
A new innovation strategy for Europe
2007-05-29 - 12:39
Europe needs a broad-based innovation strategy to boost its competitiveness. To facilitate the knowledge transfer between research centres and businesses, the European Parliament suggests the creation of 'knowledge regions', new measures to protect inventors, and tax incentives for enterprises which invest in research and innovation. This was the message of a report adopted by the House at the May plenary in Strasbourg. "The paradox of the situation in Europe is that we have highly developed centres for the development of knowledge - centres of excellence, but with little economic impetus to use that knowledge as a basis for developing innovative activities", states rapporteur Adam GIEREK (PES, PL). To improve the knowledge transfer between research centres and industry, the EP, therefore, encourages the Member States to promote 'knowledge regions' or 'clusters' - i.e. regional networks of businesses, suppliers, and research centres, such as Silicon Valley in the USA. These knowledge regions should build on the experiences of Euroregions and EUREKA clusters. EUREKA is a pan-European intergovernmental research initiative with the aim to launch longer-term, strategically significant industrial projects e.g. in the fields of Information and Communications Technology (ICT), energy and biotechnology.
Furthermore, MEPs stress that a future European Institute of Technology (EIT) should invest in the relationship between knowledge institutions and businesses through a focus on innovation. Such an institute should help "to boost competition in innovation fields" and could make "a significant contribution to translating Europe’s potential for innovation into practice".
Risk capital funds and tax incentives
According to Parliament, the current venture capital system does not meet the funding needs of SMEs, micro enterprises and entrepreneurs. Member States should therefore use public funds to establish risk capital funds in the form of public-private partnerships in regions and fields "having innovative potential and a sound knowledge base." MEPs regret that so far "systematic public support with transparent conditions is missing." Moreover, Member States should consider implementing tax incentives to encourage enterprises to invest more in research, development and innovation.
New measures to protect patents
MEPs also state that "reasonable and reliable copyright protection and patent systems are crucial elements in building an innovative knowledge-based economy and society." The Commission and Member States should therefore - in the context of the new Community patent - work on "a procedure for eliminating trivial patents and sleeping patents." The EP also calls on alternative and complementary measures to defend inventors and emerging models of creation such as FLOSS (free/open source software) licensing systems.
Finally, the House calls on the Commission and the European Investment Bank to examine the possibilities for providing small businesses with adequate financial support for their patent applications. Adopted text
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert.do#
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-024-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-026-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Human rights
Human rights: Venezuela, Syria, Sudan
2007-05-29 - 12:39
At the end of the May session in Strasbourg, Parliament adopted three resolutions on human rights, democracy and the rule of law. MEPs criticised the Venezuelan Government's decision not to renew the licence of Radio Caracas Televisión, highlighted the situation of political prisoners in Syria and condemned the harsh sentences imposed by the courts in Sudan. A resolution on the position of World Bank President Paul Wolfowitz was not adopted. TV station in Venezuela under threat
Freedom of speech is the central issue in a resolution which condems the decision by the President of Venezuela, Hugo Chávez, not to renew the broadcasting licence of one of the country's leading television and radio stations, Radio Caracas Televisión (RCTV). The current licence expires on 27 May 2007.
MEPs were divided over some aspects of this issue, with rival resolutions coming from the EPP-ED, ALDE and UEN groups on the one hand, and the PES, Greens/EFA and GUE/NGL on the other. The former was adopted by 43 votes to 22 with 0 abstentions.
The adopted resolution states that non-renewal of the licence "will deprive a large section of the public of a pluralist source of information, thus undermining the right of the press to criticise the authorities". According to the Venezuelan government itself, Radio Caracas Televisión is the only media organ whose licence is not being renewed.
Venezuela government's legal obligations to protect free speech
The EP points out that Venezuela's Constitution guarantees freedom of expression, communication and information and that Venezuela is a signatory to various international pacts which underpin civil and political rights. MEPs believe that if there is any substance to accusations which have been made by the authorities against the RCTV management, these could be tested through "ordinary legal proceedings".
The government is urged, in the name of "the impartiality of the state", to ensure "equal treatment under the law for all media, whether privately or publicly owned and irrespective of all political or ideological considerations".
MEPs also call for "a dialogue between the Venezuelan Government and the country's private media" and they deplore "the government's total unwillingness to engage in dialogue in general, notably in the case of RCTV".
In order to keep up the pressure, the resolution concludes by calling on the relevant delegations and committees of Parliament to examine this issue.
* * *
Syrian political activists in the spotlight
In a resolution on Syria, Parliament expresses concern at recent verdicts against political prisoners and human rights activists in Syria, which it says affect every political strand of the opposition.
MEPs are "deeply concerned at the restrictions imposed on, and the charges made against, Mahmoud Issa, Fayek El Mir, Aref Dalila, Kamal al Labwani, Anwar Al Bunni, Michel Kilo, Suleiman Al-Shamar and Khalil Hussein for exercising their democratic rights and engaging in peaceful activities". The resolution refers briefly to the activities of each of these individuals.
Parliament urges the Syrian authorities to comply strictly with international human rights law and to respect freedom of opinion and the right to a fair trial. More specifically, it calls on the authorities to ensure that "the detainees are well treated and not subjected to torture or other ill‑treatment" and that "detained or imprisoned persons are given prompt and regular access to their lawyers, doctors and families".
In fact, says the resolution, the relevant Syrian bodies should "reverse the judgments, drop the charges still pending in the Military Court of Damascus and release all the abovementioned prisoners of conscience and political prisoners".
EU support for democracy campaigners in Syria
More broadly, Parliament calls on the European Union "to provide all necessary support to Syrian civil society activists through the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument (ENPI) and the newly adopted European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights (EIDHR), including by implementing without delay the so-called ad hoc measures dedicated to human rights defenders".
It also asks Syria, which could play an important role in promoting peace in the region, to improve and support human rights and freedom of expression in the country generally. MEPs would like Syria to support the setting up of "a penal tribunal with an international character" after the Judge Brammertz inquiry in Lebanon into the 2005 assassination of Rafiq Hariri.
* * *
Death sentences in Sudan
The resolution on Sudan highlights the cases of two women sentenced to death by stoning for committing adultery and two teenagers condemned to be hanged for murder and robbery.
Two women sentenced to stoning
In the first case, a judge sentenced Amouna Abdallah Daldoum and Sadia Idries Fadul, on 6 March and 13 February 2007 respectively, to death by stoning for adultery. On appeal, according to a letter from the Sudanese Embassy in Brussels, the death sentences have been quashed and the case is to be reviewed.
MEPs welcome the quashing of the death sentence – if confirmed – and call on the Sudanese Government "to guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of Sadia Idris Fadul and Amouna Abdallah Daldoum". They also point out that "stoning is a cruel and inhuman punishment, and severe punishment of adultery violates the basic human rights and international obligations subscribed to by Sudan".
Minors condemned to be hanged
In the second case, on 3 May the Criminal Court of Nyala in South Darfur sentenced Zakaria Mohamed and Ahmed Abdullah Suleiman, both aged 16, to death by hanging on murder and robbery charges.
Parliament's resolution "strongly reminds the Government of Sudan that the use of the death penalty against child offenders is prohibited under international law". Indeed, Sudan has ratified the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child, under which it has undertaken not to carry out executions of anyone under 18 years of age.
MEPs therefore call on the Sudanese Government "to repeal the death sentences against, and guarantee the physical and psychological integrity of, Abdelrahman Zakaria Mohamed and Ahmed Abdullah Suleiman".
Sudan's international obligations
On 14 March 2007 the European Commission announced an additional €45 million in humanitarian aid to Sudan (bringing the total so far for 2007 to €85), demonstrating the EU’s commitment to the people of Sudan but Parliament's resoluton stresses that, under the Cotonou Agreement, EU cooperation with ACP countries is subject to respect for human rights, democratic principles and the rule of law. Moreover, the Sudanese Government has signed up to a range of international agreements on human rights, which it should respect.
EU action
The EU institutions can play a role by bringing pressure to bear. The resolution therefore calls on the Commission, Council and Member States "to condemn the use of the death penalty, flogging and other corporal, cruel or degrading punishments" and to promote women’s rights and human rights in general in their relations with the Sudanese authorities.
Lastly, the resolution calls on the Sudanese Government to revise its judicial system and to ratify the Protocol to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights Aiming at the Abolition of the Death Penalty. The government is also urged to accede to the Protocol to the African Charter on Human and People’s Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa, as well as the Protocol of the Court of Justice of the African Union. Adopted texts
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-025-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-024-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-025-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-026-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-FULL DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-FULL DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-024-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-025-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070516BRI06749 ITEM-026-EN DOC XML V0//EN
