Garry Kasparov slams Vladimir Putin's Russia
External relations
2007-05-24 - 16:54
Speaking on Thursday to the EP's Foreign Affairs Committee and the Delegation for Relations with Russia, Garry Kasparov, leader of the United Civil Front and former world chess champion, sketched a stark picture of Vladimir Putin's Russia. He urged the European Parliament to maintain the same firm stance on Russia as that taken by the EU at the Samara summit.
"Today I am playing a different chess game, one in which the opposition wants to change the current rules", said Mr Kasparov, adding that he wished to preserve the stance of a "neutral observer" even though he is involved in the political battles going on in Russia.
Analysing the current situation in Russia, Mr Kasparov said the recently deceased former president, Boris Yeltsin, had managed to guide his country towards greater democracy but the choice of his successor, the current president, Vladimir Putin, had been to arrange a return to power of the former governing elites.
"In seven years Putin has destroyed the nascent democratic institutions, notably by abolishing the election of senators", who are now appointed, said the ex-world champion. "The Duma is busy adopting laws which reduce the possibilities of taking part in public life", he added. And the new "law against extremism, which recalls the laws against anti-soviet propaganda in the days of the USSR", provides for criminal sanctions and penalties of up to 15 years imprisonment for public demonstrations, he said.
Presidential election and Putin's successor
Questioned by Ria Oomen-Ruijten (EPP-ED, NL), chair of the EP Delegation for Relations with Russia, about his movement's plans for presenting candidates at the next elections - the parliamentary elections in December 2007 and the presidential elections in March 2008 - Garry Kasparov stated "we are not fighting to win the elections but so that they take place", referring to the lack of media access for the opposition and its difficulty in registering candidates.
He also drew attention to the fact that "Nine months from the presidential elections, there is no declared candidate to succeed Vladimir Putin". In his view, two scenarios could be envisaged: either Mr Putin stays in place in violation of the Constitution, which allows only two presidential terms of office, or "a legal solution will be sought to ensure that Putin and his people have access to the free world, where they have put their money", which has come chiefly from high oil prices and the state enterprise Gazprom. He also described the Russian president as the head of a company "Russia Incorporated" or the "KGB company".
Klaus Hänsch (PES, DE) asked Mr Kasparov about the plans of the coalition Other Russia , to which his movement belongs. The coalition has two aims, replied Mr Kasparov: "it must first adopt a programme that suits all parties involved and then, in the autumn, we must choose a candidate for the presidential elections".
The former chess champion called on the European Parliament to adopt the same frank, critical position as that taken by the European Union at the EU-Russia summit on 17 and 18 May in Samara. "Europe must stand up for what it believes in and not necessarily support us personally", he said in answer to Hélène Flautre (Greens/EFA, FR), chair of the EP Subcommittee on Human Rights.
Ari Vatanen (EPP-ED, FR) praised Karinna Moskalenko, the Russian lawyer who defends opponents of the regime in cases lodged, inter alia, before the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg. "She is one of those who defends us. I hope she will not be struck off the roll, which is what the Russian authorities are threatening to do", said Mr Kasparov.
WTO membership and Kosovo
Mr Kasparov said he was in favour of his country's joining the World Trade Organisation, something which is supported by the EU, but he warned Tunne Kelam (EPP-ED, ET), Libor Roucek (PES, CZ) and Jana Hybaskova (EPP-ED, CZ) that "Putin's regime will not apply the WTO's rules".
Lastly, in reply to a question from Doris Pack (EPP-ED, DE), he said "Kosovo is the only Russian foreign policy issue which is not dictated by financial interests".
Joint meeting of the Foreign Affairs Committee and the Delegation to the EU-Russia Parliamentary Cooperation Committee
2007-05-21 Committee on Foreign Affairs PL Jacek SARYUSZ-WOLSKI EPP-ED PL
2007-05-21 Committee on Foreign Affairs PL Jacek SARYUSZ-WOLSKI EPP-ED PL
20070521IPR06880
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
