MEPs concerned that UN Human Rights Council fails to address urgent human rights situations
Human rights
2007-06-07 - 12:51
In adopting a joint resolution from the PES, ALDE, UEN, Greens/EFA and GUE/NGL groups, the House welcomes the organisation of special sessions to respond to urgent crises. The EP is concerned, however, at the failure of the Human Rights Council (HRC) to take action to address many of the world’s most urgent human rights situations.
MEPs regret in particular the weakness of the HRC resolution on Darfur, as well as the decision taken under the confidential procedure to discontinue consideration of complaints of human rights abuses by Iran and Uzbekistan under the ‘1503’ procedure. The House notes that the confidentiality under the ‘1503’ procedure has not triggered the expected deliverables in terms of better cooperation from the authorities concerned. MEPs ask for the introduction of more transparent procedures.
The House welcomes, in view of its condemnation four months earlier by UN General Assembly for human rights abuses and its lack of cooperation with Special Procedures, the fact that Belarus has not been elected to the Council.
The European Parliament calls for competitive elections in all regions in order to provide real choice among UN Member States. MEPs regret that some countries with problematic human rights records have been elected, owing to clean slates.
MEPs encourage the EU to continue to press for membership criteria for election to the HRC, as well as for monitoring of the actual implementation of the Member States’ election pledges.
The resolution stresses that the credibility and effectiveness of the HRC in the protection of human rights rests on cooperation with Special Procedures and their full implementation, as well as on the adoption of the reforms and mechanisms in a way which will strengthen its ability to address human rights violations around the world.
EU involvement
MEPs call on the countries which have entered into agreements with the EU that include human rights clauses to cooperate with the EU in increasing the potential of the Council to enhance human rights around the world. The EP calls on its interparliamentary delegations and assemblies to examine this aspect at their meetings.
Finally, the House recognises the active involvement of the EU and its Members States in the first year of work of the HRC and looks forward to a successful Presidency of the UNHRC by Romania.
20070606IPR07545 Text adopted -7 June - will shortly be available here
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
