Citizens' forum in Ireland: climate change and education feature
Future of Europe/European integration
2007-06-12 - 11:59
Citizens' Forum in Ireland, Bundoran, County Donegal.
Climate change, regional development and education were just three issues discussed at a Citizens' Forum held in Bundoran, Co Donegal on 9 June. The event brought together people and community groups from the North West of Ireland to voice their hopes and opinions about what the European Union should be doing for them. It was organised by the Parliament's Information Office in Ireland as part of the "Citizens' forums" being held across Europe.
Marian Harkin MEP of Liberal ALDE group opened the proceedings with a short overview of the work and role of an MEP, following which participants were asked to divide into workshops to focus in detail on three main areas
Climate change and energy policy
The issue of individual responsibility for controlling energy use was the focus of debate in this workshop. Participants felt that the EU and national governments have a role to play in encouraging individuals to control their energy consumption. People need information so that they can make informed choices when, for example, building a house or buying a car. "Why not an EU-standard energy efficiency rating for cars as we have for dishwashers?" suggested one participant.
Regional Development in the North West of Ireland
The potential benefits of cross-border co-operation between border counties in the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland was a recurring theme in this debate. Many participants called for the reopening of railway lines between Sligo and Derry.
Equal opportunities and the social dimension
Gerry Farry, a talk show host with local radio station Ocean FM, opened the discussion by pointing to statistics showing high levels of educational and social disadvantage in the region. He called for substantial investment in pre-schooling and in adult education. Brian Crummy from Sligo Community Forum, himself a wheelchair user, raised the issues of accessibility in terms of housing, employment and transport.
What can the EU do?
Participants were aware that many of the issues which most concerned them, such as health or education, are not matters where the EU has significant competence. However there was near-universal agreement that the EU had a role to play in facilitating exchange of best practice and in setting minimum standards in certain areas. This was particularly the case for environmental policy, where politicians might not find it easy to enforce tough changes. "The EU sees the big picture" said one participant; "we need pressure from outside" said another.
Should the EU have more power in areas like health and education? Citizens were divided on this point. "If we can be fined for over-fishing, why can't we be fined for overcrowding in classrooms?" asked one. "It takes so long to get any action in Brussels" said another.
Closing the event, Marian Harkin MEP (ALDE) pledged that she would bring the conclusions and suggestions back to the European Parliament and pursue them at that level.
20070611STO07710 European Parliament's Information Office in Ireland
EN
1
PHOTO
20070611PHT07682.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.europarl.ie/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
