Report calls for sharing of "burden" of immigration
Asylum policy
2007-06-20 - 16:56
Looking for a better life - a Senegalese immigrant
Wednesday 20 June marks UN World Refugee Day and appropriately MEPs looked at the plight of the increasing numbers of immigrants and asylum seekers to the EU. A report calls on EU members to share the burden of refugees and to adopt single procedures that will speed up and help in dealing with immigration. As more and more people arrive in boats on Europe's shores - and others drown in the attempt - the problem has never been more urgent.
Last year over 180,000 people sought asylum in the EU. This year the number is likely to be higher and the methods of getting to the EU are becoming ever more desperate. Recently 27 shipwrecked Africans spent three days clinging to the tuna nets of a vessel in the Mediterranean before being picked up. Countless more drown en-route to a better life. Some states in the front line of immigration - like Malta - are pushing for a common EU approach.
The report was on the common European asylum system was drafted by Hubert Pirker of the European People's Party and European Democrats (EPP-ED).
Pirker report: "greater solidarity needed"
The Pirker report deals with practical cooperation and decision-making in the common European Asylum system. In particular it proposes;
A "proactive common EU asylum policy"
A single procedure in all EU states which ensures that refugee status is granted as quickly as possible to all who are entitled.
Solving the technical and political problems preventing the use of a common database containing information about immigrants' countries of origin
Solidarity between EU states in sharing the burden of refugees
In terms of sharing the burden Mr Pirker said that this would involve "contributions to a fully functional observation of borders, by distributing resources such as ships, helicopters, night vision devices or financial aid."
Possible solutions: information centres, employment office
The Pirker report calls for decent living conditions for persons who have been granted refugee status or humanitarian protection to foster effective integration into the social and political life of the host community. The report also stresses the need for information campaigns to be carried out in countries of origin, with a view to making clear to potential migrants both the risks inherent in illegal immigration and the consequences of denial of refugee status.
Mr Pirker is clear that "members ought to be in the position to decide among themselves, which and how many persons willing to work are allowed to enter the country, as well as the time period these persons are allowed to stay. The EU is consequently responsible for the control of legally staying third country-residents".
Martine Roure for the Socialist PSE Group said that "we must encourage a circular migration which would allow economic migrants to be able to come and go to Europe more freely".
Dutch Liberal Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert,said that "a common policy is needed" and that. "simply strengthening the borders will not help in the long run".
Another solution to ease the burden is boosting job creation in Africa. The EU has already taken the decision to set up an experimental employment office in Mali to recruit temporary workers.
MEPs will vote on the Pirker report on Thursday.
How do we define a refugee?
Defining who exactly is a refugee is a problem. Respect for the Geneva Convention is built into the 1999 Common European Asylum System (CEAS), the ultimate goal of which is to have common standards of asylum and protection throughout Europe by 2010.
The practice however varies widely between EU members:
Each country has its own judicial system and its own procedures of determining who is entitled to protection and who is not
the Geneva Convention does not spell out how a country should determine refugees from asylum seekers not covered by the convention
The example of Chechen refugees is indicative of the disparities across the Union. One state takes 90% of Chechens who apply while another accepts almost none.
MEP visit "detention centres"
Last week a delegation of MEPs visited detention centres for illegal immigrants and asylum seekers in Greece (island of Samos and Athens) where they met NGOs and officials.
The head of the delegation Martine Roure called for greater solidarity with countries like Malta who are at the borders of the immigration flow. She also said the reception should take into account the "basic rights of the migrants".
Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert who was also in the delegation stressed the need to protect immigrants "being legal or illegal, a refugee or an immigrant, everyone has the right to proper treatment".
20070615STO07873 World Refugee Day The Pirker report Story on immigration 17 July 06 Call for common approach: 9 Feb 07 Geneva convention Parliament's Civil Liberties Committee
EN
1
PHOTO
20070620PHT08065.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.un.org/depts/dhl/refugee/
EN
6
LINK
http://www.unhchr.ch/html/menu3/b/o_c_ref.htm
EN
7
LINK
/activities/expert/committees/presentation.do?committee=2362&language=EN
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A6-2007-0182 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060717STO09891 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070207STO02857 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
