EP call for appropriate assistance to students with family responsibilities
Women's rights/Equal opportunities
2007-06-19 - 14:07
The European Parliament adopted an own-initiative report where MEPs call for tax breaks, appropriate housing, sufficient childcare and flexible study conditions for young women and men with family responsibilities. National "certification" schemes for family-friendly higher-education establishments should also be set up, MEPs believe.
MEPs point out in the report by Maria PANAYOTOPOULOS-CASSIOTOU (EPP-ED, EL) that according to the conclusions of the Green Paper on demography, the European demographic deficit is due in part to the various stages of life (education, work, family) being reached later.
On the other hand, it also means more and more students have family responsibilities - in Sweden, 41% and in Finland, 31% of women had their first child before completing their education. MEPs therefore want the Commission and the Member States to "promote policies which make it easier to combine studying, training and family life, which support the balanced assumption of family responsibilities by young people without any form of discrimination, and which enable them to optimise their contribution to European growth and competitiveness."
Resources have to be suited to needs
MEPs encourage the Member states to be more aware of the situation of young men and women who have family responsibilities while they are in education or training, and particularly to make resources available to them that suit to their needs. They encourage the Member States to offer affordable "student insurance", in particular social and medical cover - which could be extended to the student’s dependants and "to reduce or put an end to the taxation of young men and women who both study and work and who have family responsibilities or responsibilities towards dependants". MEPs also call on the Member States and credit institutions to simplify and facilitate the provision of loans on beneficial terms to young people who combine family responsibilities with their studies.
The higher education establishments on their part are invited "to take account of the financial situation of young men and women who have family responsibilities when calculating course fees" and encouraged to provide appropriate assistance.
The Member States are also asked "to count maternity and parental leave during a period of study towards women's aggregate time spent in work and their retirement pension entitlement periods, with a view to meeting fully the goad of genuine gender equality".
Suitable housing and childcare
The Member States in partnership with local authorities and higher education institutions are encouraged to adopt measures to enable students who are parents to live in housing that is suited to their needs and to have access to sufficient and adequate child care under the same conditions of eligibility as working parents. In doing that the Member States should make full use of the possibilities provided by Community funds and in particular the ESF in this area.
The higher education and vocational training establishments are also encouraged to set up child-care services on their premises and MEPs believe Member States should support such initiatives.
Flexible study conditions
The Parliament also calls on the Member States, in association with higher education or vocational training establishments, to propose more flexible ways of organising study courses, for example by increasing the provision of distance learning and the possibilities for part-time study and by allowing more adults to continue their education, as part of lifelong learning.
In addition to that, Member States should establish a national "certification" scheme for the identification of higher education or vocational training establishments at which student life and family life may be combined.
Exchange of best practice and possible reform of education systems
MEPs recommend to the Member States, Council and Commission that in the Open Coordination Method and meetings of education ministers and social services ministers, they exchange best practice concerning support for students with family responsibilities and take account of innovative arrangements in this area which some European countries have introduced.
The report also calls on the "Member States to consider, with reference to their national situation, whether a reform of their education system to encourage flexibility and better management of time spent in education would have the effect of enabling young people to begin their working lives at an earlier stage and achieve their desire for parenthood".
MEPs also adopted an amendment, where they submit "that the principle of shared parental responsibility could also apply to young women and men living together on some basis, specific to each country, other than official marriage".
20070615IPR07885 Measures to enable young women in the EU to combine family life with a period of studies Text, as adopted by the EP on 19 June, will shortly be available here
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5407192
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
