ECB’s Trichet: “Our monetary policy is still on the accommodative side”
Economic and monetary affairs
2007-06-11 - 20:52
Jean-Claude Trichet told MEPs on Monday that “upside risks to price stability prevail over the medium term” and that monetary policy “is still on the accommodative side.” In his quarterly monetary dialogue with the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee, the European Central Bank President called for moderation in wage settlements and also for ongoing close cooperation between banking supervisory authorities.
In his opening statement, Mr Trichet said that following last week’s quarter point rise in interest rates, overall financing conditions were favourable, money and credit growth vigorous and liquidity in the euro area ample. Risks to price stability were notably on the domestic side: “They relate mainly to emerging capacity constraints and, closely related, stronger than expected wage dynamics, which would pose significant upside risks.” In such circumstances he said, wage agreements should take account of price competitiveness, the still high level of unemployment and sector-specific productivity developments.
Minimum wages and pay rises
Alexander Radwan (EPP-ED, DE) asked about the impact of nationwide minimum wage levels. Mr Trichet said he preferred minimum wages to take account of differences between sectors and perhaps also regions, though this was up to national legislators. Sophia In’t Veld (ALDE, NL) agreed on the need for wage moderation, but asked how this could be helped by top managers “awarding themselves 12 per cent pay rises” while their staff faced lay-offs and low increases. Mr Trichet said: “The need for wage moderation is true for all.”
Hedge funds, private equity
Ieke van den Burg (PES, NL) asked about the rapid growth in highly leveraged institutions and private equity firms and the concerns this raised regarding financial stability. Mr Trichet said “There has been an incredible transformation of global finance. We must recognise its important contribution to global prosperity, but we should not be complacent. That is why we are asking [...] core intermediaries to enhance their own risk management and control of the counterparty risks they embark on.” He also wanted the hedge fund industry voluntarily to come up with benchmarks of best practice.
Financial market supervision
A number of MEPs, including committee chair Pervenche Berès (PES, FR), asked about supervisory arrangements for the financial services sector more generally. Mr Trichet repeatedly stressed the importance of close cooperation between the different national supervisory authorities. “It is abnormal for the same directive not to be interpreted in the same way, and the industry is right to say so,” he said. On preparing for possible financial crises, he made clear he favoured proper discussion between supervisors to build a shared understanding of the principles they would follow in the case of a crisis, but “we are not in favour of an ex-ante arrangement on burden sharing with taxpayers’ money [...] The moral hazard question is very important.”
No mention of a pause in rate rises; consumer prices the key target
Eoin Ryan (UEN, IE) asked whether it would now be sensible for the ECB to pause in raising rates further to see how previous rises affected the economy. Mr Trichet noted that “I did not pronounce the word ‘pause’ [...] We will act in a firm and timely manner and do whatever is needed at any time to counter inflationary risks we see.”
Gay Mitchell (EPP-ED, IE) - rapporteur on the ECB's annual report - wanted to know how the bank took into account asset price inflation - such as house prices - when considering monetary policy. Mr Trichet said it was important to take everything into account, including asset prices, but “the Consumer Price Index is the yardstick by which we ask to be judged,” and it would be wrong to try to use any other index which mixed consumer prices and asset prices.
2007-06-11 Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs In the chair Pervenche Berès PES FR
Quarterly Monetary Dialogue with the European Central Bank
20070611IPR07691 Full text of Jean-Claude Trichet's opening statement on the ECB website
EN
1
LINK
http://www.ecb.eu/press/key/date/2007/html/sp070611.en.html
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
