MEPs push for better public procurement
Free movement of services
2007-06-20 - 12:39
The EU, over the years, has made substantial efforts to open public procurement markets in the Member States to cross-border competition. To a large extent - and given that a majority of procurement deals comply with EU rules - it has succeeded. However, as the EP concludes in an own-initiative report on transposition and implementation of EU public procurement law, adopted today, there is still room for improvement.
As rapporteur Arlene McCarthy (PES, Labour North West UK) points out, "favouritism for national champions and other failures to award contracts on a competitive basis are a continued threat" to the Internal Market. Bearing in mind that public procurement accounts for over 16% of EU GDP, correct transposition and implementation of EU laws in this sphere is a pressing concern.
To date - despite records which show overall improvements in transposition rates in the EU - only twenty Member States have transposed the new public procurement directives. With an eye to this, MEPs consider that the Commission "should be given the human resources to police late and incorrect transposition more effectively". Moreover, they note, Member States should provide the Commission with "sufficient data" on their implementation of EU public procurement law.
MEPs also echo the Commission's concerns about the number of illegal direct awards. These, says the report, occur as a result of: misinterpretations of public procurement rules; errors made in complex procurements; alleged corrupt practices; circumvention of lengthy timescales associated with EU advertising; and unnecessarily elaborate national tendering requirements.
Breaches of EU rules could be reduced, however, if EU countries collaborate more extensively with the Commission, say MEPs, calling - in the same breath - for new advisory agencies to assist contracting authorities in the correct implementation of public procurement rules. Member States, reads the report, should also "coordinate and simplify electronic purchasing techniques to facilitate access to [...] procurements". The Commission, other than showcasing best practices, should encourage EU countries to tackle "transposition and implementation problems" in public procurement, "focusing on illegal direct awards and late or incorrect transposition".
Tomorrow, the EP will vote on a proposal to modify a pair of pre-existing public procurement directives - this, with an aim to ensuring better transparency and more effective review in contract award procedures.
20070615IPR07899 Public Procurement: transposition and implementation of the legislation in relation to the Lisbon Agenda Text, as adopted by the EP on 20 June, will shortly be available here
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5329132
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
