MEPs and Juncker on eurozone, the ECB, exchange rates and executive pay
Economic and monetary affairs
2007-06-27 - 15:55
Jean-Claude Juncker told MEPs on Wednesday the eurozone economy was doing well, but could do better still. He called for faster progress on fiscal consolidation and said calls for wage restraint were undermined by the scale of top executive pay. Earlier in the day, MEPs in the Economics Committee adopted two reports on the ECB and the euro area making a broadly similar assessment, but also calling for greater coordination on exchange rate policy between the Eurogroup, Council and the ECB.
The Eurogroup Chair and Luxembourg Prime Minister told the committee that recent EU summit had agreed to his suggestion that Economic and Monetary Union with the euro as its currency be inserted into the future treaty as one of the objectives of the EU. As he put it, “with free and undistorted competition correctly becoming an instrument rather than an objective there was room!” Together with the renewed commitment to “ever closer union” in the proposal for a treaty, he thought that despite some disappointments, there were elements to build an EU the way its founding fathers would have wanted. Economic progress, Stability Pact corrective arm working His assessment of the euro area economy was also positive, with growth continuing, unemployment down, inflationary pressure under control and public debt and deficits falling. Unemployment, though, was still “scandalously high” and growth not fast enough. “Decisions to end the excessive deficit procedure for Germany, France and Greece show the corrective arm of the Stability and Growth Pact is working most satisfactorily. When the Growth Pact was reformed to make it more economically wise, there were critics who said this would mean there would be budgetary anarchy. This did not happen, it is pleasing to note.” However, Mr Juncker warned that these three – and some other – countries still had “very high levels of public debt.” He recalled that Member States were committed to achieving their medium term goals for improving their fiscal situation by 2010. Sarkozy welcome; income distribution needs debate The Eurogroup chair took the opportunity to reject what he said were incorrect press reports that he was reluctant to have France’s President Sarkozy take part in Eurogroup meetings: “We will welcome President Sarkozy in July, so he can explain to us recent French budgetary decisions. We want to coordinate better, so how could this be a problem? It shows the importance of the issues.” Mr Juncker also called for a real debate on the distribution of income, noting that, “we constantly invite the social partners to exercise wage moderation [...] but employees can see they are invited to be moderate while other players in the economy are enjoying unlimited increases.” He said he was pleased at comments from the ECB President along similar lines. MEPs earlier adopted a call for restraint in top executive pay – see below. Asked about exchange rate policy, Mr Juncker said there were discussions both within the Eurogroup and with the ECB, but there was no need to make them all public as this was a sensitive area.
European Central Bank
In their report on the European Central Bank, drawn up by Gay Mitchell (EPP-ED, IE) in response to the ECB’s annual report for 2006, MEPs in the committee note that the economic recovery in the euro zone has become self sustaining, but emphasise that any further raising of interest rates should be undertaken with caution so as not to endanger growth.
They say it is crucial that wages increase in line with developments in productivity in order to allow for job creation in a non-inflationary environment. Fiscal consolidation, especially in good times, is key to achieving long term growth, they argue.
Exchange rates and house prices
The report expresses concern about the ongoing appreciation of the euro against most major currencies and calls on the Eurogroup, the Council and the ECB to exercise their competences in full, coordinating more closely their actions in the field of exchange rate policy.
Mr Mitchell’s report calls on the ECB to monitor closely developments on the real estate market which have potential consequences for the real economy.
ECB governance issues
The committee reiterates its support for the independence of the ECB and for its aim of maintaining price stability and protecting its anti-inflation credentials.
Regarding the ECB’s role in providing central bank services such as Target and the Target 2 Securities project, the committee recognises the value these can have in fostering financial market integration, but warns that the presentation of an appropriate governance structure for the Bank’s activities as an active market operator is overdue.
The report says that accountability and transparency would be improved if several candidates were evaluated by the Council when vacancies arise on the ECB Executive Board and if the chosen candidate were subject to a vote of approval in Parliament.
MEPs in the committee repeat their call for the Bank to publish summary minutes of Governing Council meetings, including the arguments in favour and against policy decisions and an indication of whether they were taken unanimously.
The report also repeats Parliament’s call the ECB to examine the reasons for the substantial increase in circulation of 500 euro notes with a view to identifying any attendant risks.
Report on the euro zone
In a report drawn up by Dariusz Rosati (PES, PL), in response to the Commission’s 2007 annual report on the euro area, the committee adopted a position coherent with that of the ECB report, since the issues were closely related. Here though the recommendations were mainly addressed to the Member States and the Eurogroup.
MEPs in the committee call on Member States to use the current economic upswing to reduce deficits and accumulate surpluses, as well as to improve the quality of public finance with more investment in education, vocational training research and innovation.
This report argues that the national legislators and regulators too should evaluate carefully developments in the real estate market, with asset price increases being a further reason for fiscal caution.
Wage moderation starts at the top...
Regarding wage developments, the committee argues for a fairer distribution of the fruits of growth, calling on shareholders and corporate executives to maintain a responsible policy of remuneration packages at top executive levels, “which tend to grow disproportionately compared to ordinary salary levels and thus give the wrong signals and discourage support for a responsible wage policy”.
MEPs in the committee regret that the definition of price stability used for the assessment of convergence criteria is not always in conformity with the price stability criterion adopted by the ECB in its monetary policy. They call for further analysis and policy debate on the application of the convergence criteria to prospective new members of the euro area.
The committee also argues that in the interests of stronger economic coordination, the Eurogroup should move to a more formal institutional framework, with proper infrastructure.
Procedure: Own-initiative reports -- Plenary vote: July, Strasbourg
2007-06-26 Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs In the chair Pervenche BERÈS PES FR
20070625IPR08230
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
