How to make labour law fit for the 21st century?
Employment policy
2007-07-11 - 14:53
"If labour law is to meet the challenges of the 21st century, it must focus to a large extent on employment security throughout a worker's life rather than protecting particular jobs", says an own-initiative report which contributes to the current debate on flexicurity within the EU. MEPs call for active labour policy that makes it easier to find a job, and to move from one job to another.
The report drafted by Jacek Protasiewicz (EPP-ED, PL), defines flexicurity as "combining flexibility and security in the job market in a way that helps increase both productivity and the quality of jobs by guaranteeing security, while at the same time allowing firms the flexibility needed to create jobs in response to the changing needs of the market".
Indefinite contracts should be the norm
MEPs calls for flexible and secure contractual arrangements. EU labour law should recognise employment contracts of an indefinite duration as the general form of employment. Any non-standard forms of work, such as fixed-term contracts, temporary contracts obtained through employment agencies, recurring freelance contracts and project contracts, should go hand-in-hand with support for workers who find themselves in transit from one job to another. So for example, during this transition period, when it is "strictly necessary for them to become more employable through training and re-qualification", workers should be entitled to some level of income support.
"Sufficiently flexible" working time arrangements
Working time arrangements should be "sufficiently flexible" to meet the needs of employers and employees and to enable people to better balance work and family life, as well as to safeguard competitiveness and improve the employment situation in Europe, says the report.
Reduce administrative burdens
Furthermore, the committee stresses the need to simplify administrative procedures for firms, and especially for new and small and medium-sized enterprises. "Excessive administrative burdens" could deter employers from taking on new workers even during times of economic growth, it notes. To combat exploitation of undocumented workers, labour law should be better enforced and legal employment should be made easier, states the text.
Implement existing legislation
The EP regrets that existing EU rules are not properly implemented or enforced. Member States should, for instance, review and adapt their social security systems and implement active policies to invigorate the labour market. MEPs also believe it important to achieve "a degree of consistency" in the field of labour law, which may be achieved though collective agreements and the open method of co-ordination.
MEPs also call on Member States to remove the restrictions on access to their labour markets, so as to improve worker mobility within the EU.
20070709IPR08972 Modernising labour law to meet the challenges of the 21st century: Green Paper Text, as adopted by the EP on 11 July, will shortly be available here
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5443852
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
