Future developments in financial services
Economic and monetary affairs
2007-07-11 - 14:53
MEPs adopted a wide-ranging report on the future of EU financial services policy. It says the EU capital market “is leading the world not least because of the quality and solidity of its financial regulation” but also set out a series of areas where there is room for improvement, and highlights some potential concerns for the future.
Drawn up by Ieke van den Burg (PES, NL), the own-initiative report is a response to a white paper from the Commission. The following is just a selection of its main contents.
Market concentration
Noting a high market consolidation in the top segment of financial service provided to large listed companies, “notably by audit firms and credit rating agencies”, the Parliament urges the Commission and national competition authorities carefully to apply competition rules to these players and be “vigilant to any risk of unlawful market concentration.”
Parliament says credit rating agencies play a public role in some cases, and should meet high standards for accessibility, transparency, quality and reliability required of regulated businesses like banks. They should also separate their rating activities from ancillary services. MEPs would welcome the emergence of European players in credit rating.
There is also a welcome for “increased vigilance of supervisors on plain cases of market manipulation”.
Alternative investment vehicles
MEPs recognise that alternative investment vehicles (hedge funds and private equity) provide liquidity and diversification in the market and create opportunities to improve the efficiency of corporate management, but they “share the concern of some central banks and supervisors that they may give rise to systemic risk and to high levels of exposure of other financial institutions.” They ask for the Commission to take a broader and more critical approach in its analysis of such funds “with regard to the risks of market abuse.”
Retail financial services – financial literacy
Cross-border integration of retail financial services is less well advanced than on the wholesale market, Parliament notes, calling for a focused approach on the specific barriers impacting in particular mobile cross-border users. MEPs want to prevent Member States “engaging in competition based on the lowest supervision and security standards” so that the same risks, profiles and business strategies can be matched by the same security across the whole internal market. They also argue for a greater emphasis on improving financial literacy.
Parliament wants the Commission to develop a “harmonised solvency framework for pension funds” in line with the Solvency II approach developed for the insurance industry.
Better regulation
MEPs are “fully committed to the aims of better regulation based in the findings of careful, independent and professionally conducted impact assessments” focussing on more than purely financial aspects. They regret that the Commission has not fulfilled its commitment to have a proper impact assessment with every new proposal, but warn against impact assessments having the effect of bringing law-making to a standstill.
Systemic risks
The report says the nature, source and transfer of risks to the financial system are changing, and expressed concern that the “current nationally and sectorally based supervisory framework may potentially fail to keep pace with financial market dynamics”. MEPs stress that it must be well resourced coordinated and entitled legally AM 18 to “give adequate responses in the case of major systemic crises that affect more than one Member State.”
Architecture of regulation and supervision
MEPs in the committee stress the need for cross-sectoral consistency in prudential regulation, so that similar products are regulated in similar ways, whether they are being sold by a bank, pension fund or insurance company.
To help reach common decisions on how national supervisors should apply EU rules, the committee suggests the three Level 3 committees (which respectively bring together national supervisors of the banking, pensions and insurance industries responsible for implementing EU legislation) should consider using some form of qualified majority voting.
They encourage agreements and codes of conduct between Member States and central banks on bail out and lender-of-last-resort obligations, as part of a strengthening of the system for oversight of prudential risks. MEPs say it is necessary to look into the desirability and feasibility of European level execution of prudential supervision where needed in the future.
The report emphasises that home-host supervisory cooperation is the most significant building-block in the set-up of the single financial market. Greater convergence among supervisors should, it says, facilitate the business of companies dealing with more than one regulator – and encourage the emergence of a European retail financial market.
Global impact
The report highlights the importance of developing the transatlantic partnership to ensure, among other things, the implementation of Basel II by the US authorities, and of the mutual recognition of EU and US accounting standards. It calls for more democratically controlled cooperation with the US in monitoring regulators of alternative investment vehicles. It also calls for cooperation with other jurisdictions, such as India, China and South Korea.
20070709IPR08971 Financial services policy 2005-2010. White Paper Text, as adopted by the EP on 11 July, will shortly be available here
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5406962
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
