Opening EU postal services to competition: EP rapporteur seeks to allay fears
Competition
2007-07-10 - 08:00
All smiles - face to face with Markus Ferber
Tuesday in Plenary sees a debate on a report which calls for postal monopolies in Europe to end by the start of 2011. The report - backed by Parliament's Transport committee - calls for the national monopoly on letters below 50 grams to end. Whether this move will bring more competition and a faster, cheaper postal service or whether it will lead to job cuts and less service will be debated by MEPs. Ahead of the debate we spoke to Parliament's rapporteur Markus Ferber (EPP-ED).
What will this postal directive change for the public? Will it make mail cheaper and quicker?
MF: The directive will finally establish an internal market for postal services in Europe. Increased competition will result in better services and the development of new, innovative products for consumers. The experience of open markets shows that consumers will be able to choose from a range of different products and prices, depending on their need. For example, the market for parcels is already liberalised in the EU and the results are impressive: almost overnight a new market has been created, offering improved services for consumers and a wider choice of products.
The same could be true for regular letters. If a letter I want to send is not urgent, I would not mind if it takes several days to be delivered if such a service is significantly cheaper than the regular price. Conversely, if a letter is important, I want to be sure it gets delivered the next day. The one-size-fits-all approach is a thing of the past. We now have the chance to create the conditions for better, more diverse services for Europe's citizens.
The EU has long promoted the ending of national monopolies, but postal services have been particularly resistant to change. Why is this? What is so special about postal services?
MF: All postal services grew out of state monopolies. But there is no reason why this needs to remain the case. It is true that change in the postal sector has taken a long time. But there have been significant steps on the way. Already in 1991 the Commission tabled a Green Book which contained a preliminary outline. In 1997 and 2002 the European Parliament and the Council agreed to a first step towards a fully liberalised sector. Since 1 January 2006, the market for letters weighing 50 grams or more is open to competition in all EU Member States. What we are now doing is only the very last step.
There are fears that the ending of postal monopolies for letters will lead to job losses and undermine services to remote areas. Do you share these fears?
MF: I absolutely understand these fears. We have spent a great deal of time addressing them, and have looked at the issue from all angles. The Commission has published numerous studies. In the transport committee here in the Parliament, we have organised workshops. The outcome is a balanced compromise. We want consumers to benefit from open markets. At the same time, we have agreed to table amendments which allow member states to introduce strict rules on the working conditions for employees in the postal sector.
The question of universal service - making sure that a letter gets delivered in all parts of Europe - is not as dramatic as it sounds. Member States are free to designate one company to ensure this service. And let us not forget: there are already several Member States which have opened up their market, such as the United Kingdom. The experience there shows clearly that no-one has to fear being cut off from postal services. You can still send a letter to the most remote parts of Scotland, and be sure that it gets delivered!
20070705STO08854 Follow the plenary discussion and vote CV of Mr Ferber Background note from Press service Audio: Mr Ferber explains the report
EN
1
PHOTO
20070709PHT08991.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/eplive/public/freetext_page_direct/20061120FTX00012-2101/default_en.htm
EN
3
LINK
/members/expert/searchForm/view.do?id=1917&language=EN
EN
5
LINK
/eplive/public/multimediaav_page/8969-20070709MAV08960-AUDIO/default_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070703BKG08766 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
