Opening of the July plenary session - Pöttering echoes Brown on terrorism: We shall not yield, we will not be intimidated
Institutions
2007-07-09 - 18:12
EP President Hans-Gert PÖTTERING opened the session with a statement on terrorism: "We are all aware of the events that took place on 11 March 2004 in Madrid where 129 people died and, two years after, the bomb attacks in London where 56 people died and more than 700 people were injured.
More recently, we have witnessed the events on the 29 / 30 June in London and Glasgow and again the suicide bombings in Yemen in which seven Spanish tourists and two Yemeni nationals died, and a further six people were injured.
Many signs point to Al-Qaeda. This is a threat for us all. Terrorism is a direct attack on freedom, human rights and democracy. Terrorism is a method by which violence is used to undermine our values. Terrorism, whoever undertakes it, wherever and whenever it takes place, is a crime, and we are decisive in the fight against it. During this session we will consider the report by Jeanine HENNIS - PLASSCHAERT (ALDE, NL) on the 2006 draft regulation which calls for special measures in order to protect critical infrastructure. The European Parliament has to identify itself with that.
Measures have to be taken to fight terrorism. We are looking to a Europe-wide strategy here. We are going to be led by our principles and the rule of law in what we do, for the fight against terrorism has to reflect the values which we are defending. Furthermore, the EP expresses its solidarity and support to the families of the victims of terrorism. To refer to the words of Gordon Brown: " We shall not yield, we shall not be intimidated ."
The European Parliament then held a minute of silence for the victims of terrorism.
Change to the agenda
MEPs approved the proposal (under Rule 168) to refer back the report by Helmuth MARKOV (GUE/NGL, DE) on r oad infrastructure safety management to the Transport Committee, thus taking it off this week's Strasbourg agenda. MEPs will now re-examine the Commission's proposal. Brian SIMPSON (PES, UK, North West, Labour) spoke in favour of the proposal.
Selected highlights of the Strasbourg plenary 9-12 July include :
The key debate of the July Strasbourg plenary is the presentation of the priorities of the Portuguese Presidency to MEPs by Portuguese Prime Minister José Sócrates on Wednesday at 9am. Commission President and compatriot José Manuel Barroso will respond. The House will also debate and vote on the final stage of the postal services liberalisation. Parliament will hear from ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet on the activities of the ECB in 2006 and from Jean-Claude Juncker Chairman on the Eurogroup on prospects for the euro area. Parliament will also tackle the transparency of airplane tickets with a call for full disclosure of taxes, charges and fees on the initial ticket price. MEPs will also turn their attention to measuring devices containing mercury including the issue of the use of mercury in barometers.
Monday 9 July 2007
EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering will make a statement at 5pm at the opening of the plenary session on the recent attempted terrorist attacks in London and Glasgow and on the seven Spanish tourists and two Yemeni nationals killed in Yemen when a bomber drove an explosives-laden car into a tourist convoy.
The session opens with a joint debate on food additives. Parliament will be asked to approve with amendment a set of four regulations aimed at updating procedures for authorising food additives, flavourings and enzymes.
The House will debate an own-initiative report in the internal gas and electricity market. The internal energy market should allow "consumer choice of supplier in an open competitive environment", and also be able to guarantee security of supply given that "it is essential for every citizen of the [EU] to have affordable access to energy", according to a report by the Committee on Industry, Research and Energy.
Later on Monday evening, the House will debate the issue of measuring devices containing mercury. A key issue for the UK, Parliament will be asked to approve a ban on non-electrical mercury thermometers and other mercury instruments for general sale to the public when it votes on a second-reading recommendation by the Environment Committee. The committee unanimously approved the Council's common position without amendment, thereby dropping the EP's earlier call for an open-ended derogation for barometer manufacturers and accepting Council's proposal for a two-year exemption instead.
On Monday evening, the House will debate the latest developments on passenger name records (PNR) and the EU-US agreement. MEPs will vote on a resolution on Thrusday.
The House will be asked to approve a conciliation agreement on Rome II. After almost four years of negotiations, Parliament and Council representatives struck a deal on the regulation on the law applicable to non-contractual obligations, known as Rome II. The Conciliation Committee agreed to introduce rules on road traffic accidents and environmental damages and delete the controversial provision on defamation by media. Diana WALLIS (ALDE, UK) is the Parliament's rapporteur.
Tuesday 10 July 2007
MEPs will debate and vote on a first reading report on postal services. Remaining postal service monopolies in EU Member States should expire by 31 December 2010, two years later than the 1 January 2009 deadline proposed by the European Commission, according to a report being put forward by the Transport Committee. Full market opening should mean that national operators will no longer have a monopoly on mail below the maximum weight of 50 grams, known as the "reserved area". The vote will take place on Wednesday 11 July.
The House will also debate air transport services. In order to avoid the current practice of some air carriers, i.e. publishing air fares without any taxes and charges, the Transport Committee says that passengers should be provided with a full breakdown of any taxes, fees and charges added to the ticket price. Air passengers must be treated like other consumers and thus have a right on clear and full information of the price they finally should pay, the Committee argues.
Wednesday 11 July 200 7
The centre-piece of the July Strasbourg plenary is the presentation of the Portuguese EU Presidency programme. Portugal took over the presidency of the European Union from Germany on 1 July. At 9am, on Wednesday 11 July in Strasbourg the Portuguese Prime Minister, José Sócrates , will discuss with MEPs the EU's policy priorities for the next six months. These will include finalising the reform treaty, relaunching the Lisbon economic agenda and a fresh focus on Africa, the Mediterranean and Brazil. Mr Sócrates' compatriot, Commission President José Manuel Barroso , will take part in the debate.
Before formally launching an Intergovernmental Conference (IGC), the European Parliament must be consulted. The European Parliament will give its opinion through a vote on a report on the issue.
The House will also vote on the European Parliament's calendar for 2008. The dates for Brussels and Strasbourg plenary sessions will be decided.
MEPs will also vote on Wednesday on a resolution on the situation in Darfur. A delegation of five MEPs from the EP Development Committee are in Darfur from 30 June to 6 July, where they visit camps of displaced people in Darfur as well as camps of Sudanese refugees in eastern Chad. The delegation is led by Josep BORRELL (PES, ES), chair of the Development Committee and former EP President. A press conference will take place in Strasbourg on Tuesday, 10 July at 11.30am to report on the findings.
On economic and monetary affairs, MEPs will debate the policies of the European Central Bank and the Eurogroup – and the prospects for the euro area with ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet, Eurogroup chair and Luxembourg Prime Minister Jean-Claude Juncker and Economic and Monetary Affairs Commissioner Joaquin Almunia . They will then vote on two reports from the Economics Committee on the ECB and the euro area. The report on the activities of the European Central Bank is drafted by Gay Mitchell (EPP-ED, IE).
Wednesday afternoon is dedicated to foreign affairs with debates on Palestine, Pakistan, Kosovo and FYROM.
On Palestine, MEPs will vote on a resolution given the heightened tension in the territories.
MEPs will also vote on a resolution on the situation in Pakistan after hearing statements from the Council and the Commission.
On Kosovo, on 29 March, Parliament gave its full support to the Ahtisaari proposal for a status settlement, stating that "sovereignty supervised by the international community is the best option" for securing the objectives of a peaceful, self-sustaining Kosovo.
On FYROM, progress towards EU membership by the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, including reforms and recent agreements between the government and opposition on the use of Albanian in public institutions and the protection of ethnic minorities in decision-making, is welcomed in a Foreign Affairs Committee report.
Thursday 12 July 2007
On Thursday, in an own-initiative report on Ukraine, the Foreign Affairs Committee calls on Ukraine's politicians to resolve the current crisis peacefully, unravel political from economic powers, weed out corruption and ensure an independent judiciary, as well as further integrating Ukraine's energy markets with those of the European Union.
As is usual, the session ends with three debates and votes on human rights around the world. On this occasion, the topics are: the humanitarian situation of Iraqi refugees, human rights violations in Transnistria (Moldova) and human rights in Vietnam.
20070706IPR08886 Briefing - 9-12 July - Strasbourg Plenary Final draft agenda - 9-12 July 2007 Rule 168 of Rule of Procedure - Referral back to committee
EN
2
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?language=EN&reference=2007-07
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070618BRI08002 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT RULES-EP 20070606 RULE-168 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
