EP calls for a "fully liberalised European energy market as soon as possible"
Energy
2007-07-10 - 13:56
The internal energy market should allow "consumer choice of supplier in an open competitive environment", and also be able to guarantee security of supply given that "it is essential for every citizen of the [EU] to have affordable access to energy", according to a report by the European Parliament.
The own-initiative report, by Alejo VIDAL-QUADRAS (EPP-ED, ES) focuses specifically on the gas and electricity markets, and says that in order to facilitate the liberalisation of these markets it is crucial to "promote investments in infrastructures in a non-discriminatory way" and allow "fair access to the grid for new entrants and transparency in the market." During the debate, Mr Vidal-Quadras said: " We agree with the need to phase out regulated tariffs in a gradual manner. In some Member States, t he current system of regulation is an obstacle to the internal market, in particular regarding trade and interconnections. We therefore propose the creation of an entity with European dimension to deal with these issues. T he completion of a competitive internal market should in no way mean diminishing rights of consumers the obligations towards the most vulnerable must continue."
Regulation of the energy markets
MEPs believe that public ownership in the electricity and gas markets is one of the main causes of distortions at EU level and that the stimulus for competition in those markets is reduced if there are public enterprises, because, in most cases, by virtue of their company statute, there is a lower level of transparency and less information for potential investors and because they are dependent on political decisions taken by Member State governments.
Concerning how these markets and regulated, the report seeks to "promote a more European approach to regulation on cross-border issues", part of which will be to "enhance cooperation between national regulators at EU level." Moreover, it is however "essential to overcome technical and regulatory differences that impose serious barriers to cross-border trade and interconnections."
The report also adds that "national regulators should remain the only authority responsible for decisions affecting their national market only."
They should be "independent, strong and have well-defined competences" to "ensure the law is fully implemented in practice and is adhered to by market players and that the necessary investments and transparency levels are in place."
Environmental considerations
Looking at the environmental impact of liberalising the energy market, the report states that regulators should also have the role of "ensuring that energy companies have a statutory obligation to give energy saving advice to customer."
It is also stressed by the Parliament that "subsidies for non-renewable sources of energy should be eliminated" and Member States are urged to "facilitate an increase in grid capacity in order to allow the incorporation of new massive onshore and offshore renewable energy generation."
Securing energy
Whilst placing an emphasis on the "long-term investments that are necessary in the energy sector", the House also "reiterates its call on the Commission to take further steps to address concentrations in the energy market in cases of abuse of market dominance."
The "high energy prices derived from the lack of competition in the markets" means that it is necessary to "take account of the importance of the role of small and medium-sized energy companies to the functioning of competitive energy markets."
In this way, it is hoped to "establish a common energy policy based on a broader vision of the common European interest in the energy field by respecting national characteristics and allowing Member States to adhere to their energy mixes in order to diversify energy sources and energy producers as much as possible."
Unbundling
The House calls on the Commission to present an analysis in which the expected costs of ownership unbundling and of establishing independent system operators for the Member States, the expected effects on investment in the networks, as well as the benefits for the internal market and consumers are demonstrated. MEPs point out that the analysis should address the question whether, and if so what problems or costs would arise if no unbundling is carried out by the state as well as the question whether the negative consequences differ as between state and private ownership. The report suggests furthermore that the analysis should consider what the advantages would be of an ownership unbundling compared to the independent regional market operator approach as regards the achievements of objectives.
The Parliament urges the Commission to consider the structural differences between the EU electricity and gas sectors, including the fact that, some Member States have no indigenous production of these sources of energy and that, in important gas upstream markets, full economic reciprocity is not currently guaranteed. MEPs call therefore on the Commission to come forward with a balanced proposal allowing EU gas emissions to use new upstream pipeline investments and long-term contracts in order to raise their negotiating power vis-à-vis third countries.
20070706IPR08896 Prospects for the internal gas and electricity market Text, as adopted by the EP on 10 July, will shortly be available here
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5479272
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
