The Week Ahead 9-15 July 2007
Institutions
2007-07-06 - 09:20
Plenary Session - Strasbourg
Reform treaty. After a vote in the Constitutional Affairs Committee (Monday), the plenary will debate and vote on a report on the convening of an intergovernmental conference, which is a prerequisite for its formal launch (debate and vote Wednesday). The political group leaders are then due to choose Parliament’s three representatives at the conference (Thursday).
Portuguese Presidency. Portugal's Prime Minister José Sócrates will discuss EU policy priorities for the next six months in a debate with MEPs and Commission President José Manuel Barroso (Wednesday).
Postal services. MEPs may fix the end of 2010 as the deadline for opening up all postal services to competition - two years later than the Commission proposed (debate Tuesday, vote Wednesday).
Fight against terrorism. Hans-Gert Pöttering will open the session with a statement on recent events (Monday). Later, MEPs will give their views on an EU-wide strategy to protect critical infrastructure against terrorism (debate Monday, vote Tuesday).
ECB and euro area. MEPs will debate European Central Bank and Eurogroup policies with ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet, Eurogroup chair Jean-Claude Juncker and Commissioner Joaquin Almunia. They will then vote on reports on the ECB and the euro area (debate Wednesday, vote Thursday).
Air fares and PNR. The house will debate a co-decision report that says air passengers should be quoted the full price, including any taxes and charges, and not just the basic fare (debate Tuesday, vote Wednesday). They will also debate progress on the EU/US agreement on Passenger Name Records, after a statement by Commissioner Franco Frattini (Monday).
Food additives. A package of legislation on food additives come to its first reading in plenary (debate Monday, vote Tuesday).
Foreign affairs. MEPs will vote on resolutions on Darfur ( vote Wednesday), Palestine and Pakistan (both debate Wednesday, vote Thursday) and reports on FYROM (debate Wednesday, vote Thursday) and Ukraine (debate and vote Thursday).
20070705IPR08840 For full details see 'The Agenda'
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20072800AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
