Famous visitors at the Parliament - from Tutu to Sheen
Institutions
2007-08-02 - 15:26
Over the last few months there have been several high-profile visitors to the Parliament - people who have made their names in different walks of life. Here, for the first time we put together a selection of interviews with them for you to browse through. It starts with iconic anti-apartheid activist Desmond Tutu and finishes with American actor and environmental campaigner Martin Sheen.
It also includes the fearless Carla Del Ponte who has pursued former Yugoslavia's worst war criminals in the last few years. The focus also looks at the situation on the EU's borders with an interview with Belarus pro-democracy campaigner Aliaksander Milinkevich. There is also an interview with Garry Kasparov. All of them were conducted when these guests visited the European Parliament.
20070706FCS08908
Archbishop Desmond Tutu: No end to the challenges in Africa
Desmond Mpilo Tutu is a South African Archbishop and activist who received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1984 and rose to worldwide fame as a leading opponent of apartheid. The 76-year old Anglican Archbishop was at the European Parliament on 5 June to discuss the Darfur conflict with MEPs. He took time out of his schedule to talk to us about, "one of the most ghastly situations in the world", and about Africa's problems more generally. Why have you decided to take up the invitation to come to the European Parliament? How can this occasion help people in Darfur? The situation in Darfur is one of the most ghastly situations in the world. The EP is a very significant institution in the world. If it wants to turn the spotlight on one of the most horrendous situations in the world, it can do so. I am glad to be able to participate in any effort that might ameliorate the situation. It is estimated that since the beginning of the Darfur conflict more than 200,000 have died and a further 2.5 million have been displaced. The EU is already engaged in the region with humanitarian aid of several hundred million euros, with further funding in support to the mission of the African Union. What else can the EU do to help? Well, obviously we need considerable support for the African Union peacekeeping force. The force is simply not large enough and that is why it UN efforts to significantly augment it are so important. It is also hamstrung by its lack of resources. We hope to encourage the EU to augment its support to this force so that it becomes effective in doing its most important work, which is the protection of civilians - the unarmed population of women, children and old people (like me!). You received the Nobel Peace Prize in 1984 for fighting against apartheid and in favour of peace. Now, when the politics of apartheid are over, what are the main challenges that Africa faces? Of course it is important that we are able to show some victories: that we have overcome apartheid in South Africa, overcome colonialism in many parts of that continent. But challenges do not end. Europe is reasonably prosperous, it is reasonably peaceful, but Europe has also come out of a very serious history: the holocaust, dictatorships in Spain, Portugal and Greece, and, very recently, ethnic cleansing. It also has a very serious situation in Northern Ireland. We believe that just as Europe has been able to rise like a phoenix from the ashes, so Africa will be able to rise from the ashes to face the very many complex problems we have. One of the most serious is AIDS/HIV, as well as the fact that climate change is beginning to make malaria a very serious threat to the health of most Africans. It exacerbates problems such as the scarcity of water, the incidents of drought and the fact that people are beginning to become less food-productive. These are all issues that in the long run will make the continent unstable. If we can face up to those problems, just as we overcame apartheid, surely we will overcome them. There are also problems such as corruption and governments that are not accountable. We've seen some of the most awful things happening in Zimbabwe. We are hoping that all the initiatives underway are going to help Africa get back its former glory.
American peace activist Jody Williams: "tired of rhetoric without action"
Prof. Jody Williams In 1997, Jody Williams became the 10th woman to receive the Nobel Peace Prize in its almost 100-year history. She is a founding coordinator of the International Campaign to Ban Landmines (ICBL) - an unprecedented coalition of NGOs - which made the Mine Ban Treaty a reality in less than 7 years. Ms Williams is now trying to bring about change in Darfur. She recently headed a UN Mission on Darfur, which issued a critical report on 7 March. In less than 7 years an unprecedented coalition of NGOs - International Campaign to Ban Landmines (ICBL) - achieved the Mine Ban Treaty. Will "people power" work in Darfur's case? Probably not in the quite same way. The land mine treaty was very specific; we were able to pressure governments to specifically negotiate a treaty. In the case of Darfur there's no consistent international pressure on Khartoum to stop its counterinsurgency war, therefore it does whatever it wants. Unless there's international pressure, Khartoum will continue to lie. People power is working in different ways than governments that are either incapable or unwilling to exercise their responsibility to protect, outlined in at least three UN resolutions. People are pushing for divestment, and at least in the US a number of states have taken their pension funds out of companies that do business with Khartoum and thereby deal with the war. I think we're going to be stepping up international pressure on companies. Why does this tragedy still seem to capture world attention less than others? In the US, Darfur has a very high profile. In my view it shows complete failure by the international community to exercise its "responsibility to protect" (first elaborated in the Millennium Summit in 2000). Primarily, responsibility to protect its own citizens from ethnic cleansing, war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide lies with a state itself, but when the state cannot protect its own people, responsibility lies with the international community. It was all the result of the Rwanda genocide, after which the world said "never again", but "never again" doesn't seem to apply with Darfur. There's something wrong with an international community that makes the pronouncement and then doesn't follow it through. If they are not going to do it, they should just shut up. Inaction by the international community is one thing, but do you think outside powers actively share in the responsibility for creating the man-made disaster in Darfur? Not for creating the disaster, but the states that continue to invest in Khartoum share responsibility. China does, Japan does. Japan is a huge buyer of Sudanese oil. China is one of the biggest investors in Khartoum, and a huge percentage of Khartoum's oil is consumed by China. Companies and shareholders have their responsibility too. The attitude "if we don't invest somebody else will" is unacceptable. Where is the morality in that? Until recently China insisted on its policy of non-interference. What seemed to hit China's nerve more than anything else was an opinion piece that appeared recently in the Wall Street Journal. It was titled "Genocide Olympics" and written by UNICEF goodwill ambassador Mia Farrow. China was really upset and considered it an attack on the Olympics. Unless China takes a more proactive role in dealing with Khartoum to end its impunity and bring about change, I think it's appropriate to have this debate You participated in the "Landmine information day", organised in the European Parliament 2 years ago and you are back today. What can the EP do to fight for a more humane world more effectively? Can I answer that honestly? I'm really tired of listening to Europeans complaining about the US instead of having a united front. When the US says jump, they say - "how high"? If the EU really wants to be a counterweight to the US, it has to be one. Public posturing without consistent action is empty. I am really tired of rhetoric without action, whether by states, individuals or NGOs. Governments need to represent the views of their people, that means really doing something. What do you think about the celebrity band wagon - Darfur becoming a "fashionable" cause? Is it a good or bad thing? I think celebrities have every right to get involved. They can make a real contribution. However, I don’t like when uneducated or ignorant celebrities get involved and their opinions are heard ahead of others. In the case of the landmine treaty, there was a conscious decision not to involve them. It can make the general public fail to understand that the real work is done by activists every day.
Carla Del Ponte: "My greatest motivation is the victims"
Carla Del Ponte at the European Parliament Carla Del Ponte, Chief Prosecutor of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, was in Parliament Wednesday to talk to the foreign affairs committee about her work in pursuing indicted war criminals. Only 4 remain at large - including Mladic and Karadzic - and she believes a new Serbian government will cooperate. Since being established by a UN Resolution in 1993, the tribunal has indicted 161 people. Ms Del Ponte has been Prosecutor since 1999. She told us about her work.
Born in Lugano in 1947, Ms Del Ponte made her name as an indefatigable opponent of organised crime as a prosecutor in her native Switzerland - often at significant personal risk - before being appointed to take on her present role. This has put her in the front line in dealing with some of the worst crimes in post war European history. Her work at the Tribunal has been important in identifying and prosecuting forms of warfare such as genocide and rape. What do you think has been the most important accomplishment of the ICTY? Has it helped in the reconciliation process in former Yugoslavia? CDP: The most important achievement is that the ICTY has been able to issue 161 indictments against those militarily and politically responsible for the atrocious crimes committed in the former Yugoslavia – the war crimes, crimes against humanity and genocide. It is now common knowledge that Srebrenica was genocide. This is a big achievement, the fight against the impunity of the powerful men or women. It was an important achievement for the implementation of justice, of the Genocide Convention and of the Geneva Convention. That is extremely important. Reconciliation is a much more difficult issue. Justice must be done, but it's not enough to achieve a complete reconciliation; it's one of the contributions, a component to reconciliation. Reconciliation will only be when the population accepts the facts of the past and the new generation is informed and engages for a future of peace and in democracy. International justice is the first step, but we need the local, national authorities to provide a second step in admitting the truth, the facts of the conflict. A third step will be the educational step by a new generation, in schools and universities. This takes time.
The EU recently resumed negotiations on a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with Serbia. Does this mean that Belgrade is now cooperating fully with the Tribunal? CDP: Yes, in two weeks they delivered two fugitives who were extremely important for us - and we were told that it was very difficult to get them. So I'm asking them now to deliver Mladic and I hope he will be located and transferred to the Hague as soon as possible. I think finally with the new government Serbia has the political will to cooperate with us, as not only were two fugitives transferred to the Hague, but we also received a lot of documents we had been asking for months as well as access to witnesses. So I think we are in a good direction for being able to certify full cooperation - but I need my four fugitives, without my four fugitives it will never be full cooperation - especially Mladic, they can deliver Mladic! I need the European Union, particularly in the next two or three months to keep the conditionality (linking progress on an EU Association agreement with Serbia to cooperation with the ICTY). If they (Serbia) do not deliver the fugitives it will be the crucial moment and the last moment. If I cannot get my fugitives this year I think it will be extremely difficult if not impossible. I hope the EU will support me as they have done before - despite different political pressures. If in future, MEPs are asked to consider the EU applications of countries in former Yugoslavia, what standards should they hold them to? CDP: I'm a prosecutor, I'm not involved in politics and I am trying to stay out, although sometimes I go to the border...but I need to get my fugitives, to have the co-operation to allow me to execute my mandate. In any case I would say, if they (States of former Yugoslavia) are hiding war criminals they should not be allowed to enter European Union. We're not talking about low or mid-level fugitives but those highly responsible for the most atrocious crimes. Let's see, it will be in the near future. On a personal note, what is it that motivates you and has kept you going through your career? Well, firstly it is because it is my job. I have been a prosecutor for many years. My greatest motivation is the victims of the crimes. You can imagine that with war crimes, crimes against humanity...people suffer in an incredible manner. I and my collaborators are very motivated when we see that the victims see that justice is done, it's incredible and that gives us a great motivation.
Aliaksandr Milinkevich, Belarus opposition leader
Aliaksandr Milinkevich In March last year Aliaksandr Milinkevich and his followers were jailed after protesting the result of the Belarus Presidential election in which he stood against President Alexander Lukashenko. Amid apparent manipulation of the media and electoral system by the incumbent, the EU and the US condemned the result. Mr Milinkevich later received Parliament's Sakharov prize for freedom of thought for his non-violent opposition.
How did the authorities in Belarus react when you won the Sakharov prize? The authorities were irritated. The chief of KGB commented that "we have many people deserving awards, why Milinkevich?" The uneasiness of the authorities is a good sign. The award is a sign that Europe is not going to leave Belarus until democracy gains victory there and that it considers it a serious and responsible mission. The European Parliament is immersed in Belarusian affairs so deeply, that sometimes it even seems that we take too much spotlight from other problems. I am very grateful for the support shown, as we are not in a very simple situation. This support charges us with positive energy. Does the recent row over gas prices indicate the Minsk-Moscow friendship has ended? Moscow is offended like a lady that was promised marriage and leaves when it does not happen. Belarus has changed its mind on the marriage. As an owner of the product, Russia is punishing Belarus and has a right to sell it according to the price it wants. Mr Lukashenko failed to undertake serious reforms when he had incredibly cheap oil and gas. What was needed was restructuring, privatisation, attracting investment and new technologies. Everything was wasted on empty projects. Economic crisis is imminent, so Mr Lukashenko must conduct free elections and set the media and people free. What problems does the Belarus opposition face and are you united? How were recent local elections? It is hard to attain unity, which is much easier to achieve during presidential elections when you have a clear objective. During the current period we are having big discussions as to whether a single leader is needed. I would say yes (that we need one leader, headquarters and work programme), but time after time he must go through legitimate elections (in a Congress). Some call me a dictator masked under a pro-democracy flag, but I think we are at war, therefore we need a general, headquarters, officers and soldiers. We must all work for the person we would have elected. While going from door to door during the campaign, people kept asking me: "do you yourself believe that something can be changed with these elections?" People are pragmatic. In reality there are no elections in Belarus - representatives are appointed by authorities. We can say this and either lose hope or continue working, and our duty is to go out to people, as there is no independent television and only a few newspapers. What is your message to our readers in 27 European countries? I want Europe not to forget that there is a country living in difficult conditions of dictatorship, a European neighbour with European history, traditions and mentality. Second, I would like to see as many politicians as possible that cherish morals more than economic interests. In the European Parliament I see very many politicians like this, and I am thankful for that. There are discussions on what is more important: security, stability or fight for human rights, and sometimes a choice must be made. I see that in the Parliament morality takes priority, and I am proud of such a European Parliament. Is there any hope for change before 2011 Belarus Presidential elections? Free information and the defeat of fear would mean less dictatorship. Yes, economic crisis can accelerate reforms, but I would not like us to come to power due to the collapse of the economy. I am for evolution. One must think about the lives of people and not the seat of the president. Milinkevich address to MEPs
Garry Kasparov
Garry Kasparov During his visit to the European Parliament during its May sitting, we took the opportunity to put some questions to Mr Kasparov about his view of the current situation in Russia. As was the case throughout his visit, he expressed himself in forthright terms. Do you accept the premise, put forward by some, that the Russian nation needs a strong hand to be governable? The premise itself is faulty. Where is it written that strong leaders cannot be democratically elected? Or is that supposed to be the case only in Russia? After World War II, many doubted that Japan and Germany could flourish under democracy. Russia’s transition away from totalitarian Communism will require many strong hands, but those hands should be selected by the hands of the voters, the citizens of Russia, in free and fair elections. A leader can be strict while still being fair and respecting democratic institutions and the individual rights of the people. In your political campaigns in Russia, you have used street protest and the internet to communicate your message. Does this indicate a lack of belief in the political institutions of the Russian Federation? I believe in our Constitution, but our government does not. We go to the streets and to the internet because there are no official avenues for political opposition or dissent against the current administration today. Legal and illegal barriers of all sorts are set against anyone who does not agree with the Putin government. Opposition parties are declared ineligible or are banned outright. Opposition candidates and other voices are barred from the airwaves and the print media. Opposition activists are harassed, often arrested and beaten. In this environment, even the political institutions that are still left on paper are worthless. Will the presidential elections of 2008 bring about change? Do you intend to stand? If your movement wins, what would be its first move on the political chessboard? They will bring change, but at this point we have no way of knowing in which direction that change will move Russia. My purpose right now is to serve as a sort of moderator in this grand coalition we call the Other Russia. Because of my background – outside of politics but always representing my country – I am in a unique position to help such a diverse coalition stay together despite our many ideological differences. To that end I have put any personal ambitions aside. This summer we will propose a program endorsed by our potential candidates. Later in the year we will try to run a type of primary election, which will be difficult under the circumstances, with so much government pressure on our activities. It is very important that we stay together as a united democratic force in case the coming battles in the Kremlin lead to collapse. If that happens, a credible, independent group such as the Other Russia will be ready to step into the gap. Our first and only goal right now is to see honest and open elections. If one of our movement comes to power, his own beliefs and experience will lead him. What we all agree on is that building strong democratic institutions is more important than our differences on social and economic issues. Without true democracy we all suffer. You have brought your campaign to the European Parliament today. What is it that you think the EU and EP can and should do in their relations with Russia? We do not so much ask for your action as for your honesty. Stop providing Putin with democratic credentials he has in no way earned. Stop receiving him and his allies as democratic equals. Stand up to authoritarianism instead of quietly endorsing it. Nobody denies the necessity of doing business with Russia. The EU also does business with China, for example. But you do not provide the Chinese leadership with the trappings of democratic comradeship as you do with Putin. Every summit, every collegial meeting, is played on state-controlled Russian television as a way of discrediting the pro-democracy opposition of which I am a member. They say, “see, Putin is welcomed and treated as an equal by Europe’s leaders. He is a democrat too.” The idea that Putin’s Russia will be slowly brought over to the side of human rights by appeasement has by now been thoroughly discredited. The Kremlin takes every concession as a sign it can go further in cracking down on dissent and demolishing democratic structures. If you believe a democratic Russia is important, it is past time to stand up and say so. Parliament hears voice of independent media
Martin Sheen: “We have to wake up”
Martin Sheen American actor and environmental campaigner Martin Sheen was in the European Parliament yesterday, 11 April, to take part in the Energy Globe Awards ceremony at which green energy projects from across the world will be recognised at a gala prize-giving event. Mr Sheen took a moment to answer our questions about his commitment to the fight against global warming and worldwide environmental degradation. He did not mince his words on the need for his own country to do more.
What made you come to the EP to participate in the Energy Globe Awards?
I think this Award gives the ordinary citizen and NGOs who have no voice and no access to this kind of media or attention, the chance to show us the things which are necessary for all of us. It’s fascinating that it’s third world countries which are making the greatest contributions, because they seem to suffer the most from lack of clean air, lack of clean water, and access to big business or profits from the environment. This event really focuses on the little guys, and that’s what makes it so valuable. Why do you campaign against environmental destruction?
I’m a concerned citizen and I believe that having offspring makes us hostages for the future. My children, my children’s children and their children will inherit what we have given them and what we are giving them is not very good. So as a steward of the Earth, I have to accept the responsibility to do all that I can, for as long as I can, to awaken whoever will listen to what’s coming down, and get people to join the fight for the environment. What position does America have towards climate change?
We have to wake up! The only thing we lack in America is leadership, which is the most important thing. We have enough people who are concerned and active citizens, but we do not have the support of the government. This administration has been lacking; it’s very upsetting and very discouraging. We can only hope they’re gonna to wake up before it’s too late. We’re not anticipating anything from this administration; but maybe the next one. Public opinion in America is starting to wake up, no thanks to this administration, but thanks to the environmentalists in America who are taking the leadership. Can Europe and the USA work together on controlling climate change?
They absolutely must! We’re part of the same world, we can not separate ourselves. Europeans are far more aware and Europe is doing far more than we are. So I hope we’ll catch up with you very soon; but we need a new administration in Washington to do that! Forecasts about climate change are dire and much damage is already done: is it too late?
Oh no! Of course many people, even those with scientific opinions, say that it’s too late, that we have reached the point of no return. I personally do not believe that: I think we are capable of making it better, of repairing what has been destroyed. Europeans often characterize Americans as wanton consumers of energy, drivers of gas-guzzlers: is this fair?
Yes, definitively. I think we’re over privileged: we have a lot, we use and we waste a lot, and we don’t think about the needs and concerns of anyone else. We have to begin to focus on the needs of the third world now. We think of the third world as the child of a lesser god, and it has no relation to us. But we have to wake up and understand that we all breathe the same air, our children inherit the same future. If you had a magic wand so you could make one practical change to affect climate change, what would it be?
I would start with water. I think the fresh water issue is the main issue: the lack of clean water is one of the greatest environmental dangers we have to face now. It is the centre of most of the health problems in the third world. It causes so many diseases and destroys the hopes of so many children in so many of these countries. Hydrology is the energy of the future
EN
1
PHOTO
20070605PHT07528.jpg
EN
2
PHOTO
20070605PHT07522.jpg
EN
3
PHOTO
20070626PHT08377.jpg
EN
4
PHOTO
20070228PHT03696.jpg
EN
6
PHOTO
20070529PHT07115.jpg
EN
8
PHOTO
20070413PHT05281.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20060911FCS10501 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20061123STO00262 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
