Industry Committee endorses EU co-ordinators for key energy projects
Energy
2007-07-17 - 11:15
The nomination by the European Commission of four project co-ordinators in the field of energy was approved by the European Parliament's Industry, Research and Energy Committee on Tuesday. The co-ordinators, Wladyslaw Mielczarski, Georg Wilhelm Adamowitsch, Mario Monti and Jozias Van Aartsen, will be responsible for monitoring several key energy infrastructure projects to ensure their timely and successful realisation.
Professor Mielczarski has solid experience in the field of energy networks and will be responsible for the Northern European Powerlink. Mr Adamowitsch, former Economics Minister in the Federal Republic of Germany, will oversee the offshore wind project. Professor Monti, a member of the European Commission from 1995 to 2004, will deal with the France-Spain power connection. Mr Van Aartsen, former Foreign Minister of the Netherlands, will be in charge of the Nabucco gas pipeline project.
"I am very pleased that the committee has approved by an overwhelming majority the European Commission proposal to nominate four European co-ordinators on four very important energy network projects", said committee chair Angelika Niebler. "I am very confident that the nominated European co-ordinators will be a good choice and that they will make these important European energy infrastructure projects a success", she added. "I am delighted by the committee's green light for these four coordinators," said Energy Commissioner Andris Piebalgs. "This is not just another bureaucratic exercise – it is something which the project organisers have asked for and which all Member States have welcomed. It will bring real added value, and help us strengthen the economic foundations for the future prosperity of our citizens". The task of the co-ordinators will be to offer strategic support and practical advice. This will include: assessing obstacles; bringing interested parties together to work out optimal solutions; assessing the impact of the projects (e.g. on the environment), and devising appropriate implementation strategies. The co-ordinators will report annually to the Commission, Parliament and the Member States on the progress achieved in each project.
2007-07-16 Committee on Industry, Research and Energy In the chair Angelika Niebler EPP-ED DE
20070717IPR09255
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
