EU membership a possible long-term goal for a reformed, democratic Ukraine
External relations
2007-07-12 - 13:23
In the long term, Ukraine's European perspective can aim for EU membership, says an own-initiative report by Michal Kaminski (UEN, PL), adopted by the Parliament. The report calls on Ukraine's politicians to resolve the current crisis and tackle problems of corruption, as well as to further integrate the country's energy markets with the Union.
Members welcomed the Council's decision to open negotiations on a new agreement with Ukraine. Nevertheless, the House also expressed its belief that "the negotiations should lead to the conclusion of an Association Agreement that contributes efficiently and credibly to the European perspective of Ukraine and opens the corresponding process, including the possibility of membership." MEPs also recommended that the Council lay down a "concrete plan for the gradual establishment of a deep and comprehensive Free Trade Area" between the Ukraine and the EU.
On the other hand, the Parliament also expressed its disquietude with regard to the current political tensions. They noted that "before the negotiations are concluded and a new, closer relationship between the EU and Ukraine is established, the current crisis has to be peacefully resolved, the system of checks and balances restored and the enforcement of the rule of law ensured." In particular, the report notes that "the key to the stabilisation of Ukraine lies in unravelling political from economic powers, weeding out corruption, bringing transparency to public procurement procedures and ensuring an independent judiciary."
Energy issues
The report also calls on Ukraine to fully comply with principles of market economy and transparency in the energy sector. MEPs urge faster procedures for nuclear safety evaluations, a diversification of energy resources, and an overall effort to raise energy efficiency in Ukraine, which lags behind most other countries in the world. In this vein, the EP also called on the political leadership of the Ukraine to implement the relevant provision of the Kyoto Protocol.
20070710IPR09049 Text, as adopted by the EP on 12 July, will shortly be available here
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
