ECB should exercise caution over further interest rate rises
Euro
2007-07-12 - 16:22
MEPs are calling on the European Central Bank to be cautious about further increases in interest rates and have warned that calls for wage moderation are undermined by disproportionately generous pay rises for top executives. They reiterate their support for the ECB's independence and ask it to monitor closely developments in the housing market.
These positions were adopted in two own-initiative reports, intended as Parliament’s response to the 2006 ECB Annual Report and the 2007 annual report on the euro area from the Commission.
European Central Bank should exercise caution on interest rates
In their report on the European Central Bank, drawn up by Gay Mitchell (EPP-ED, IE) and adopted by 506 votes in favour to 64 against with 41 abstentions, in response to the ECB’s annual report for 2006, MEPs note that the economic recovery in the euro zone has become self sustaining, but emphasise that any further raising of interest rates should be undertaken with caution so as not to endanger growth.
They say it is crucial that wages increase in line with developments in productivity in order to allow for job creation in a non-inflationary environment, while warning that disproportionately generous wage increases for top executives undermine calls for wage moderation. Fiscal consolidation, especially in good times, is key to achieving long term growth, they argue.
Exchange rates and house prices
The report expresses concern about the ongoing appreciation of the euro against most major currencies and calls on the Eurogroup, the Council and the ECB to exercise their competences on exchange rates in full. (On the other hand, MEPs voted against calling for these institutions to coordinate their actions in this field more closely.)
Mr Mitchell’s report calls on the ECB to monitor closely developments on the real estate market which have potential consequences for the real economy.
ECB governance issues
Parliament reiterates its support for the independence of the ECB and for its aim of maintaining price stability and protecting its anti-inflation credentials.
Regarding the ECB’s role in providing central bank services such as Target and the Target 2 Securities project, Parliament recognises the value these can have in fostering financial market integration, but warns that the presentation of an appropriate governance structure for the Bank’s activities as an active market operator is overdue.
The report says that accountability and transparency would be improved if several candidates were evaluated by the Council when vacancies arise on the ECB Executive Board and if the chosen candidate were subject to a vote of approval in Parliament.
MEPs repeat their call for the Bank to publish summary minutes of Governing Council meetings, including the arguments in favour and against policy decisions and an indication of whether they were taken unanimously.
The report also repeats Parliament’s call the ECB to examine the reasons for the substantial increase in circulation of 500 euro notes with a view to identifying any attendant risks.
Report on the euro zone
In a report drawn up by Dariusz Rosati (PES, PL), adopted by a show of hands, in response to the Commission’s 2007 annual report on the euro area, MEPs took a position coherent with that of the ECB report, since the issues were closely related. Here though the recommendations were mainly addressed to the Member States and the Eurogroup.
MEPs call on Member States to use the current economic upswing to reduce deficits and accumulate surpluses, as well as to improve the quality of public finance with more investment in education, vocational training research and innovation.
This report argues that the national legislators and regulators too should evaluate carefully developments in the real estate market, with asset price increases being a further reason for fiscal caution.
Wage moderation starts at the top ...
Regarding wage developments, Parliament argues for a fairer distribution of the fruits of growth, calling on shareholders and corporate executives to maintain a responsible policy of remuneration packages at top executive levels, “which tend to grow disproportionately compared to ordinary salary levels and thus give the wrong signals and discourage support for a responsible wage policy”.
MEPs regret that the inflation criterion as set in the Treaty is measured against all Member States instead of concentrating on those which are now part of the euro zone. They call for further analysis and policy debate on the application of the convergence criteria to prospective new members of the euro area.
Parliament also argues that in the interests of stronger economic coordination, the Eurogroup should move to a more formal institutional framework, with proper infrastructure.
20070709IPR08943 2006 Annual report of the ECB 2007 annual report on the eurozone Text, as adopted by the EP on 12 July, will shortly be available here
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5498292
EN
2
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5498332
EN
3
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
