Opening of the Strasbourg session: condolences to this summer's disaster victims; deceased European leaders remembered
Institutions
2007-09-03 - 18:24
Parliament's President Hans-Gert Pöttering opened the first plenary session following the summer recess by expressing his sadness at the recent deaths of Gaston Thorn and Raymond Barre, "who both served as distinguished European Commissioners and as prime ministers of their respective countries" (Luxembourg and France). He also sent Parliament's condolences to the victims of of this summer's natural disasters in Europe.
The President had earlier reminded the House that last weekend marked the hundredth anniversary of the birth of Altiero Spinelli MEP, saying "his draft constitution for a European Union, which Parliament approved by a large majority in 1984, laid the foundations for many of the key changes introduced by successive treaty amendments, including a very substantial increase in the legislative power of this Parliament".
Natural disasters in Europe this summer
Mr Pöttering voiced sorrow at the impact of this summer's natural disasters in Europe, including the floods in Britain, the heatwave in the Mediterranean and the forest fires in Greece. Parliament will vote on a resolution on these natural disasters tomorrow (Tuesday 4 September).
The President also mentioned the 500 victims of the earthquake in Peru on 15 August, the thousands of deaths from the violence in Iraq and the many refugees who risked their lives seeking to reach the EU via the Mediterranean and the Atlantic.
The House observed a minute's silence in honour of the lives of all these people.
Highlights of the session 3-6 September 2007
The Portuguese President Aníbal Cavaco Silva will formally address the European Parliament. Parliament will give its views on the summer's "natural" disasters, counter-terrorism measures, the recent instability in the financial markets, combating alcohol related harm and the restrictions imposed on liquids that passengers can take on board aeroplanes. The House will also debate and vote on a first-reading legislative report on the inland transport of dangerous goods.
Monday 3 September
The session starts with a MEPs giving their reaction to the tragic fires in Greece. The Commission will make a statement entitled "forest fires in Greece, their consequences and conclusions to be drawn for prevention and preparedness measures." MEPs will vote on a resolution on Tuesday on "natural disasters". A debate on this subject was also held in Strasbourg on 11 July 2007.
Following this, the House turns its attention to a joint debate on better regulation in the EU. The House will debate four own-initiative reports on better regulation, subsidiarity and proportionality, the simplification of the regulatory environment and on so called "soft law" instruments. On the latter, the Legal Affairs Committee says soft law all too often constitutes an ambiguous and ineffective instrument which is liable to have a detrimental effect on Community legislation and institutional balance and should be used with caution, even where it is provided for in the Treaty.
Tuesday 4 September
Tuesday starts with MEPs debating an own-initiative report on the review of the single market. As MEPs in the committee underline, an improvement in the functioning of the Single Market is still necessary. "There is a need", reads the report, "to complete the opening of network industries, such as transport, telecommunications, postal services and energy transport."
MEPs will debate the risk of closure of the Gdansk shipyard. The shipyard is the birth place of the celebrated Solidarity trade union. Under EU rules, state aid for struggling shipyards can only be granted if it is accompanied by extensive cost-cutting aimed at restoring long-term viability
The House will then turn its attention to a first-reading report on the inland transport of dangerous goods. The Transport Committee recommends endorsing a Commission proposal to harmonise the rules for the transport of dangerous goods by making them as user-friendly as possible. Committee rapporteur Boguslaw Liberadzki (PES, PL) says that the new proposal integrates the existing rules into one piece of EU law which will cover the land transport modes - road and rail - and include inland waterway transport as well.
A report on the EU strategy to aid Member States in the their efforts to reduce alcohol related harm will also be debated and voted on by the European Parliament. The own-initiative report raises several issues including: labelling and health warnings, binge-drinking, "alcopops" and reducing accidents caused by drinking and driving.
The European Parliament will deal with three reports on the milk sector. School milk aid needs to be raised, and the necessary adjustments to Europe's dairy market should not jeopardise the existing private storage scheme. This is the thrust of a series of reports being proposed.
At midday on Tuesday, the President of Portugal Aníbal Cavaco Silva will address the House in a formal sitting. EP President Pöttering and Portuguese President Aníbal Cavaco Silva will hold a joint press conference after the formal sitting.
Tuesday afternoon is dedicated to the EU 2008 budget with its presentation by the Council. Parliament's first reading of the 2008 Budget in committee is expected to take place on the first week of October, with the view to a plenary vote on 25 October. The 2008 draft budget at first reading amounts to: €128.4bn in commitment appropriations and €119.4bn in payment appropriations.
Wednesday 5 September
The House will debate the fight against terrorism on Wednesday morning. The House will also vote on a resolution in October on this topic. The European Union is committed to jointly combating terrorism and to providing for the best possible protection for its citizens. Through good co-operation, several terrorist attacks in Europe have been prevented, and arrests and convictions obtained.
MEPs will vote on a resolution on restrictions imposed by the EU on liquids that passengers can take on board aeroplanes. The Transport Committee calls upon the Commission to review "urgently and on an ongoing basis" the EU-regulation regarding the introduction of liquids onto aircraft. In a draft resolution, MEPs express their concern that the costs engendered by the regulation may not be proportionate to the added value achieved by additional security provisions.
On Wednesday afternoon, MEPs will debate the recent instability in the world's financial markets with the Council and Commission, the day before the European Central Bank (ECB) makes its latest decision on interest rates. Increasing numbers of people defaulting on their loans in the so-called "sub-prime" mortgage market in the United States (where banks lent at higher interest rates to customers with poor or non-existent credit histories) have left a number of lenders in the sector in difficulties.
Also on Wednesday afternoon, the House will debate a report on human rights dialogue. Parliament will debate and vote on an own-initiative report by the Foreign Affairs Committee which calls on the Commission and Council to ensure a greater degree of coherence in the EU's human rights dialogues with third countries. MEPs in the committee particularly stress the need for Parliament to be informed of the content of ongoing dialogues and urge the use of more stringent criteria and monitoring mechanisms.
Thursday 6 September
Parliament will debate and vote on a report on the review of the consumer acquis. The report recommends that the scope of this review concentrate on updating and creating coherence between the eight consumer protection directives named in the Green Paper.
The House will also votes on a report on international health regulations. An own-initiative report by the Environment Committee calls for swift implementation throughout the EU of the International Health Regulations (IHR) as revised in 2005 by the World Health Assembly (WHA).
As is usual, the session ends with three debates and votes on human rights issues in the world. On this occasion, the topics are: Burma, Bangladesh and the financing of the Special Court for Sierra Leone.
20070831IPR09934 Briefing - 3-6 September 2007 Final draft agenda 3-6 September 2007
EN
2
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?reference=2007-09&language=EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070716BRI09221 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
