Post-Briefing - 9-12 July 2007 - Strasbourg
2007-07-16 - 15:32
President Pöttering's statement on terrorism
Opening the session with a statement on terrorism, EP President Hans-Gert PÖTTERING referred to the events that took place on 11 March 2004 in Madrid where 129 people died and one year later the bomb attacks in London where 56 people died and more than 700 people were injured. He also referred to the recent events of 29-20 June in London and Glasgow and against the suicide bombings in Yemen in which seven Spanish tourists and twoYemeni nationals died, and a further six people were injured. Measures, he said, have to be taken to fight terrorism.
The European Parliament then held a minute's silence for the victims of terrorism.
New European Parliament Vice-President - Martine Roure
The House voted by acclamation to appoint Martine Roure (PES, FR) as a new Vice-President of the European Parliament. Ms Roure replaces Pierre Moscovici. Mr Moscovici was elected to the French National Assembly and is therefore no longer an MEP. The 14 Vice-Presidents and the EP President sit on Parliament's Bureau along with the six Quaestors. The election of Martine Roure means there are now five female Vice-Presidents out of a total of 14, or 35.7 per cent.
Portuguese PM Sócrates tells MEPs new EU reform treaty in October
Portuguese Prime Minister José Sócrates outlined the new Presidency's priorities to MEPs in Strasbourg on Wednesday, 11 July. The Presidency, he said, was working to obtain agreement on the new reform Treaty at the informal 18-19 October informal meeting of Heads of State and Government following a rapid Intergovernmental Conference.
Conciliation agreement on Rome II - law on non-contractual obligations
The House approved a conciliation agreement on Rome II. After almost four years of negotiations, Parliament and Council representatives struck a deal on the regulation on the law applicable to non-contractual obligations, known as Rome II. The European Parliament agreed to introduce rules on road traffic accidents and environmental damages and delete the controversial provision on defamation by media. Diana WALLIS (ALDE, UK) is the Parliament's rapporteur.
MEPs adopt plenary sessions calendar for 2008
The House adopted the 2008 calendar for Strasbourg and Brussels plenary sessions. MEPs narrowly rejected (331 to 328) ofintroducing an additional eight one-day part sessions in Brussels.
Intergovernmental Conference
Parliament favours giving a green light to an intergovernmental conference (IGC) on EU treaty reform. Its report, adopted with 526 votes in favour, 128 against with 26 abstentions, says that although the proposed new EU treaty would incorporate the bulk of the draft constitution, EU cohesion could nonetheless be weakened by the exemptions granted to Member States. Parliament's opinion is required for the IGC to begin.
Statement by EP President Pöttering on death sentences on medical staff in Libya
In response to news on 11 July that the death sentences on six medical personnel detained in Libya have been confirmed, the President of the European Parliament, Hans-Gert Pöttering, made the following statement to the House. "Today the Libyan Supreme Court confirmed the death sentence of the five Bulgarian nurses and the Palestinian doctor detained in Libya since February 1999, accused of deliberately infecting hundreds of Libyan children with HIV.
Heart disease: Europe's No 1 killer
The European Parliament called on the EU Member States and the European Commission to tackle today's biggest killer in Europe: cardiovascular disease. Prevention strategies, public awareness campaigns, and the promotion of healthy lifestyles are urgently needed, believe MEPs.
MEPs give green light for EU public health programme 2008-2013
The House gave its seal of approval to a second-reading compromise package agreed with the Council on the second Community action programme on public health, which will run from 2008 to 2013. Parliament's negotiating team had accepted the budget figure proposed by the Council to make sure the new programme is up and running as of 1 January 2008.
Postal services: open to competition by 2011, but subject to safeguards
A large majority of MEPs want remaining postal services monopolies in EU Member States to expire by 31 December 2010, two years later than the 1 January 2009 proposed by the European Commission. With 512 votes in favour, 156 against and 18 abstentions, MEPs backed the compromise, proposed by postal services rapporteur Markus Ferber (EPP-ED, DE). This means that postal services should be opened up to competition by 2011, but subject to strict conditions.
EP Resolution calls for tougher sanctions on Khartoum
MEPs adopted on 12 July a resolution on the situation in Darfur following the recent visit of an ad-hoc delegation led by Josep Borrell (PES, ES). MEPs ask Member States of the EU to monitor more strictly the arms embargo against Khartoum and to enforce a no-fly zone over the region. They also call for an in-depth investigation on unpaid African-Union mission soldiers.
Current Palestinian crisis "no excuse" to undermine the regional peace process, say MEPs
The European Parliament condemned the Hamas take-over of Gaza, while emphasizing that the current crisis should not be used as an excuse to halt efforts to reach a lasting peace. An EP resolution adopted by a large majority also urged the resumption of political dialogue in Lebanon, and argued for a dialogue with Syria to resolve the conflicts in the region.
" Return to democratic government," says European Parliament to Pakistan
The European Parliament expressed its solidarity with the people of Pakistan following the recent siege of the Red Mosque in Islamabad. In a resolution adopted, MEPs also expressed their concern at the erosion of democratic values in Pakistan, and urged the government to step up its activities for ensuring that its northern regions are not used by terrorists fighting in Afghanistan.
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia EU prospects unrelated to its dispute with Greece
Welcoming recent reforms in the country, the European Parliament urged the start of actual accession negotiations as soon as possible, while insisting that the momentum of reforms must be maintained. The own-initiative report by Erik Meijer (UEL/NGL, NL) on the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (fYRoM) was adopted by a large majority (558-47-8), and made it clear that the contested issue of the country's name can not form part of the conditions for EU membership.
EU membership a possible long-term goal for a reformed, democratic Ukraine
In the long term, Ukraine's European perspective can aim for EU membership, says an own-initiative report by Michal Kaminski (UEN, PL), adopted by Parliament on 12 July. The report calls on Ukraine's politicians to resolve the current crisis and tackle problems of corruption, as well as to further integrate the country's energy markets with the Union.
Food additives legislation fit for the 21st century
Parliament approved with amendments a set of four regulations aimed at updating and simplifying methods for authorising food additives and bringing them into line with the latest scientific findings. One goal is higher safety standards for consumers but this streamlined legislation should also boost innovation and competitiveness in the European food industry.
Ban on sale of mercury measuring instruments - MEPs agree two year exemption for barometers
The European Parliament approved, at second reading, a ban on non-electrical mercury thermometers and other mercury instruments for general sale to the public, thereby dropping its earlier call for an open-ended derogation for barometer manufacturers and accepting Council's proposal for a two-year exemption instead. The draft directive prohibiting the sale on the EU market of these devices is part of a broad strategy on mercury, a metal which is highly toxic to humans, ecosystems and wildlife.
ECB should exercise caution over further interest rate rises
By adopting reports on the ECB and eurozone drawn up by Gay Mitchell (EPP-ED, IE) and Dariusz Rosati (PES, PL) respectively, MEPs call on the European Central Bank to be cautious about further increases in interest rates and have warned that calls for wage moderation are undermined by disproportionately generous pay rises for top executives. They reiterate their support for the ECB's independence and ask it to monitor closely developments in the housing market.
EU strategy to protect critical infrastructure from terrorist attacks
A proposed EU-wide strategy to protect critical infrastructure against terrorist attacks (in fields such as energy, health, communication and transport), was backed by the European Parliament. Nevertheless, MEPs stress that responsibility for protecting critical infrastructure still rests primarily with Member States and private stakeholders.
MEPs fear that new PNR agreement fails to protect citizens' data
The European Parliament looked into the recent agreement signed by the EU-US administration for the transfer of air passengers' data and concluded in its resolution that the new deal still fails to offer an adequate level of data protection and it has been concluded without any involvement of parliaments from both sides, lacking democratic oversight.
Excise duty on alcohol: Parliament votes against any increase in minimum rates
The Commission proposal to raise the EU-wide minimum rates of excise duty on alcoholic drinks other than wine was rejected by MEPs. They opposed amendments calling for the minimum rates to rise by 4.5 per cent, then voted against the whole Commission proposal.
Future developments in financial services
MEPs adopted a wide-ranging report on the future of EU financial services policy. It says the EU capital market “is leading the world not least because of the quality and solidity of its financial regulation” but also set out a series of areas where there is room for improvement, and highlights some potential concerns for the future.
Towards a future maritime policy
Parliament adopted an own-initiative report by Willy Piecyk (PES, DE) on a European future maritime policy. After tough negotiations between the responsible Transport Committee and the committees on the Environment, Industry and Research, Fisheries and Regional Affairs, Members were able to vote a report with a rather holistic approach. The environmental dimension, economic importance, tourism, fisheries policy as well as social aspects were consequently key topics in the report.
MEPs advocate more transparent ticket prices
In order to avoid misleading advertising and information of passengers the European Parliament adopted a legislative report saying that all air fares published in any form and addressed to the public must include all taxes, fees and charges added to the ticket price and known at the time of publication of the air fare. Air passengers must be treated like other consumers and thus have a right on clear and full information of the price they finally have to pay, the EP argues.
More measures needed on access to medicines says EP resolution
According to the resolution adopted by Parliament on 12 July, more needs to be done to allow developing countries and LDCs to access to medicines. The EP asks the Council to support the developing countries which use the flexibilities enshrined in the TRIPS Agreement. The Commission and the Member States should provide financial support for local production of pharmaceuticals in developing countries.
EP calls for a "fully liberalised European energy market as soon as possible"
The internal energy market should allow "consumer choice of supplier in an open competitive environment", and also be able to guarantee security of supply given that "it is essential for every citizen of the [EU] to have affordable access to energy", according to a report by the European Parliament.
How to make labour law fit for the 21st century?
"If labour law is to meet the challenges of the 21st century, it must focus to a large extent on employment security throughout a worker's life rather than protecting particular jobs", says an own-initiative report which contributes to the current debate on flexicurity within the EU. MEPs call for active labour policy that makes it easier to find a job, and to move from one job to another.
Reduction of the administrative burdens on businesses: mergers of public limited liability companies
By adopting a legislative report by Piia-Noora KAUPPI (EPP-ED, FIN), the European Parliament approved a directive concerning mergers of public limited liability companies and Council Directive 82/891/EEC concerning the division of public limited companies as regards the requirement for an independent expert's report on the occasion of a merger or a division.
Lift the ban on feeding fishmeal and fish oil to ruminants says MEPs
The European Parliament adopted a report by Struan STEVENSON (EPP-ED, UK) calling on the Commission and the Council to lift the ban on feeding fishmeal and fish oil to ruminants. The report stresses that "there is no scientific evidence to support a total ban on fishmeal on the grounds that it may transmit BSE or other TSEs".
Parliament endorses report on reducing regional development disparities
Investing in information technology infrastructure and education enabling everyone to use it, promoting local entrepreneurship, and building the administrative know-how to use EU regional funds productively, are key ways to reduce development disparities among EU regions, says an own-initiative report on the role and effectiveness of cohesion policy in reducing development disparities in the poorest regions of the EU, approved by a show of hands in plenary session on 12 July.
Human rights: Iraq, Transnistria, Vietnam
In three resolutions winding up the July plenary session, MEPs called for action to help the growing wave of Iraqi refugees; they condemned the abuses of the breakaway regime in Transnistria, Moldova; and they voiced concern at a new round of persecution of dissidents in Vietnam.
Adopted texts from the Strasbourg plenary session 9-12 July 2007 can be found here : The draft agenda for the first September Strasbourg plenary - 3-6 September 2007 can be found here : 20070706BRI08890
EN
1
A
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
2
A
/sides/indexPartSession.do?language=EN&reference=2007-09
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
President's Pôttering's statement on terrorism
2007-07-16 - 15:32
EP President Hans-Gert PÖTTERING opened the session with a statement on terrorism: "We are all aware of the events that took place on 11 March 2004 in Madrid where 129 people died and, two years after, the bomb attacks in London where 56 people died and more than 700 people were injured. More recently, we have witnessed the events on the 29 / 30 June in London and Glasgow and again the suicide bombings in Yemen in which seven Spanish tourists and two Yemeni nationals died, and a further six people were injured.
Many signs point to Al-Qaeda. This is a threat for us all. Terrorism is a direct attack on freedom, human rights and democracy. Terrorism is a method by which violence is used to undermine our values. Terrorism, whoever undertakes it, wherever and whenever it takes place, is a crime, and we are decisive in the fight against it. During this session we will consider the report by Jeanine HENNIS-PLASSCHAERT (ALDE, NL) on the 2006 draft regulation which calls for special measures in order to protect critical infrastructure. The European Parliament has to identify itself with that.
Measures have to be taken to fight terrorism. We are looking to a Europe-wide strategy here. We are going to be led by our principles and the rule of law in what we do, for the fight against terrorism has to reflect the values which we are defending. Furthermore, the EP expresses its solidarity and support to the families of the victims of terrorism. To refer to the words of Gordon Brown: "We shall not yield, we shall not be intimidated."
The European Parliament then held a minute of silence for the victims of terrorism.
Change to the agenda
MEPs approved the proposal (under Rule 168) to refer back the report by Helmuth MARKOV (GUE/NGL, DE) on road infrastructure safety management to the Transport Committee, thus taking it off the July Strasbourg agenda.. MEPs will now re-examine the Commission's proposal. Brian SIMPSON (PES, UK, North West, Labour) spoke in favour of the proposal.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
New European Parliament Vice-President - Martine Roure
2007-07-16 - 15:32
The House voted by acclamation to appoint Martine Roure (PES, FR) as a new Vice-President of the European Parliament. Ms Roure replaces Pierre Moscovici. Mr Moscovici was elected to the French National Assembly and is therefore no longer an MEP. The 14 Vice-Presidents and the EP President sit on Parliament's Bureau along with the six Quaestors. The election of Martine Roure means there are now five female Vice-Presidents out of a total of 14, or 35.7 per cent. The Bureau elected by Parliament for a period of two and a half years (which can be renewed) is the body that lays down rules for Parliament. It draws up Parliament’s preliminary draft budget and decides all administrative, staff and organisational matters.
The 14 Vice-Presidents are listed below :
Rodi KRATSA-TSAGAROPOULOU (EPP-ED, GR)
Alejo VIDAL-QUADRAS (EPP-ED, ES)
Gérard ONESTA (Greens/EFA, FR)
Edward McMILLAN-SCOTT (EPP-ED, UK)
Mario MAURO (EPP-ED, IT)
Miguel Angel MARTÍNEZ MARTÍNEZ (PSE, ES)
Luigi COCILOVO (ALDE, IT)
Mechtild ROTHE (PES, DE)
Luisa MORGANTINI (GUE/NGL, IT)
Martine ROURE (PES, FR)
Manuel ANTÓNIO DOS SANTOS (PES, PT)
Diana WALLIS (ALDE, UK )
Marek SIWIEC (PES, PL)
Adam BIELAN (UEN, PL)
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Portuguese PM Sócrates tells MEPs new EU reform treaty in October
2007-07-16 - 15:32
Portuguese Prime Minister José Sócrates outlined the new Presidency's priorities to MEPs in Strasbourg on Wednesday, 11 July. The Presidency, he said, was working to obtain agreement on the new reform Treaty at the informal 18-19 October informal meeting of Heads of State and Government following a rapid Intergovernmental Conference. MEPs expressed divergent views and voted on 12 July on the Parliament's opinion on the forthcoming IGC. The European Parliament will have 3 of its members fully involved in the IGC. (see separate article under 'Intergovernmental Conference.'
Council presidency
Opening the debate, the Council president-in-office and prime minister of Portugal, José Sócrates, said that in the present day, it was important for Europe to face up to global challenges and help build a more stable world, because "It is not only European people that need a strong Europe. It is the world that needs Europe." He then turned to the three priorities of his country's six-month presidency of the EU: treaty reform, economic and social modernisation and a stronger role for Europe in the world.
Treaty reform: Parliament's participation
The prime minister stressed that his presidency's job was to turn the mandate adopted at the last European Council into a new treaty. There would be an intergovernmental conference on 23 July, when Portugal would present "a draft Treaty drawn up on the basis of the detailed instructions set out in the mandate". Emphasising that the main issues had been settled by the summit, he said "One thing is clear to me. Our mandate is not to change the mandate, but to turn the mandate into a Treaty." Next, he said, "We intend to work actively to obtain an agreement on the Treaty during the informal European Council of 18th and 19th October in Lisbon".
He himself had argued for the European Parliament to have three representatives at the IGC (compared with two on previous, similar occasions). He would also propose that "the European Parliament is represented by its President whenever the Intergovernmental Conference meets at the Heads of State and Government level". He looked forward to the EP's approval later today of its opinion on the convening of an IGC, without which the process cannot start.
Modernisation of the European economy and society
Turning to his next priority, Mr Sócrates reminded the House that seven years ago the Lisbon Strategy was adopted, as a "roadmap for the modernisation of the European economy and society". A new phase of the strategy would be prepared in time for approval under the Slovenian presidency in early 2008.
Key areas would be the internal market, the role of culture industries in job creation, and energy and environment policy. "Here, Europe must have just one goal: to maintain its leadership in the environmental field and, in particular, in the fight against climate change", he said.
His presidency also intended to "give the social dimension of the “Lisbon Strategy” the relevance and visibility it deserves", by focusing on the creation of sustainable jobs in the context of global competition, sustainability of pension schemes and "flexicurity" (labour market reforms combined with protection for workers).
Another key area was strengthening of police and judicial cooperation in the fight against terrorism and organised crime. Striking the right balance was crucial, but he was confident that "democracy does not fear terrorism and know how to be firm in the face of this threat" He added "A good example of this firm position is that of the British government last week and I would like to express the solidarity of all the countries of the Union with them".
He also stressed that "The fight against terrorism should therefore remain a common aim among all member states. Because only European cooperation allows us to prevent, protect and pursue terrorism."
Strengthening Europe's role in the world
Mr Sócrates also told the House that "in the second half of 2007 unavoidable decisions must be taken about delicate questions on the global agenda", including Kosovo, the Iran nuclear issue and Darfur. Bilateral summits with India, China, Russia and Ukraine were also on the agenda and EU-US relations would remain crucial.
Three events merited special emphasis. Firstly, the recent summit with Brazil was important to Portugal because of close ties between the two countries but he also looked forward to a relationship "that is mutually beneficial to Europe and Brazil, and in this way also contributes to enhancing general relations with the whole of Latin America".
Secondly, the forthcoming Euromediterranean conferences in the areas of migration, energy, foreign affairs and ecofin/trade were part of "an in-depth political debate" which was needed given "the growing interdependence of the two margins of the Mediterranean".
Thirdly, Mr Sócrates spoke of the second EU-Africa summit set for December, stressing "the relations between two continents which are both historically close and very interdependent in our world today" and adding "we recognise the need to define a new strategic partnership between the EU and Africa, so as to develop sustainable growth, guarantee peace, combat endemic disease and achieve a balanced and mutually advantageous management of migratory flows".
Concluding, the prime minister said "in a world of change, the worst thing is to stand still". "Our intention is to ensure that Europe doesn't stop but moves forward in the service of a better world".
Commission President José Manuel Barroso
José Manuel Barroso said that: "The agenda of the Portuguese presidency is ambitious and demanding. The forthcoming IGC will play a major role, but the Portuguese presidency can't just be limited to the treaty. This IGC will also be of a very different nature to previous IGCs. We can now say that we have a never held an IGC with such a specific mandate. This time, we will be using a very developed language from a technical and legal viewpoint. The central issue of this IGC is not the political substance, but instead is level of faithfulness to the content of the mandate. The Commission fully defends the mandate and doesn't feel that the mandate should be reopened, and our overall goal is to transform the mandate into a Treaty. We do not want the renegotiation of a mandate that everyone gave their agreement to.
Furthermore, we shouldn't forget that this agreement was difficult, and was based on a difficult political balancing act. The Commission fully supports therefore the intention of the Portuguese presidency to carry out a concentrated, rapid IGC, and also the Commission will be particularly vigilant in ensuring that this mandate is complied with. The Commission fully supports a rapid IGC with a decision in October. "
Lisbon agenda
On the Lisbon strategy, President Barroso, said that positive results of this strategy are already coming through." Unemployment, he said had fallen by 10 million in the EU and female employment levels had increased by 50 per cent. We can not he said, be complacent. Innovation in particular is important, he said, as it is clearly linked to economic growth. This is why the priority given to the European Institute of Technology and the fight against climate change should be welcomed.
President Barroso said: "A reformed treaty will increase EU's capacity when it comes to external relations. Brazil, our most recent strategic partner, we share an ambitious agenda such as sustainable bio-fuels and tackling climate change."
Trade
On trade, President Barroso said: "International trade has to be based on rules and has to be run by multilateral agents. This also has to do with our multilateral vision of the world." "Trade is not just an end in itself; it is a motor for development bringing people out of poverty as has been in the case of Asian countries."
On Africa, the Commission President said "We need for a strategic partnership between the EU and Africa which tackles energy, immigration, climate change, democracy and human rights. . The EU cannot and should not be a set of countries that look inwards. The EU can and should be a force of stability in the world, [and] cannot close its eyes to the drama in Africa that is taking place so close to home," he said.
Concluding, President Barroso said: "We can have full confidence in Portugal and its pro-European credentials. We want a strong Europe for a better world. Together we will hopefully be able to work together to bring this about."
Political group speakers
The Portuguese Presidency's "will to build" was welcomed by EPP-ED group chairman Joseph DAUL (EPP-ED, FR) as following the "ambitious but realistic" path traced by its German predecessors.
Success in areas such as treaty reform, counter-terrorism measures and consolidating growth "will to some extent depend" on EU support, he noted, stressing that progress was needed in all these areas. Like a house of cards, "if any is missing, the whole edifice could collapse", he said.
Mr Daul hoped that the reform treaty could be completed by the autumn summit, and called on other Member States to co-operate with the UK to combat terrorism - the "I'm all right" attitude needs to be "done away with", he said, if we are to deal with sophisticated terrorist organisations that do not shrink from any kind of crime, including illegal immigration.
On the single market, Mr Daul noted that it takes courage to become a world-leading economic power, and stressed the need to bring home to EU citizens the tangible benefits of free movement of people, goods, capital, and services.
The Presidency's renewed focus on Africa and Brazil, and determination to pursue dialogue with Ukraine and Russia, were welcome, said Mr Daul, concluding with a call for "peace, security, courage and responsibility".
A year ago, Portugal's "nerves of steel" enabled it to turn the tide of football match in its favour by scoring penalties in extra time - a feat it now needs to repeat by turning the Intergovernmental Conference into a Treaty, began Socialist Group chairman Martin SCHULZ (PES, DE).
The PES group are "'realists' -what's being negotiated is not everything we would like, but at least we don't see less in this proposal" (the IGC mandate), he continued, stressing the need not "to step backwards into a crisis", and adding that it is hard to see how democracy can work in a "multi-speed" Europe.
The "Lisbon" strategy needs to deliver not just jobs and growth, but social security too, he said, insisting that this growth must be sustainable - otherwise, it is "worse than useless", he said.
The need to act on climate change is good example of a unifying theme for EU citizens - and one that MEPs can act upon, said Mr Schulz, stressing the need to harness the enthusiasm of young people, as displayed at a recent "Live earth" concert.
Yet unless Africa is involved, climate protection will be a "dead letter" he continued, noting that although Africa is among those that contribute least to climate change, it is among those that suffer most from it. The EU also needs to engage more intensively with Latin American countries to solve problems that affect them most, such as financial crises, he added.
The "common ground" between Portugal's Prime Minister and the Commission President, despite their differing political backgrounds, is "love of the European concept", noted Mr Schulz, wishing them every possible success.
The Presidency's programme has "clear goals" and "ample ambition" said ALDE chairman Graham Watson (UK), welcoming what he saw as "two Josés competing for the laurels of liberalism" - "It's the only way, José", he added, paraphrasing a UK newspaper.
On jobs and growth, Mr Watson stressed the need to put the "is on" back into "Lisbon", by ensuring that economic growth is sustainable. Here he welcomed the discussion on "flexicurity", which, he said, should "protect workers, not uncompetitive jobs, not businesses, but the people in them". Tackling climate change entails "merging the Lisbon and Gothenburg agendas", he concluded.
Africa and the EU need each other, said Mr Watson, hoping that the "first EU/Africa summit for seven years", will begin to forge a "new, generous, partnership".
In justice and home affairs, the ALDE will strive to protect civil liberties, ensuring inter alia that they are not eroded in the fight against terrorism.
Mr Watson urged that the IGC "package must not be unravelled", and concluded by wishing Portugal, this nation of navigators, "good luck and fair winds" in the Council.
Brian CROWLEY (IE) for the UEN group began by saying that "the main purpose of this Presidency will be to ensure that EU leaders sign a new EU treaty later this year", but reflecting that "a lot of work still remains to be done before this treaty is fully agreed." The EU-Africa summit set up by the Portuguese presidency offers "the opportunity to encourage other African countries to operate with each other" to achieve "what should be proper democratic control, and proper procedures for the rights and freedoms of individuals." It will also offer the chance to try and "find a clear way forward" for Darfur.
The reformed treaty, Mr Crowley added, should be "about giving us the freedom that we seek, not the freedom to do whatever we want, but the freedom to achieve all that we desire." The treaty should also give high priority to climate change, and Mr Crowley welcomed the Brazil summit which offered "the opportunity to bring forward the whole idea of renewable energies, looking at ways to bring about a new partnership with the developing world, and, most importantly of all, to guarantee that our citizens have the rights and freedoms they deserve."
On behalf of the Greens/EFA group, Monica FRASSONI (IT) stated that she liked the slogan of the Portuguese presidency, "A stronger Europe for a better world", but that specific action had to taken "to ensure that we do have a stronger Europe." As far as the IGC is concerned, Mrs Frassoni said, there should be "no tolerance whatsoever for those that want to revise downwards the agreements that have already been arrived at", but that there should be "space for a possible improvement, in climate change, for example."
The IGC should also be opened up to the involvement of Parliament and public debate. On the Lisbon strategy, Mrs Frassoni said that "absolutely nothing will happen if, over the next six months...you are not able to reinforce the climate change agenda." Favouring the idea of "a pact for the climate and climate change", Mrs Frassoni said that "it is now time to act" and that there should be measures in place to "limit temperature rising to two degrees over pre-industrial levels, and to ensure that there are sanctions as there are under the Stability Pact."
Mrs Frassoni also expressed caution about agro-fuels, and the "mystic vision and miraculous solution" given by President Lula of Brazil, stating that "deforestation, illegal imports of wood and food insecurity are actually going to work to the benefit of Europeans but not others."
Ilda FIGUEIREDO (GUE/NGL, PT) said that Europe is still faced with an "increase in precarious jobs and poverty", and a situation in which "women and children have their human rights negated." We should be looking at the "deep injustices" that have not been addressed by the reformed constitutional treaty and "must forget about sacrosanct competitiveness." There must be "a change of direction for the EU", Mrs Figueiredo continued, because "we see this insecurity prevailing amongst workers." It is time for "people to deepen democracy and concentrate on a fairer Europe and a greater division of power." Mrs Figueiredo added that "we need strength, co-operation and solidarity internationally" and that "the new draft treaty is just like the previous one, which ignored the real priorities before us."
Patrick LOUIS (FR), for the Independence and Democracy group, said that the German presidency tried to impose upon the French and Dutch people a text which they rejected in a referendum, now they have a new version of the same thing." Mr Louis spoke of the "manipulation we are being subject to" and expressed a "wish to the Portuguese presidency" that "if you don't want the peoples of Europe to be alienated from politics, the Portuguese presidency must go back to the methods of another age, and institute...less technocracy, more democracy."
Bruno GOLLNISCH (ITS, FR) said of the Portuguese presidency that "we cannot help but admire your objectives" such as making a contribution to help "resolve the problems in Africa, problems which have worsened since the European nations departed."
Mr Gollinsch added that "the wish to develop a European international policy can only be legitimate and transparent if it can distinguish itself from that hegemony and superpower which we know the USA to be." On the IGC, Mr Gollinsch said that "Europe shall have to apply a roadmap which has been imposed on you, which is defeating the voters. It is about a constitution which has already been rejected and you are just changing the wording." He added that people "would reject [the constitution] again if they were properly informed."
Gianni DE MICHELIS (IT), on behalf of the non-attached members, said to the Portuguese presidency that that they "appreciate the list of priorities that you gave" but added that "to ensure that your slogan becomes reality, in order to show that a stronger Europe can help for a better world, we do have to introduce some changes." Mr De Michelis referred to the priority given to the Middle East, and said that "Europe can and should do more", and that the increasing dangers in the region "gives us new opportunities." He added that "Europe has to know how to be stronger if it is to contribute to a better world."
British speakers
Alyn SMITH (Greens/EFA) stated that his party decided, on balance, that "we could not recommend the previous draft of the Constitution to our voters, but that is in the past, and we view your efforts with a fair heart and an open and constructive attitude. We wish you all the best. The EU is far from perfect but what is right with it is to be saved and is to be promoted. If you can build on the successes and sweep away what does not work – like this building, perhaps! – I hope to congratulate you in December also."
Nigel FARAGE (IND/DEM) stated that fortunately, there are some voices in the EU who are honest and say that we have the substance of the Constitution and all we have done is to change the terminology. Others say that we have 90%, we have 99%, of what was there in the first place.
Mr Farage stated that if the British had a referendum on the Constitution, 70% of perhaps more would say 'no'. Mr Barroso, he stated, talked on Tuesday about the EU being an empire and, "when it comes to Africa, my goodness me it is! I urge you to stop the fisheries deals with West Africa. Stop your own fleet. Stop the Spanish fleet plundering western African resources, killing African fishermen. If you do that in your six-month Presidency then you will have done something positive for Africa. Please act!"
Timothy KIRKHOPE (EPP-ED).wanted to ensure that the EU-Africa summit later this year takes place without the presence of Robert Mugabe. Mr Kirkhope and his colleagues, including Geoffrey Van Orden, have been underlining this matter for some time because, he said, it would be intolerable for our Union to welcome such a tyrant to Europe at a time when the suffering of his people is clear and should be uppermost in our minds.
"As to the draft mandate for the IGC, it may be very precise but it is not necessarily right. We do believe very strongly that, whatever form this constitution is shown to be in, there ought to be a referendum, certainly in the United Kingdom. And indeed we believe that the promise made by our outgoing - now gone - Prime Minister, Mr Blair, to give the British people a referendum on this issue should be followed and taken on board by his successor, Gordon Brown.
We do have other serious concerns. There are serious concerns about our continuing commitment to free competition, about the legal position of the so-called British opt-out of the Charter of Fundamental Rights and about the collapse of the third pillar, but I look forward to a positive debate during the IGC on these matters.
Finally, I want to refer to the resolution on the IGC today which calls for the issue of Parliament's two seats to be included in the mandate. I believe this is the perfect opportunity to demonstrate that Europe is listening to the people. The continuing vast expense of shuffling between Brussels and Strasbourg undermines the standing of our Parliament and the matter must be resolved soon."
Council response
For the Council, Mr Sócrates reiterated that the main priority of his country's presidency was to resolve the "constitutional crisis" by adopting a new treaty swiftly. He stressed that ratification of the treaty by national parliaments was perfectly legitimate and should not be seen as less democratic than referendums. The prime minister underlined the importance of the recent first EU summit with Brazil, saying that a good political dialogue with this country would help efforts to complete the Doha round of trade negotiations.
Responding to concerns about human rights in Africa in connection with the EU-Africa summit in December, he said a structured political dialogue with this part of the world would help tackle issues such as hunger, governance and indeed human rights. Mr Sócrates voiced concern about that morning's confirmation of the death sentences on the Bulgarian nurses and Palestinian doctor in Libya but said he believed a solution was still possible.
On climate change, he stressed the value of the decisions taken at the EU's spring summit and was firmly convinced that biofuels were part of the solution. Lastly, the prime minister underlined the importance to his presidency of dealing with immigration and the need to look at all sides of the question: border security, a humane approach and coordination of policies.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Conciliation agreement on Rome II - law on non-contractual obligations
2007-07-16 - 15:32
The House approved a conciliation agreement on Rome II. After almost four years of negotiations, Parliament and Council representatives struck a deal on the regulation on the law applicable to non-contractual obligations, known as Rome II. The European Parliament agreed to introduce rules on road traffic accidents and environmental damages and delete the controversial provision on defamation by media. Diana WALLIS (ALDE, UK) is the Parliament's rapporteur. The so-called "Rome II" Regulation aims to facilitate litigation between citizens from different European countries on matters such as traffic accidents, accidents caused by defective products and environmental damage by harmonising national legal provisions.
The regulation sets out the general rule that the law applicable to a non-contractual obligation arising out of a tort (roughly speaking, an action or inaction which causes damage or injury for which there can be recourse to civil law proceedings) is the law of the country in which the damage occurs, irrespective of the country in which the event giving rise to the damage took place. Nevertheless, for situations where the tort is manifestly more connected with another country, the regulation provides for specific rules to allow courts to treat individual cases in the most appropriate way. Finally, the involved parties are also free to agree on the law applicable to their circumstances, if the choice is demonstrated "with reasonable certainty".
Traffic accidents represent the majority of cross-border disputes involving EU citizens. Non-contractual obligations arising out of family relationships, matrimonial property issues and succession rights are excluded from the regulation.
After two readings by Parliament and Council under the co-decision procedure, the main points of disagreement remaining between MEPs and EU governments concerned violation of privacy, including defamation, road traffic accidents, the definitions of environmental damage and of unfair competition, and the review clause. All these points were settled at a formal conciliation meeting on 15 May, with the outcome being described as "historic" by Diana Wallis (ALDE, UK), who piloted the legislation through Parliament. "It is the first time Parliament has dealt with such an instrument in codecision. The first, but not the last", she said.
Road traffic accidents
At Parliament's insistence, the provisions on personal injuries and related compensation are, in the end, to be included in the regulation. This issue turned out to be particularly complex, due to the different practices followed in the Member States regarding the level of compensation awarded to victims of road traffic accidents.
According to the approved text, in a case of personal injury caused by a car accident where the victim is not in his or her home state, the court concerned should take into account the actual losses and costs incurred by the victim. Moreover, the Commission is asked to present, before the end of 2008, a study on all options for improving the position of cross-border victims, including insurance aspects and, if appropriate, a Green Paper.
Defamation by the media
At second reading, MEPs had approved an amendment to regulate the violation of privacy by print or audiovisual media. According to that text, the law applicable in case of defamation by media would have been the one of the country to which the publication or broadcasting service is principally directed or, if this is not apparent, the country in which editorial control is exercised. However, national governments strongly opposed the Parliament’s position and the Conciliation Committee agreed to leave this matter to be discussed in the future under the review clause.
Unfair competition and environmental damage
MEPs insisted and obtained a definition of environmental damage to be introduced in the Regulation. According to the approved article, "environmental damage" will cover any damage of natural resources, such as water, land or air, or any damage to a natural resource service, as well as to the diversity of living organisms. On unfair competition, Parliament successfully insisted on having a clear rule to ensure courts apply one single law and thus to avoid "forum-shopping". The agreed text says that, in case of restriction of competition, the applicable law is the law of the country where the market is, or is likely to be, affected.
The review clause
MEPs obtained two review clauses: a special review clause with a shorter timetable (by 2008) to address the issue of defamation and road traffic accident and a general one, whereby the Commission will present a study on the application of Rome II 4 years after its entry into force. This report will also provide a study on the extent to which national courts apply foreign law. The Regulation will be applicable in all Member States 18 months after the date of adoption.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
MEPs adopt plenary sessions calendar for 2008
2007-07-16 - 15:32
The House adopted the 2008 calendar for Strasbourg and Brussels plenary sessions as set out in the link below. MEPs narrowly voted in favour (331 to 328) of rejecting the idea of introducing an additional eight one-day part sessions in Brussels. As usual there will be 12 plenary sessions in Strasbourg (two in September) lasting four days and six in Brussels lasting two days. .
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Intergovernmental Conference
Treaty reform: Parliament gives green light to Intergovernmental Conference
2007-07-16 - 15:32
Parliament favours giving a green light to an intergovernmental conference (IGC) on EU treaty reform. Its report, adopted with 526 votes in favour, 128 against with 26 abstentions, says that although the proposed new EU treaty would incorporate the bulk of the draft constitution, EU cohesion could nonetheless be weakened by the exemptions granted to Member States. Parliament's opinion is required for the IGC to begin. The House approved a report by Jo LEINEN (PES, DE) on the opening of an Intergovernmental Conference (IGC) on EU treaty reform. This report forms the basis of Parliament's opinion, which under Article 48 of the current EU Treaty, is required before the IGC can start work. But the European Parliament's opinion voices certain reservations about the reform mandate.
Support for the overall package
MEPs welcome the fact that the agreement reached by the European Council on 23 June included most of the content of the draft Constitution. Specifically, the EU's legal personality, the increased use of qualified majority voting (which would become the rule for all EU policies except defence, social security and fiscal policy) and the inclusion in the treaty of the Charter of Fundamental Rights are among the reforms deemed to guarantee a more efficient and democratic Union.
Members also expressed a positive opinion on the addition of the new provisions on energy solidarity and climate change. The approved text welcomes the tight timetable for the conclusion of the IGC, to allow the new Treaty to come into force before the 2009 European Parliament elections.
Shortcomings identified
Whilst broadly endorsing the content of the agreement on the treaty reforms, MEPs criticised the IGC mandate as not adequately addressing the challenges that the Union faces today.
They regret the increased number of exemptions granted to Member States in important areas, which could undermine the cohesion of the EU. Specifically, they disapproved of any derogation granted to Member States on the Charter of Fundamental Rights, as damaging to the EU's identity.
The Parliament also deplores the loss of parts of the draft Constitution, including symbols (flag and anthem), a clear statement of the primacy of EU law, and clearly comprehensible naming of legislative acts. MEPs therefore decided to consider modifying Parliament's procedural rules in order to lend and official character to the flag and the hymn.
Parliament aims to be fully involved in the IGC
According to the June European Council conclusions, the European Parliament will be closely involved in the work of the IGC. Three MEPs will join the conference to ensure that Parliament's voice is heard. During the previous IGC, in 2003-4, only two MEPs joined the meetings. Parliament is to choose its three IGC representatives on 12 July.
Parliament wants to play an active role both during and after the negotiations. In fact, once briefed by its three representatives, Parliament will if necessary put forward proposals on specific issues within the scope of the mandate. After the 2009 elections, according to the approved text, Parliament will also make proposals on further constitutional settlements for improving the functioning of the EU.
Members stressed the Parliament's intent to ensure full transparency of the IGC's work. Its opinion says that the EP will publish all the working documents submitted to the Conference. Moreover, it will keep an open dialogue with national parliaments and the civil society all throughout the IGC and during the following ratification procedure.
European Parliament seat - amendment rejected
Finally, an amendment proposed by Alexander ALVARO (ALDE, DE) on the European Parliament's seat was defeated with 280 votes in favour, 370 against with 33 abstentions. It read: "Calls for the mandate of the IGC to be extended to include a change in the seat of the European Parliament from Strasbourg to Brussels and of the European Council (summit) from Brussels to Strasbourg."
Debate preceding the vote - Convening of the IGC on the reform treaty
Council
The debate was opened by Portugal's Minister for European Affairs, Mr Lobo Antunes, who said the mandate for the IGC was "a compromise between opposing positions" but was a "balanced text". Highlighting the fact that Parliament will be fully involved in the IGC, with its three representatives, and stressing that the EP would be "fully consulted", he urged Members to give their full support to the mandate in their vote.
Commission
For the Commission, vice-president Margot Wallström pointed to four reasons why the agreed mandate would give the EU a sound institutional basis for the future: it would make the institutions more modern and accountable; the Charter would safeguard fundamental rights as regards the implementation of EU law and was binding on the EU institutions and Member States (except one); the EU would speak with a single voice on the world stage; and swifter, more consistent decisions could be taken in areas such as climate change and freedom, justice and security.
She then turned to the issue of explaining the treaty's importance to the public, saying "The European train is back on track but it is not at the end of the journey. The citizens must be on board". Communication would be crucial and the Commission, for its part, was planning to put forward some ideas in the near future on ways of organising a debate on the reform treaty during the ratification period.
Rapporteur Jo LEINEN (PES, DE) began by stating that the IGC "will be at the heart of what the Portuguese presidency wants to do", and that "whether or not we get the treaty will determine the success" of the presidency. The European Parliament has "pulled out all the stops to ensure that we are not responsible for placing obstacles in the path of the IGC", Mr Leinen continued, because "we want an outcome by October. We have a clear mandate, so this is possible." Mr Leinen urged the Portuguese presidency to "stick to your guns, don't let yourselves be distracted", and in particular, not to "let errant Member States turn the whole process upside-down." The presidency should "stick to the deal that has been agreed", for "if you work within the mandate you cannot help but be successful."
Mr Leinen stated that "the reformed treaty is, in essence, different to the original constitutional treaty:" He added that "the idea of a Europe of citizens and states, rather than merely a Europe of states has been somewhat watered down with the loss of article one." It is, he said, "no longer a reflection of the will of peoples and states. This is regrettable, and could turn out to be more so." He also expressed some anxiety concerning the "array of derogations attached to this IGC... are we all pulling in the same direction or do we have a 'Europe à la carte'? Do we have two categories of Member States?" Mr Leinen also criticised the "opt-out from the Charter of Fundamental Rights by the UK", stating that "this is a community of values."
He continued by saying that "we seek to call the rest of the world to account on human rights", when in fact "we are unable to take a united line on human and fundamental rights." He added that "In the interest of people of the UK, we call upon the heads of state and government to restore a degree of unity [regarding] human rights."
What we have is a "simplified treaty that unfortunately threatens to be more complex than anything we've seen before", Mr Leinen said, and it should therefore "be accompanied by a declaration that makes clear what this is all about."
Political group speakers
"It was a good thing that the summit agreed on the IGC, and that is why we shall vote in favour", said Íñigo MÉNDEZ DE VIGO (EPP-ED, ES), adding that his group will nonetheless "judge by results". The EPP-ED will be represented at the IGC by Elmar BROK (EPP-ED, DE), whom it will regard as a "guardian" of the proposal's substance, said Mr Mendez De Vigo. Many advocates of referendums "are out to destroy Europe", so we must "fight together" to dispel "mistrust and suspicion" and find a way to break the "institutional deadlock", he concluded.
The Socialist Group "welcomes the IGC, accepts the mandate and supports the timetable", said Richard CORBETT (PES, UK). That the IGC mandate "salvages" 90% of the constitution has excited much comment, noted Mr Corbett, who pointed out that although that mice and men are 90% identical, the 10% difference is rather important.
The 10% lost from the constitution include the treaty's "constitutional" nature, the title "foreign minister", a statement of the supremacy of EU law, and symbols. All this makes it a very different beast, which is a matter of regret for this House, and also for many in the Member States. But the "crucial point" is that these changes "will make it easier to ratify", concluded Mr Corbett.
The prospect of a "quick and efficient IGC, that clears up ambiguity, secures legal certainty and builds strong consensus behind the reform treaty" is welcome, said Andrew DUFF (ALDE, UK). It is right that the EP should seek to retain those parts of the 2004 document that protect its interests, but it should also seek to ensure that the footnotes do not "contaminate the corpus" of EU law and the jurisdiction of the courts, he said. The ALDE group will fight to prevent any "political spillover" from the UK's arrangement with respect to fundamental rights, because the European Parliament "cannot tolerate first and second class citizenship". We should "fight suspicion that the IGC is a 'grand exercise in obscurantism'". Plebiscites should not be "pitched to oppose Parliaments" and Parliament's role in the IGC will help to ensure transparency, concluded Mr Duff.
On behalf of the UEN group, Konrad SZYMAŃSKI (UEN, PL) said that "it seems to me that as far as this treaty is concerned, this parliament doesn't like compromise." The criticism of the treaty in the report, he added "is unjust." Mr Szymański objected to the "stubborn language used in the document" and said that "the mandate is obviously a success."
Johannes VOGGENHUBER (Greens/EFA AT) said that "perhaps Europe has been hit harder than we realise", for we have a situation in which "Member States are suspicious" and "people are very jealous of their sovereignty." The mandate, Mr Voggenhuber continued, "veils the real character of Europe" and thus "gives us a fake idea of European construction", for what we are witnessing right now is in fact "a reawakening of nationalism."
He added that "the opting out of the Charter of Fundamental Rights is almost a killing blow."
Francis WURTZ (GUE/NGL, FR) asked "how do we understand the democracy at the heart of this process?" We have had, he said, "totally illegible negotiations" along with a "real fear of there possibly being a referendum." There is a real lack of awareness surrounding the reformed treaty, Mr Wurtz added, and it is vital to "get people talking about the substance of the future treaty" in order to ensure that "we have full democracy, full consultation of our European citizens."
Bernard WOJCIECHOWSKI (PL) for the Independence and Democracy group said that the constitution is "little more than a sloppy attempt at federalising the Union at any price" and that "this parliament has become so arrogant that if it were not so pathetic it would be funny." He stated that "to say that we maintain an open dialogue with anyone is a mere joke" and that "scholars and politicians declare [the new treaty] a complete failure."
Philip CLAEYS (ITS, BE) said that we have effectively "admitted that the European constitution...is not actually going to ever enter into force" and that "we're now going to have a new effort to bring the constitution in through the back door." The debate on the treaty has led to a situation in which we "have to draw a distinction between the so-called 'good' Member States and the so-called 'bad' Member States" and that we have reached a point where "we are not actually able to represent the interests of our citizens and we have to think about what we really mean by democracy."
"This is a report which conspicuously avoids support for popular ratification of the recast constitution", said Jim ALLISTER (UK) on behalf of the non-attached Members. He added that "such is the determination to rush this report through that we have abandoned due process in this house to a degree that would make a despot blush." The constitution, Mr Allister continued, "permits self-amendment which for most will mean never again having to consult the people about whose constitutional status we would make changes."
Council and Commission responses
For the Council, Mr Lobo Antunes said "what counts is the commitment to make progress". But, he was confident that "the determination is there". We are sending a signal, he argued, that "this project serves the interests of Europe and the world".
The mandate, he continued, would lead to "more effective institutions and more democratic decision-making" and, alluding to the need to ensure public support for the treaty, he concluded by saying that transparency "is part of our commitment".
For the Commission, Mrs Wallström said it was a rare thing to get a second chance in life: less than a year ago the constitution was being pronounced dead or on life-support but here we were coming up with a reform treaty!
She made two final points. On the Charter of Fundamental Rights, the real political choice had been between a non-binding charter or a legally binding charter with opt-outs. She preferred the latter. On ratification, she felt that Members of the European Parliament would surely not regard parliamentary ratification as less democratic than referendums.
At all events, regardless of the ratification method used, everyone was now obliged to engage in communication with the citizens all over Europe, and she repeated her earlier statement that the Commission would be making proposals on this point.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External relations
Statement by EP President Pöttering on death sentences on medical staff in Libya
2007-07-16 - 15:32
In response to news on 11 July that the death sentences on six medical personnel detained in Libya have been confirmed, the President of the European Parliament, Hans-Gert Pöttering, made the following statement to the House. "Today the Libyan Supreme Court confirmed the death sentence of the five Bulgarian nurses and the Palestinian doctor detained in Libya since February 1999, accused of deliberately infecting hundreds of Libyan children with HIV. I am greatly disturbed by this news which is distressing for everybody, especially of course for the nurses and the doctor but in particular for their friends and relatives. I have met their family members in April and I would like to send them our solidarity and support at this difficult moment. In addition I want to transmit to them a clear message of hope: This is not the end of the procedure. The matter will now be referred to the Libyan High Judicial Council. We believe that the Libyan authorities will take the necessary measures to review and quash the death sentence and pave the way for an early resolution.
Once again we reiterate our fundamental opposition to the death penalty which is against human dignity and express our solidarity with the victims of the HIV/AIDS infection in the Benghazi hospital.
We appeal to the Libyan authorities to show clemency and to release the Bulgarian nurses and the Palestinian doctor."
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External relations
EP Resolution calls for tougher sanctions on Khartoum
2007-07-16 - 15:32
MEPs adopted on Thursday in Strasbourg Plenary a resolution on the situation in Sudan's Darfur, following the recent visit of an ad-hoc delegation led by Josep Borrell (PES, ES). MEPs ask Member States of the EU to monitor more strictly the arms embargo against Khartoum and to enforce a no-fly zone over the region. They also call for an in-depth investigation on unpaid African-Union mission soldiers. The resolution condemns the "blatant violation" of the UN arms embargo by the Government of Sudan as set out in the UN Security Council Resolutions of 30 July 2004 (S/Res/1556) and 29 March 2005..
MEPs consider that "a military no-fly zone over Darfur should be immediately established". Targeted economic sanctions including travel bans and asset freezes should be applied to those violating the ceasefire or attacking civilians, including the Government of Sudan.
The resolution urges Sudan to "arrest Humanitarian Affairs Minister Ahmad Muhammad Harun and Janjaweed leader Ali Kushayb" suspected of war crimes and crimes against humanity and to surrender them to the International Criminal Court.
Unpaid soldiers from African Union Mission in Sudan
The House calls for an in-depth investigation into the fact that "some AMIS soldiers have not received any pay for many months". The Commission and EU states have given over 400 million euros to the African Union Mission in Sudan (AMIS) since it has been deployed to Sudan in 2004.
China
MEPs call on China to cease exporting arms to Sudan and to cease blocking decisions on targeted sanctions against Khartoum at the UN Security Council. The Development Committee welcomes "the signs that China is now more willing to promote peace in Darfur."
Member of the EP delegation which went to Darfur between 30 June and 5 July 2007 were Thierry Cornillet (ALDE, FR), José Ribeiro e Castro (EPP-ED, PT), Frithjof Schmidt (Greens/EFA, DE) and Jürgen Schröder (EPP-ED, DE).
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External relations
Current Palestinian crisis "no excuse" to undermine the regional peace process, say MEPs
2007-07-16 - 15:32
The European Parliament condemned the Hamas take-over of Gaza, while emphasizing that the current crisis should not be used as an excuse to halt efforts to reach a lasting peace. An EP resolution adopted by a large majority also urged the resumption of political dialogue in Lebanon, and argued for a dialogue with Syria to resolve the conflicts in the region. The House condemned Hamas's seizure of military control over the Gaza Strip, and expressed its "understanding and support for President Abbas' extraordinary decisions given the serious circumstances." MEPs welcome the Council's decision to resume normal relations with the Palestinian authority, including direct financial support to the government.. They also called for the "release of all the imprisoned Palestinian former ministers, legislators and mayors, and Israeli corporal Gilad Shalit," while welcoming the release of BBC journalist Alan Johnston as "a positive step forward."
Parliament urges the "resumption of the internal political dialogue between Palestinians," and noted that "the current crisis is not an excuse to undermine the prospect of peace." MEPs welcome Israel's decision to transfer parts of the withheld Palestinian tax and customs revenues, but called for a "complete and regular transfer" of all these funds. Members also called on Israel to remove roadblocks, stop the extension of settlements, and halt the building of the security wall beyond 1967 borders. The House condemns both Qassam missile attacks on Israel from Gaza, as well as military interventions by the Israeli army.
Lebanon - call for immediate release of two Israeli soldiers
Members urge the kidnappers of two abducted Israeli soldiers, Eldav Regev and Ehud Goldwasser, to give a sign of life of their captives, and called for their immediate release. The resolution also argues for a "re-launch of the dialogue for national unity" in the country in order to achieve political stability. The resolution strongly condemns the terrorist attack on Spanish soldiers of UNIFIL stationed in Lebanon. It welcomes the UN Security Council resolution setting up the international Tribunal to try those responsible for the assassination of former Lebanese Prime Minster Rafik Hariri and other political murders.
Wider Middle East Peace Process
MEPs recall the "valuable contribution of the Arab Peace Initiative," and called on Israel to recognize the window of opportunity that it offers. They also emphasise that "neither preconditions nor unilateralism help" the peace efforts in the region, and said that "dialogue with Syria [was] one of the key factors" in this context.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External relations
"Return to democratic government," says European Parliament to Pakistan
2007-07-16 - 15:32
The European Parliament expressed its solidarity with the people of Pakistan following the recent siege of the Red Mosque in Islamabad. In a resolution adopted today, MEPs also expressed their concern at the erosion of democratic values in Pakistan, and urged the government to step up its activities for ensuring that its northern regions are not used by terrorists fighting in Afghanistan. The EP expressed its "solidarity with the people of Pakistan, who are victims of the violence perpetrated by the armed extremists" and its great concern about the still unknown number of casualties at the Red Mosque. The House also "recognises the challenges the siege posed to the Government of Pakistan, regrets the loss of life and supports the efforts to bring those responsible to justice."
Return to democratic government
The Parliament expressed its concern about several areas of democracy in Pakistan, as well. It urged the government of Pakistan to "return to democratic government by holding free, fair and democratic elections" notably by encouraging President Musharraf to relinquish his post of army chief, as previously agreed with the EU. Members also "deplored the suspension of Chief Justice Chaudhry of the Supreme Court on alleged charges of misconduct which was widely regarded as an effort by the government to maintain control over the Judiciary in an election year."
They also worried about the upcoming Parliamentary elections. The EP expressed its worry about the neutrality of the caretaker government that will be in place three months before the elections, and about the lack of legitimacy of a future President, were he or she to be elected by the outgoing Assembly, instead of the new one. The House also urged the removal of academic qualifications as a precondition for standing as a candidate, as these mandatory qualifications would preclude 70% of Pakistani women from standing for election.
Stronger commitment to human rights, tougher stance on terrorism
MEPs condemned all attempts by the Government to control media freedom and noted with concern the "continuing reports of repression against religious minorities." They were similarly concerned by the "numerous and well-documented cases of 'disappearances" of journalists, students, political activists as well as terrorist suspects.
With respect to terrorism, the EP worried that the "domestic political alliances that exist between the Government, the military and religious fundamentalists may hamper the ability of the Government to address the issue of extremism and fundamentalism." Members therefore urged the Pakistani government to "take immediate and effective steps to prevent any political or armed force from using its territory as a sanctuary and as a base for operations in Afghanistan."
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External relations
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia EU prospects unrelated to its dispute with Greece
2007-07-16 - 15:32
Welcoming recent reforms in the country, the European Parliament urged the start of actual accession negotiations as soon as possible, while insisting that the momentum of reforms must be maintained. The own-initiative report by Erik Meijer (UEL/NGL, NL) on the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (fYRoM) was adopted by a large majority (558-47-8), and made it clear that the contested issue of the country's name can not form part of the conditions for EU membership. The report welcomed the progress made by the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia since its application for EU membership, and pointed out that "the reform momentum must be maintained, and that the adopted legislation must now be properly and promptly implemented." MEPs were especially concerned about reforms in the fields of police, judiciary and public administration, as well as the fight against corruption. The House also commended the government for its cooperation in the field of CFSP and ESDP, and for its "constructive position on the future status of Kosovo." Nevertheless, it urged the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia to reach an agreement with the province on unresolved frontier demarcation issues.
Members noted with satisfaction the Ohrid Framework Agreement, which established the application of the double majority principle (the so-called Badinter principle) protecting non-majority communities in parliamentary decision-making. They also regretted the practice of boycotting the Parliament, and pointed out that such practices "are incompatible with functioning parliamentary institutions." The EP therefore welcomed the successful consultations between government and opposition on the use of Albanian in public institutions, and the agreement on the list of laws to be subject to the Badinter principle.
A candidate by any other name
The most enduring controversy surrounding the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia still seems to be the country's official name. The EP welcomed the fact that the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia has changed its flag, and has made constitutional amendments to confirm that it has no territorial claims against neighbouring countries. MEPs urged the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Greek governments to conclude talks on this issue as soon as possible, while reiterating that "the name issue is not an obstacle to the opening of negotiations for EU accession." While welcoming the initialling of visa facilitation and readmission agreements with the EU, the House also took note of the difficulties faced by the citizens of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia "due to the non-recognition by one Member State of the EU of its passports."
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External relations
EU membership a possible long-term goal for a reformed, democratic Ukraine
2007-07-16 - 15:32
In the long term, Ukraine's European perspective can aim for EU membership, says an own-initiative report by Michal Kaminski (UEN, PL), adopted by Parliament on 12 July. The report calls on Ukraine's politicians to resolve the current crisis and tackle problems of corruption, as well as to further integrate the country's energy markets with the Union. Members welcomed the Council's decision to open negotiations on a new agreement with Ukraine. Nevertheless, the House also expressed its belief that "the negotiations should lead to the conclusion of an Association Agreement that contributes efficiently and credibly to the European perspective of Ukraine and opens the corresponding process, including the possibility of membership." MEPs also recommended that the Council lay down a "concrete plan for the gradual establishment of a deep and comprehensive Free Trade Area" between the Ukraine and the EU.
On the other hand, the Parliament also expressed its disquietude with regard to the current political tensions. They noted that "before the negotiations are concluded and a new, closer relationship between the EU and Ukraine is established, the current crisis has to be peacefully resolved, the system of checks and balances restored and the enforcement of the rule of law ensured." In particular, the report notes that "the key to the stabilisation of Ukraine lies in unravelling political from economic powers, weeding out corruption, bringing transparency to public procurement procedures and ensuring an independent judiciary."
Energy issues
The report also calls on Ukraine to fully comply with principles of market economy and transparency in the energy sector. MEPs urge faster procedures for nuclear safety evaluations, a diversification of energy resources, and an overall effort to raise energy efficiency in Ukraine, which lags behind most other countries in the world. In this vein, the EP also called on the political leadership of the Ukraine to implement the relevant provision of the Kyoto Protocol.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Public health
Heart disease: Europe's No 1 killer
2007-07-16 - 15:32
The European Parliament called on the EU Member States and the European Commission to tackle today's biggest killer in Europe: cardiovascular disease. Prevention strategies, public awareness campaigns, and the promotion of healthy lifestyles are urgently needed, believe MEPs. Other major diseases have in the past been singled out for special attention by the European Parliament, including diabetes and breast cancer. Now MEPs believe the time has come for action on heart disease and related conditions.
Cardiovascular disease accounts for 1.9 million deaths each year, i.e. 42 percent of all fatalities in the EU, generating costs of €169 billion, of which €105 billion are for treating the condition in the EU and €64 billion are attributable to lost productivity and the cost of informal care. No better illustration is needed of the economic value of preventive healthcare.
Healthy lifestyles the key
Parliament asks the Commission to bring forward a policy recommendation to promote regular exchanges of experience and data between all those involved in combating these diseases and to encourage tobacco and alcohol controls, better dietary habits and more physical activity, with a view to preventing obesity and high blood pressure.
Member States are urged to review national public health strategies so as to include health promotion as well as early high-risk management strategies on cardiovascular health, and to develop health impact assessments to measure the burden of these ailments on national healthcare systems.
Since this disease is a pan-European problem, Parliament stresses the need for "equity of access to prevention, treatment, diagnosis and control of disease for all Europeans". It also highlights the gender dimension.
It also calls on the EU "to encourage the equipment of large public spaces, such as railway and metro stations, airports and stadia, with pre-hospital system care such as early defibrillation for victims of cardiac arrest".
EU funding already available
Lastly, says the resolution, the Commission should point out to Member States "the funding opportunities available" for high blood pressure screening and prevention methods and "for further research into cardiovascular disease such as through the 7th Research Framework Programme, Structural Funds and the European Development Fund".
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Public health
MEPs give green light for EU public health programme 2008-2013
2007-07-16 - 15:32
The House gave its seal of approval to a second-reading compromise package agreed with the Council on the second Community action programme on public health, which will run from 2008 to 2013. Parliament's negotiating team had accepted the budget figure proposed by the Council to make sure the new programme is up and running as of 1 January 2008. The compromise, negotiated by the rapporteur for the Environment and Public Health Committee, Antonios Trakatellis (EPP-ED, EL), was overwhelmingly approved today by the full Parliament.
The programme was initially due to run from 2007 to 2013. At first reading the EP sought to increase the amount available over the whole period to €1,500 million but under the Financial Perspective adopted in 2005 this figure was cut to €365,600,000.
Under the compromise, Parliament has accepted the latter figure but given the delay in adopting the programme it will now run from 1 January 2008 to 31 December 2013. Some of the funding is being used this year under the first health action programme, so the total figure for the remaining period is reduced in proportion.
The institutions also signed a declaration by which they undertake to explore ways of finding further money for the programme on a year-to-year basis.
As part of the compromise package, Parliament successfully pushed for the programme's objectives to include the reduction of health inequalities as well as the promotion of cross-border care and the mobility of patients and health professionals. And at the EP's instigation the text now contains specific references to complementary and alternative medicine as well as to major diseases including cancer.
What action can the EU take on health?
Healthcare systems are a matter for national governments but action on some areas of public health is often best carried out at European level. Epidemics, rules on exposure to chemicals, prevention of injuries and accidents at the workplace: these are the kinds of problems the EU can tackle, by laying down Europe-wide rules, boosting cooperation between national authorities, promoting best practice and data-swapping on illnesses and medicines, and promoting healthy lifestyles.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Food safety
Food additives legislation fit for the 21st century
2007-07-16 - 15:32
Parliament approved with amendments a set of four regulations aimed at updating and simplifying methods for authorising food additives and bringing them into line with the latest scientific findings. One goal is higher safety standards for consumers but this streamlined legislation should also boost innovation and competitiveness in the European food industry. The four first-reading reports were tabled by the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety. In today's plenary vote, MEPs decided to make the proposed procedures more transparent, to improve consumer protection and to safeguard the EP's right of scrutiny over any updates to the legislation.
Food additives are currently regulated by a dozen or so EU laws, which the four new regulations will simplify and bring into line with the latest scientific findings. The first regulation sets out an EU-level "common authorisation procedure" for additives, enzymes and flavourings. The other three deal in detail with each of these categories, for which lists of authorised products will be compiled, with conditions of use and rules on labelling. The European Commission will manage the lists of approved products, subject to risk assessments carried out by the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA).
Single EU-wide approval
The first of the four reports, dealing with the "common authorisation procedure", was drafted by by Åsa Westlund (PES, SE). A single EU-wide approval procedure will be simple and consistent, and is thus expected to be welcomed by industry.
MEPs decided that the procedure should be more transparent: any decisions and the reasons behind them must be made public, and any application to market a product should be notified not only to the Member States but also to the EP and to stakeholders.
Parliament also says applicants should be granted scientific data protection for five years if, as part of their application, they have to reveal trade secrets that could help their competitors.
Additives must benefit consumers and not harm the environment
Turning to the three sectoral regulations, Parliament first adopted another report by Åsa Westlund (PES, SE) on additives such as sweeteners, colourings, preservatives, antioxidants, emulsifiers, gelling agents and packaging gases.
In its draft text the Commission proposed that such additives must not endanger the health of consumers or mislead them, and must be technologically necessary. They would be completely banned in unprocessed food, as would sweeteners and colourings in food for babies and small children.
MEPs go further, arguing that the environmental impact of food additives must not be overlooked, that they should only be used if they bring benefits to consumers and they must not mislead consumers as to specific qualities, for example, the freshness or naturalness of a product. There should be separate limit values for nanotechnologies, and labels should state whether an additive has been produced from GMOs and - for allergy sufferers - whether it contains azo-dyes.
How will the system work? In parallel to the authorisation procedure for new additives, all additives already on the market - around 300 in number - will gradually be re-evaluated. Additives which are currently authorised may stay on the market but, after the updating process is complete, any additive not on the approved list will be banned.
Flavourings and enzymes
The food industry uses a great many natural and artificial flavourings, with around 2600 being currently registered. Another category of substances - food enzymes - has been used for hundreds of years, for example in baking, cheese-making and brewing, where these products perform useful functions such as improving texture, appearance and nutritional value.
Parliament believes food enzymes should be allowed only if they do not mislead as to the freshness or naturalness of a product. As to flavourings, MEPs believe these should be used only if there is a reasonable technological need. In addition, a flavouring should be deemed "natural" only if 95% of the flavouring element is of natural origin (the Commission proposes 90%) and the effect of flavourings on vulnerable groups should be investigated, in particular the impact on the food preferences of children.
As with food additives, Parliament says that both flavourings and enzymes should be used only if there is a benefit to the consumer and, if they are produced from GMOs, this must be indicated on the label. In addition, the precautionary principle should apply.
The report on flavourings was drafted by Mojca Drčar Murko (ALDE, SI) and the report on enzymes by Avril Doyle (EPP-ED, IE).
Lastly, in all the reports, MEPs spelt out the fact that, for any technical updates to the legislation, the "regulatory procedure with scrutiny" is to be used, thus giving Parliament the right to intervene if it considers necessary.
The legislation now goes to the Council of Ministers, which is expected to carry out its first reading in the autumn.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Environment
Ban on sale of mercury measuring instruments - MEPs agree two year exemption for barometers
2007-07-16 - 15:32
The European Parliament approved, at second reading, a ban on non-electrical mercury thermometers and other mercury instruments for general sale to the public, thereby dropping its earlier call for an open-ended derogation for barometer manufacturers and accepting Council's proposal for a two-year exemption instead. The draft directive prohibiting the sale on the EU market of these devices is part of a broad strategy on mercury, a metal which is highly toxic to humans, ecosystems and wildlife. Only last month Parliament adopted another report - on the export, import and storage or mercury - which is also part of the strategy.
Non-electrical devices not banned until now
Electrical measuring devices containing mercury are already covered by existing EU legislation (the RoHS directive). The main product group not yet dealt with by Community law was non-electrical or non-electronic measuring and control equipment, hence this latest directive.
The ban will apply to new fever thermometers for both professional and private use, and also to "other measuring devices intended for sale to the general public (e.g. manometers, barometers, sphygmomanometers, thermometers other than fever thermometers)".
The ban covers only the sale of new devices. Existing instruments can still be repaired or bought and sold second-hand.
Antiques exempted but barometer makers must switch to non-mercury devices
Parliament - whose rapporteur is María Sornosa Martínez (PES, ES) - is highly supportive of the ban on the whole, although it suggested a number of improvements at first reading.
The Council accepted most of Parliament's first-reading amendments, including a demand that the Commission carry out a review of safer alternatives for mercury-containing sphygmomanometers (blood pressure measuring instruments) and other devices in healthcare and other professional and industrial uses.
Another Parliament amendment accepted by Council lays down that mercury measuring devices may be traded if they are more than 50 years old, since they are to be classified as antiques or cultural goods.
However, a further amendment calling for a complete exemption for traditional barometer manufacturers - which Parliament adopted after hearing that such producers constitute a valuable craft industry - was rejected by Council, which instead proposed a two-year transition period. At the recommendation of its Environment Committee, Parliament voted by an overwhelming majority today to approve this alternative, along with the rest of the Council's common position.
When does the ban take effect?
The legislation has to be enacted in national law no later than one year after the directive enters into force (which is expected to happen in the coming weeks or months) and must take effect no later than 18 months after the directive has entered into force. Traditional barometer manufacturers have an additional six months after that point, meaning their exemption could end in late 2009.
Dangers of mercury
Mercury pollution was once regarded as an acute, albeit local, problem but is now understood to be a diffuse, global and chronic phenomenon. Mercury can change in the environment into methylmercury, the most toxic form, exposure to which occurs mostly via diet. It concentrates particularly in the aquatic food chain, making populations with a high intake of fish and seafood especially vulnerable. Direct exposure to mercury via inhalation of vapour and absorption through the skin is also a health risk.
Around 80-90% of all mercury used in measuring devices is used in medical and other thermometers for household use. Many consumer products containing mercury will end up being landfilled, which may lead to slow but long term leaching. Mercury instruments pose a particular risk if they break in the home.
Safer non-mercury alternatives exist for virtually all the instruments covered by the ban. Most mercury measuring devices for consumer use (around two thirds) are imported into the EU, so these producers will be the hardest hit.
Debate 9 July Strasbourg, UK MEPs clash on barometers
Martin Callanan (EPP-ED, UK, North East, Conservative) , said: "The only remaining issue to be resolved, as the Commissioner and Mrs Sornosa Martínez pointed out, is that of barometers. I have to say that I remain deeply convinced that both the Commission and the Council, and some Members of this Parliament, have got the argument completely wrong. There is no justification whatsoever for a ban on barometers. They are only being singled out because there is only a relatively small number of companies which still produce them in Europe and they are an easy target as far as the Commission is concerned, to make it look as though they are actually doing something about mercury, whereas the big sources of release of mercury – from power stations, crematoria, etc. – are not being tackled because, of course, to tackle them would be very expensive for Member State governments and local authorities!
It is a completely illogical position to say that antique instruments will be exempted but new instruments will be banned. There are probably more antique instruments being circulated and placed on the market in Europe than there are new instruments being created. It is a very small minority specialist market and Europe brings itself into disrepute by delegitimising, by banning, by forcing out of business, a small number of very entrepreneurial and gifted craftsmen. They can be controlled by a proper licensing and control regime which they have said that they are willing to pay for. That would be by far the most sensible solution rather than an outright ban and to force a number of small companies out of business, thereby losing the skills and traditions that have existed in Europe for several hundred years."
Linda McAvan (PES, UK, Yorkshire, Labour) said: "There is an amendment about licensing barometers. Well, that does not address the issue of spillages, accidental damage or waste disposal, landfill and incineration. In the United States in May, somebody found a broken barometer in a storage cupboard in a school. The school was closed for a week. The whole school had to be evacuated and there was a clean-up bill amounting to thousands of dollars. Sixteen US States are moving towards mercury prohibitions on barometers and other equipment. In fact, they are going much further than the European Commission is proposing to go here today. So anybody who is talking about nanny-state Europe is totally misplaced when they are looking at the barometer issue.
The PSE Group pushed for the two-year phase-out for the barometer industry. We know these are small companies, we know it will pose some difficulties for them, but I think they were aware of the REACH Directive coming their way anyway, and I think this is a sensible compromise."
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Euro
ECB should exercise caution over further interest rate rises
2007-07-16 - 15:32
MEPs are calling on the European Central Bank to be cautious about further increases in interest rates and have warned that calls for wage moderation are undermined by disproportionately generous pay rises for top executives. They reiterate their support for the ECB's independence and ask it to monitor closely developments in the housing market. These positions were adopted in two own-initiative reports, intended as Parliament’s response to the 2006 ECB Annual Report and the 2007 annual report on the euro area from the Commission.
European Central Bank should exercise caution on interest rates
In their report on the European Central Bank, drawn up by Gay Mitchell (EPP-ED, IE) and adopted by 506 votes in favour to 64 against with 41 abstentions, in response to the ECB’s annual report for 2006, MEPs note that the economic recovery in the euro zone has become self sustaining, but emphasise that any further raising of interest rates should be undertaken with caution so as not to endanger growth.
They say it is crucial that wages increase in line with developments in productivity in order to allow for job creation in a non-inflationary environment, while warning that disproportionately generous wage increases for top executives undermine calls for wage moderation. Fiscal consolidation, especially in good times, is key to achieving long term growth, they argue.
Exchange rates and house prices
The report expresses concern about the ongoing appreciation of the euro against most major currencies and calls on the Eurogroup, the Council and the ECB to exercise their competences on exchange rates in full. (On the other hand, MEPs voted against calling for these institutions to coordinate their actions in this field more closely.)
Mr Mitchell’s report calls on the ECB to monitor closely developments on the real estate market which have potential consequences for the real economy.
ECB governance issues
Parliament reiterates its support for the independence of the ECB and for its aim of maintaining price stability and protecting its anti-inflation credentials.
Regarding the ECB’s role in providing central bank services such as Target and the Target 2 Securities project, Parliament recognises the value these can have in fostering financial market integration, but warns that the presentation of an appropriate governance structure for the Bank’s activities as an active market operator is overdue.
The report says that accountability and transparency would be improved if several candidates were evaluated by the Council when vacancies arise on the ECB Executive Board and if the chosen candidate were subject to a vote of approval in Parliament.
MEPs repeat their call for the Bank to publish summary minutes of Governing Council meetings, including the arguments in favour and against policy decisions and an indication of whether they were taken unanimously.
The report also repeats Parliament’s call the ECB to examine the reasons for the substantial increase in circulation of 500 euro notes with a view to identifying any attendant risks.
Report on the euro zone
In a report drawn up by Dariusz Rosati (PES, PL), adopted by a show of hands, in response to the Commission’s 2007 annual report on the euro area, MEPs took a position coherent with that of the ECB report, since the issues were closely related. Here though the recommendations were mainly addressed to the Member States and the Eurogroup.
MEPs call on Member States to use the current economic upswing to reduce deficits and accumulate surpluses, as well as to improve the quality of public finance with more investment in education, vocational training research and innovation.
This report argues that the national legislators and regulators too should evaluate carefully developments in the real estate market, with asset price increases being a further reason for fiscal caution.
Wage moderation starts at the top ...
Regarding wage developments, Parliament argues for a fairer distribution of the fruits of growth, calling on shareholders and corporate executives to maintain a responsible policy of remuneration packages at top executive levels, “which tend to grow disproportionately compared to ordinary salary levels and thus give the wrong signals and discourage support for a responsible wage policy”.
MEPs regret that the inflation criterion as set in the Treaty is measured against all Member States instead of concentrating on those which are now part of the euro zone. They call for further analysis and policy debate on the application of the convergence criteria to prospective new members of the euro area.
Parliament also argues that in the interests of stronger economic coordination, the Eurogroup should move to a more formal institutional framework, with proper infrastructure.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Justice and home affairs
EU strategy to protect critical infrastructure from terrorist attacks
2007-07-16 - 15:32
A proposed EU-wide strategy to protect critical infrastructure against terrorist attacks (in fields such as energy, health, communication and transport), was backed by the European Parliament. Nevertheless, MEPs stress that responsibility for protecting critical infrastructure still rests primarily with Member States and private stakeholders. A draft directive tabled by the Commission in 2006 would oblige Member States to identify and designate existing infrastructure as European Critical Infrastructure (ECI), according to sector-specific criteria established by national governments, the Commission and stakeholders. Once the list is ready, the directive would oblige owners and operators of the ECIs to establish an "operator security plan", with permanent and graduated security measures in the event of a terrorist attack.
Primarily a national responsibility
Parliament's consultation report, drafted by Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert (ALDE, NL), agrees on the need to identify what national facilities can be designated "European Critical Infrastructure" and to assess their protection needs, but stresses that the primary and ultimate responsibility for protecting critical infrastructures lies with the Member States and the owners or operators. A Community approach, say MEPs, can be justified only if at least three Member States, or at least two Member States other than that in which the critical infrastructure is located, would be affected.
Avoid duplicating work
The EU should make every possible effort to avoid duplicating the work of Member States and adding unnecessary costs and administrative burdens for owners and operators, say MEPs. Future common risk assessments should always take into account existing methodologies in each country. Even when a given facility is designated as ECI, its compliance with existing protection measures might be enough to satisfy the requirement to establish and update an "operator security plan".
Finally, the European Parliament agrees with the Commission that appropriate measures must be taken to protect sensitive and confidential information revealing the vulnerability of each piece of infrastructure. According to MEPs, the recent SWIFT case showed that critical data needs to be protected against illegal use by foreign authorities or private actors as well, therefore all sensitive data "shall be carried out within the EU and any mirroring data shall not be allowed in third countries for reasons of security".
An overall strategy to protect critical infrastructure was requested by the European Council in 2004, in the aftermath of the Madrid train bombings, with a view to preventing the potentially disastrous impact that damage to, or the loss of, infrastructure in any one Member State could have on the EU economy and public confidence as a whole.
The rapporteur was satisfied with the adoption of these compromise amendments and hoped the new law will be useful to reinforce EU's strategy to fight terrorism. "Experiences from the past do tell us that if a terrorist attack occurs, the EU Heads of State will be calling for new security proposals within 48 hours, thereby weakening their quality. Or even worse, they come up with measures that are disproportionate and lack transparency, like for example the measures restricting liquids aboard aircrafts", she said in her explanatory statement.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Justice and home affairs
MEPs fear that new PNR agreement fails to protect citizens' data
2007-07-16 - 15:32
The European Parliament looked into the recent agreement signed by the EU-US administration for the transfer of air passengers' data and concluded in its resolution that the new deal still fails to offer an adequate level of data protection and it has been concluded without any involvement of parliaments from both sides, lacking democratic oversight. While recognising the difficult conditions under which the negotiations took place, MEPs regret that the EU-US agreement for the transfer of Passenger Name Records (PNR) is "substantively flawed", in particular by "open and vague definitions and multiple possibilities for exception".
Even though Parliament welcomed the provision that existing data protection law for US citizens (US Privacy Act) will be extended administratively to EU citizens' data processed in America, MEPs felt there is still much more to be improved. Some of their main concerns regarding the new agreement are:
USE: The handling, collection, use and storage of personal data from air passengers by US Department of Homeland Security is not founded on a legal agreement but on non-binding assurances remitted in a letter, which can be unilaterally changed.
PURPOSE: PNR transfer is not limited to fighting terrorism, it can also be used for other "unspecified additional purposes" by the US government.
SENSITIVE DATA: Information regarding ethnic origin, political opinions, sex life of the individual, etc. will be also made available and can be used by the US Homeland Security Department in exceptional cases.
ACCESS: The fields of data which can be accessed from each PNR file have been reduced from 34 to 19, but "the reduction is largely cosmetic due to the merging of data fields instead of actual deletion."
RETENTION PERIOD: Data can be retained for longer periods with the new agreement: from 3.5 years to 15. Besides that, PNR data will be kept for seven years in "active analytical databases", leading to a big risk of massive profiling, contrary to EU principles.
THIRD COUNTRIES: Parliament strongly opposes to the fact that third countries in general may be given access to PNR data if adhering to specified conditions by the US government. The EU has accepted "not to interfere" concerning the protection of EU citizens' PNR data shared by the US with third countries.
Finally, MEPs demand the Commission to clarify Commissioner Frattini's statements regarding the possible creation of an EU PNR system to be used in Europe and called national parliaments of Member States to examine the present draft agreement carefully.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Economic and monetary affairs
Excise duty on alcohol: Parliament votes against any increase in minimum rates
2007-07-16 - 15:32
MEPs voted against a Commission proposal to raise the EU-wide minimum rates of excise duty on alcoholic drinks other than wine. They opposed amendments calling for the minimum rates to rise by 4.5 per cent, then voted against the whole Commission proposal. The first block of amendments supporting an increase in minimum rates were rejected with 307 votes in favour to 350 against with 23 abstentions. The only logical option for both sides (those favouring an increase in the minimum rates and those who wanted to scrap them altogether) was then to reject the proposal as a whole. This was confirmed in a vote on a legislative resolution, with 46 MEPs voting in favour, 627 against and 13 abstentions.
As is usual when it comes to taxation matters, Parliament's position is advisory. The final decision is now for the Council, which needs to act unanimously.
This was the second time the plenary had voted on this issue: at the previous vote in May, Parliament sent the matter back to the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee after a series of close votes left an unclear result. The Committee subsequently proposed to back an increase by 4.5 per cent, reflecting inflation since the 2004 enlargement. This position is now backed by the European Commission with the aim of getting the required unanimous agreement within the Council. The full Parliament, however, did not support the Committee's position.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Economic and monetary affairs
Future developments in financial services
2007-07-16 - 15:32
MEPs adopted a wide-ranging report on the future of EU financial services policy. It says the EU capital market “is leading the world not least because of the quality and solidity of its financial regulation” but also set out a series of areas where there is room for improvement, and highlights some potential concerns for the future. Drawn up by Ieke van den Burg (PES, NL), the own-initiative report is a response to a white paper from the Commission. The following is just a selection of its main contents.
Market concentration
Noting a high market consolidation in the top segment of financial service provided to large listed companies, “notably by audit firms and credit rating agencies”, the Parliament urges the Commission and national competition authorities carefully to apply competition rules to these players and be “vigilant to any risk of unlawful market concentration.”
Parliament says credit rating agencies play a public role in some cases, and should meet high standards for accessibility, transparency, quality and reliability required of regulated businesses like banks. They should also separate their rating activities from ancillary services. MEPs would welcome the emergence of European players in credit rating.
There is also a welcome for “increased vigilance of supervisors on plain cases of market manipulation”.
Alternative investment vehicles
MEPs recognise that alternative investment vehicles (hedge funds and private equity) provide liquidity and diversification in the market and create opportunities to improve the efficiency of corporate management, but they “share the concern of some central banks and supervisors that they may give rise to systemic risk and to high levels of exposure of other financial institutions.” They ask for the Commission to take a broader and more critical approach in its analysis of such funds “with regard to the risks of market abuse.”
Retail financial services – financial literacy
Cross-border integration of retail financial services is less well advanced than on the wholesale market, Parliament notes, calling for a focused approach on the specific barriers impacting in particular mobile cross-border users. MEPs want to prevent Member States “engaging in competition based on the lowest supervision and security standards” so that the same risks, profiles and business strategies can be matched by the same security across the whole internal market. They also argue for a greater emphasis on improving financial literacy.
Parliament wants the Commission to develop a “harmonised solvency framework for pension funds” in line with the Solvency II approach developed for the insurance industry.
Better regulation
MEPs are “fully committed to the aims of better regulation based in the findings of careful, independent and professionally conducted impact assessments” focussing on more than purely financial aspects. They regret that the Commission has not fulfilled its commitment to have a proper impact assessment with every new proposal, but warn against impact assessments having the effect of bringing law-making to a standstill.
Systemic risks
The report says the nature, source and transfer of risks to the financial system are changing, and expressed concern that the “current nationally and sectorally based supervisory framework may potentially fail to keep pace with financial market dynamics”. MEPs stress that it must be well resourced coordinated and entitled legally AM 18 to “give adequate responses in the case of major systemic crises that affect more than one Member State.”
Architecture of regulation and supervision
MEPs in the committee stress the need for cross-sectoral consistency in prudential regulation, so that similar products are regulated in similar ways, whether they are being sold by a bank, pension fund or insurance company.
To help reach common decisions on how national supervisors should apply EU rules, the committee suggests the three Level 3 committees (which respectively bring together national supervisors of the banking, pensions and insurance industries responsible for implementing EU legislation) should consider using some form of qualified majority voting.
They encourage agreements and codes of conduct between Member States and central banks on bail out and lender-of-last-resort obligations, as part of a strengthening of the system for oversight of prudential risks. MEPs say it is necessary to look into the desirability and feasibility of European level execution of prudential supervision where needed in the future.
The report emphasises that home-host supervisory cooperation is the most significant building-block in the set-up of the single financial market. Greater convergence among supervisors should, it says, facilitate the business of companies dealing with more than one regulator – and encourage the emergence of a European retail financial market.
Global impact
The report highlights the importance of developing the transatlantic partnership to ensure, among other things, the implementation of Basel II by the US authorities, and of the mutual recognition of EU and US accounting standards. It calls for more democratically controlled cooperation with the US in monitoring regulators of alternative investment vehicles. It also calls for cooperation with other jurisdictions, such as India, China and South Korea.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Free movement of services
Postal services: open to competition by 2011, but subject to safeguards
2007-07-16 - 15:32
A large majority of MEPs want remaining postal services monopolies in EU Member States to expire by 31 December 2010, two years later than the 1 January 2009 proposed by the European Commission. With 512 votes in favour, 156 against and 18 abstentions, MEPs backed the compromise, proposed by postal services rapporteur Markus Ferber (EPP-ED, DE). This means that postal services should be opened up to competition by 2011, but subject to strict conditions. During the debate on Tuesday 10 July Markus Ferber said: "We've had monopolies for more than 200 years. Monopolies are not capable of solving the problems the postal services are facing. Those problems can only be solved if there is a fair competition, that takes into consideration working and workers' conditions".
Full market opening
Full market opening implies that national operators will no longer have a monopoly on mail below the maximum weight of 50 grams, known as the reserved area. It was also decided that for new Member States and those with a particularly difficult topography or with numerous islands as well as Member States with a small population and a limited geographical size, the deadline for the opening up of the market will be two years later, i.e. 31 December 2012, to allow extra time to find ways to maintain a universal service.
Although there was no definition of "Member States with a small population", MEPs had referred to Luxembourg (among others) during the debate. These states should have specific characteristics that are particular to postal services.
Universal service
Parliament also said that the universal service or territorial coverage should be retained. This means that also in a liberalised postal sector letters should continue to be delivered and collected at an affordable cost everywhere in the EU. A uniform tariff between rural and urban areas will be applied. MEPs also decided that Member States should ensure that sufficient access and contact points are established that take account of the needs of users in rural and sparsely populated areas. The Member States should determine the minimum number of access and contact points in order to guarantee the universal service.
One key issue in the compromise by EPP-ED, PES and ALDE groups is the funding for the universal service. MEPs say that if market players prove to be unable to provide such services profitably, Member States may set up compensation funds, financed by service providers and/or user fees, to cover universal service costs. Providers of these services could also be compensated by the state. Member States may themselves decide what financing mechanisms are used. Any Member State which concludes that meeting a universal service obligation would entail a net cost will have to draw up national plans for meeting this cost and notify them to the Commission.
Working conditions not affected
It was also stressed that the directive must not affect terms and conditions of employment. Social dumping should by all means be avoided. Maximum work periods and minimum paid annual holidays, minimum rates of pays as well as relations between social partners including the right to negotiate and conclude collective agreements or the right to strike should not be under the scope of the directive.
To prevent any distortion of competition until markets are opened up to competition, Parliament says that postal service providers from countries with a reserved area must not meanwhile be granted an authorisations to operate in countries such as Sweden, Finland and the UK, where postal markets have been fully opened. This means that liberalising Member States may refuse authorisation to operators which are granted a reserved area in another Member State (reciprocity clause).
What's next?
After the vote, it is unlikely that a first reading agreement under the co-decision procedure will be reached. So far, no political agreement has been reached in Council. If there is no agreement, then the existing directive including its universal services measures would lapse at the end of 2008 under the so-called sunset clause, leaving no postal services legislation at all. This would have serious consequences for the sector, a scenario that all parties concerned are doubtless keen to avoid.
British speakers during the debate on Tuesday 10 July in Strasbourg
Speaking for the Employment and Social Affairs Committee, Stephen Hughes, PES, UK, Labour North East said "We would have preferred to make the full accomplishment of the postal internal market subject to a new prospective study, showing that universal service could be maintained in each Member State, and looking at how to maintain or improve the employment situation in the postal sector. However, sometimes politics is about the art of the possible, and I know my good friend Brian Simpson negotiated the best possible deal he could with the rapporteur and the other shadows in the Committee on Transport and Tourism.
We are pleased at the clear emphasis placed on maintaining the provision of universal service and on the number of safeguards built into the report in the form in which it will come before this House. We are also happy about the report’s focus on the need to ensure good social and employment standards as liberalisation begins to unfold. This is an important point given that even Deutsche Post has expressed some disquiet over declining employment standards amongst some new entrants to the German postal market. We accept that this was the best achievable deal at this late stage in the liberalisation process."
Brian Simpson (PES, UK, Labour, North West) said: "Postal services are a highly personal and highly political issue. That is why they are different to other sectors, like telecoms and energy, because post, as I have often said in this House, is about people; it is about frontline public service. That is why it is important and generates a lot of interest. I know in the work we have done in committee we have tried to take on board the views of other committees and political groups. And, after a lot of hard work, and I have to say a great deal of good will, we reached an agreement, which I think is a good one.
So let us look at the key issue. How do we guarantee a universal service, and a universal service that treats all citizens equally, irrespective of where they live? That is why we support the guarantee of access points in rural and peripheral areas. How do we finance that universal service? How do we have the national plans in place to enable that to happen? How do we protect the workers and their working conditions, and how do we ensure that the new Member States are not forced into competition that they cannot sustain? That is where the timescale is important. They are the issues we have addressed in this report and in the compromise that we reached and I hope Parliament will support that compromise tomorrow."
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Transport
Towards a future maritime policy
2007-07-16 - 15:32
Parliament adopted an own-initiative report by Willy Piecyk (PES, DE) on a European future maritime policy. After tough negotiations between the responsible Transport Committee and the committees on the Environment, Industry and Research, Fisheries and Regional Affairs, Members were able to vote a report with a rather holistic approach. The environmental dimension, economic importance, tourism, fisheries policy as well as social aspects were consequently key topics in the report. Members firstly asked for a drastic reduction of CO2, SO2 and nitrogen oxide emissions from ships by assessing the feasibility of emissions trading and by promoting renewable energies for shipping. They also called for better European shipping with better European ships by stressing that goods transported by ships was one of the least environmentally damaging ways of transport; A European quality label for ships should be introduced.
They also asked for a proposal as to ensure that bunker oil for engine oil for engine fuel in new ships had to be stored in safer, double hull tanks and for a European coast guard to be set up in order to increase cooperation and coordination for the different problems in the maritime sector. Special attention should be paid to sustainable coastal tourism and a Commissioner for maritime policy should be introduced.
During the debate, MEPs saw many of their wishes already incorporated in the proposals Commissioner Joe Borg announced. He agreed that speedy progress should be made on legislative proposals like the third maritime package which are now before the Council. On 10 October, the Commission will present an ambitious maritime policy package including a European Maritime Policy and Action Plan as is suggested in the Piecyk report.
The policy will focus on Europe's maritime reality and on the importance of an integrated approach to maritime affairs. In line with the EP report, the Commission will focus and promoting and developing the sustainable use of the oceans and the seas, delivering the highest quality of life in coastal areas, providing transparency and raising the visibility of maritime Europe, strengthening Europe's maritime international leadership role and reaching for the EU's full knowledge and innovation potential in maritime affairs.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-024-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Transport
MEPs advocate more transparent ticket prices
2007-07-16 - 15:32
In order to avoid misleading advertising and information of passengers the European Parliament adopted a legislative report saying that all air fares published in any form and addressed to the public must include all taxes, fees and charges added to the ticket price and known at the time of publication of the airfare. Air passengers must be treated like other consumers and thus have a right on clear and full information of the price they finally have to pay, the EP argues. The report by Arūnas Degutis (ALDE, LT) deals with the Commission proposal on the revision the 1992 "third liberalisation package" of the internal aviation market that aims to increase market efficiency, to enhance the safety of air services and to improve passenger protection. The regulation lays down rules for, inter alia, operating licences, leasing of aircraft, public service obligations, traffic distribution rule and price transparency.
The price you really have to pay
Air passengers must be treated like other consumers and thus have a right on clear and full information of the price they finally pay. Especially internet booking has to be considered, as they are often the only possibility of booking with low-cost carriers. Air carriers therefore will have to provide the general public with comprehensive information "in any form, including on the Internet", on their air fares.
Those air fares which are "addressed directly or indirectly to the travelling public" have to include all applicable taxes, non-avoidable charges, surcharges and fees known at the time of publication (i.e. taxes, or duties, fees and other costs for the benefit of the airlines or of the airport operators.)
By adopting this amendment, Parliament wants to put an end to misleading advertising and information of passengers.
Security taxes and charges
Security charges are on the rise. The Transport Committee argues that the consumer has a right to know how high they are, and where they are used for. Where airport or on-board security costs are included in the price of an air ticket, those costs shall therefore be shown separately on the ticket or otherwise indicated to the passenger.
Security taxes and charges, whether levied by Member States or by air carriers or entities, shall be transparent and shall be used exclusively to meet airport or onboard aircraft security costs.
Social legislation
In the past, the operation of bases other than country of origin has created problems as to the determination of the applicable laws to crews on the employment. Therefore, Member States shall ensure the proper application of Community and national social legislation with respect to employees of a Community air carrier operating air services from an operational base outside the territory of the Member State where that Community air carrier has its principal place of business.
Background
On 23 July 1992 the final stage in the liberalisation of air transport in the Community was reached with the adoption of the three Regulations, known as the "third package". This followed up the "first package", adopted in December 1987, and the "second package" of June 1990.
More than ten years after the entry into force the third package has largely played its role, allowing the unprecedented expansion of air transport in Europe. Old monopolies have been swept away, intra-Community cabotage has been introduced, and competition in all markets has intensified to the benefit of consumers.
Jim Higgins (EPP-ED, Fine Gael, IE) said during the debate in Strasbourg on Tuesday 10 July: "The opening-up of air travel to millions of citizens has been brought about by the low-fares airlines. I agree with the Commissioner that the single aviation market has been a singular success. Airlines such as Ireland’s Ryanair have revolutionised the aviation sector and have put pressure on the older, more established and more expensive airlines to follow suit. Such competition is good for the consumer and the traveller.
I raised this issue by way of a parliamentary question here last January, and the Commission replied, ‘the Commission, while maintaining the general rule of price freedom, proposes that “air carriers operating within the Community [...] provide the general public with comprehensive information on their air fares and rates and the conditions attached”. Consumers will thus be informed of the actual price (price of ticket plus the various charges and taxes).’
The Degutis report, which we are debating here tonight, will give practical effect to this, and that is extremely welcome. The obligation on airlines to introduce full transparency is extremely welcome and very important, because the consumer will now see from the very outset exactly what he or she will have to pay. That alone will not reduce the numbers of people travelling – as a lot of people think it might – but in my opinion it will further enhance competition and benefit the travelling public."
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-025-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External/international trade
More measures needed on access to medicines says EP resolution
2007-07-16 - 15:32
According to the resolution adopted by Parliament on 12 July, more needs to be done to allow developing countries and Least Developed Countries (LDCs) access to medicines. The EP asks the Council to support the developing countries which use the flexibilities enshrined in the TRIPS Agreement. The Commission and the Member States should provide financial support for local production of pharmaceuticals in developing countries. On Economic Partnership Agreements (EPAs), MEPS want to restrict the mandate of the Commission "in order not to negotiate pharmaceutical-related TRIPS-plus" affecting public health and access to medicines.
The resolution asks the Commission and the Member States to provide financial support for pharmaceutical-related transfer of technology and capacity building and local production of pharmaceuticals in developing countries, especially in LDCs. The House also asks the Commission to grant funding for R&D on poverty-related, tropical and neglected diseases.
The EP asks the Council to support the developing countries which use the so-called flexibilities built into the TRIPS Agreement and recognized by the Doha Declaration.
The resolution calls on the Council to adopt a Joint Policy Statement with the European Parliament to the effect that EU Member States remain free to use all exception provisions of the TRIPS Agreement under their domestic patent laws to authorise production and export ‘to address public health needs in importing Members’ and asks the Council to mandate the Commission to refrain from taking action to interfere with these proceedings.
Restricted Commission's mandate on EPAs
The resolution calls on the Council to restrict the mandate to the Commission in order not to negotiate pharmaceutical-related TRIPS-plus provisions affecting public health and access to medicines, such as data exclusivity, patent extensions and limitation of grounds of compulsory licenses, in the framework of the negotiation of the Economic Partnership Agreements with the African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) countries and other future bilateral and regional agreements with developing countries.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-024-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-026-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Energy
EP calls for a "fully liberalised European energy market as soon as possible"
2007-07-16 - 15:32
The internal energy market should allow "consumer choice of supplier in an open competitive environment", and also be able to guarantee security of supply given that "it is essential for every citizen of the [EU] to have affordable access to energy", according to a report by the European Parliament. The own-initiative report, by Alejo VIDAL-QUADRAS (EPP-ED, ES) focuses specifically on the gas and electricity markets, and says that in order to facilitate the liberalisation of these markets it is crucial to "promote investments in infrastructures in a non-discriminatory way" and allow "fair access to the grid for new entrants and transparency in the market." During the debate, Mr Vidal-Quadras said: "We agree with the need to phase out regulated tariffs in a gradual manner. In some Member States, the current system of regulation is an obstacle to the internal market, in particular regarding trade and interconnections. We therefore propose the creation of an entity with European dimension to deal with these issues. The completion of a competitive internal market should in no way mean diminishing rights of consumers the obligations towards the most vulnerable must continue."
Regulation of the energy markets
MEPs believe that public ownership in the electricity and gas markets is one of the main causes of distortions at EU level and that the stimulus for competition in those markets is reduced if there are public enterprises, because, in most cases, by virtue of their company statute, there is a lower level of transparency and less information for potential investors and because they are dependent on political decisions taken by Member State governments.
Concerning how these markets and regulated, the report seeks to "promote a more European approach to regulation on cross-border issues", part of which will be to "enhance cooperation between national regulators at EU level." Moreover, it is however "essential to overcome technical and regulatory differences that impose serious barriers to cross-border trade and interconnections."
The report also adds that "national regulators should remain the only authority responsible for decisions affecting their national market only."
They should be "independent, strong and have well-defined competences" to "ensure the law is fully implemented in practice and is adhered to by market players and that the necessary investments and transparency levels are in place."
Environmental considerations
Looking at the environmental impact of liberalising the energy market, the report states that regulators should also have the role of "ensuring that energy companies have a statutory obligation to give energy saving advice to customer."
It is also stressed by the Parliament that "subsidies for non-renewable sources of energy should be eliminated" and Member States are urged to "facilitate an increase in grid capacity in order to allow the incorporation of new massive onshore and offshore renewable energy generation."
Securing energy
Whilst placing an emphasis on the "long-term investments that are necessary in the energy sector", the House also "reiterates its call on the Commission to take further steps to address concentrations in the energy market in cases of abuse of market dominance."
The "high energy prices derived from the lack of competition in the markets" means that it is necessary to "take account of the importance of the role of small and medium-sized energy companies to the functioning of competitive energy markets."
In this way, it is hoped to "establish a common energy policy based on a broader vision of the common European interest in the energy field by respecting national characteristics and allowing Member States to adhere to their energy mixes in order to diversify energy sources and energy producers as much as possible."
Unbundling
The House calls on the Commission to present an analysis in which the expected costs of ownership unbundling and of establishing independent system operators for the Member States, the expected effects on investment in the networks, as well as the benefits for the internal market and consumers are demonstrated. MEPs point out that the analysis should address the question whether, and if so what problems or costs would arise if no unbundling is carried out by the state as well as the question whether the negative consequences differ as between state and private ownership. The report suggests furthermore that the analysis should consider what the advantages would be of an ownership unbundling compared to the independent regional market operator approach as regards the achievements of objectives.
The Parliament urges the Commission to consider the structural differences between the EU electricity and gas sectors, including the fact that, some Member States have no indigenous production of these sources of energy and that, in important gas upstream markets, full economic reciprocity is not currently guaranteed. MEPs call therefore on the Commission to come forward with a balanced proposal allowing EU gas emissions to use new upstream pipeline investments and long-term contracts in order to raise their negotiating power vis-à-vis third countries.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-025-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-027-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Employment policy
How to make labour law fit for the 21st century?
2007-07-16 - 15:32
"If labour law is to meet the challenges of the 21st century, it must focus to a large extent on employment security throughout a worker's life rather than protecting particular jobs", says an own-initiative report which contributes to the current debate on flexicurity within the EU. MEPs call for active labour policy that makes it easier to find a job, and to move from one job to another. The report drafted by Jacek Protasiewicz (EPP-ED, PL), defines flexicurity as "combining flexibility and security in the job market in a way that helps increase both productivity and the quality of jobs by guaranteeing security, while at the same time allowing firms the flexibility needed to create jobs in response to the changing needs of the market".
Indefinite contracts should be the norm
MEPs calls for flexible and secure contractual arrangements. EU labour law should recognise employment contracts of an indefinite duration as the general form of employment. Any non-standard forms of work, such as fixed-term contracts, temporary contracts obtained through employment agencies, recurring freelance contracts and project contracts, should go hand-in-hand with support for workers who find themselves in transit from one job to another. So for example, during this transition period, when it is "strictly necessary for them to become more employable through training and re-qualification", workers should be entitled to some level of income support.
"Sufficiently flexible" working time arrangements
Working time arrangements should be "sufficiently flexible" to meet the needs of employers and employees and to enable people to better balance work and family life, as well as to safeguard competitiveness and improve the employment situation in Europe, says the report.
Reduce administrative burdens
Furthermore, the committee stresses the need to simplify administrative procedures for firms, and especially for new and small and medium-sized enterprises. "Excessive administrative burdens" could deter employers from taking on new workers even during times of economic growth, it notes. To combat exploitation of undocumented workers, labour law should be better enforced and legal employment should be made easier, states the text.
Implement existing legislation
The EP regrets that existing EU rules are not properly implemented or enforced. Member States should, for instance, review and adapt their social security systems and implement active policies to invigorate the labour market. MEPs also believe it important to achieve "a degree of consistency" in the field of labour law, which may be achieved though collective agreements and the open method of co-ordination.
MEPs also call on Member States to remove the restrictions on access to their labour markets, so as to improve worker mobility within the EU.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-026-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-028-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Industry
Reduction of the administrative burdens on businesses: mergers of public limited liability companies
2007-07-16 - 15:32
By adopting a legislative report by Piia-Noora KAUPPI (EPP-ED, FIN), the European Parliament approved a directive concerning mergers of public limited liability companies and Council Directive 82/891/EEC concerning the division of public limited companies as regards the requirement for an independent expert's report on the occasion of a merger or a division. The House supports the Commission in its aim of easing domestic mergers or divisions. The amendments concern the issue of shareholder protection. MEPs also propose to set the transposition date to 31 December 2008 (as opposed to 31 July 2008 as was proposed by the Commission).
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-027-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-029-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Fisheries
Lift the ban on feeding fishmeal and fish oil to ruminants says MEPs
2007-07-16 - 15:32
The European Parliament adopted a report by Struan STEVENSON (EPP-ED, UK) calling on the Commission and the Council to lift the ban on feeding fishmeal and fish oil to ruminants. The report stresses that "there is no scientific evidence to support a total ban on fishmeal on the grounds that it may transmit BSE or other TSEs". The EP notes that Regulation No 1923/2006 of 18 December 2006 laying down rules for the prevention, control and eradication of certain transmissible spongiform encephalopathies, recently adopted by the European Parliament and the Council, prohibits the feeding of animal protein to ruminants, but enables the Commission to grant derogations for feeding fishmeal to young ruminants, provided that such derogations are based on a scientific assessment of the dietary needs of young ruminants and follow an assessment of the control aspects.
MEPs call for scientific analysis to determine acceptable limit values for dioxin in fishmeal for feeding pigs and poultry.
The problem of discards
This report stresses the problem of discards from marine fisheries, a problem which is estimated in Europe to account for up to 1 million tonnes annually. The EP suggests that use of discards by the fishmeal and fish oil industry should be examined, given the swiftly expanding EU aquaculture sector.
MEPs also ask the Commission to "increase scientific research into blue whiting" in order to obtain improved advice and management in the near future.
The EP welcomes the €25 million investment by the fishmeal and fish oil industry in Denmark and the UK, aimed at eliminating dioxins and dioxin-like PCBs and ensuring the creation of a safe and healthy product.
UK market for fishmeal largest in the EU
The UK is the largest consumer of fishmeal in the EU largely due to its extensive aquaculture sector. Germany, France, Spain, Denmark and the Netherlands use fishmeal for their agriculture and aquaculture sectors. Greece, Italy and the smaller Mediterranean islands rely on fishmeal for their sea bass and sea bream aquaculture.
Fishmeal is not eaten directly by people with the exception of very small volume sales of fishmeal tablets in Norway sold through pharmacies for dietary supplements of sportspersons. About 33% of the fishmeal consumed in the EU is fed to farmed fish; the balance is fed to pigs and poultry. Thus the effect of fishmeal on human health is as a result of the meat eaten from farmed fish, pigs, and poultry fed on the product as a feed ingredient. Fishmeal is rich in both essential amino acids in the form of protein, and in the long chain polyunsaturated omega-3 fatty acids DHA and EPA (PUFAs) which provide health and welfare benefits to animals. Meat, milk and eggs from farm animals fed on fishmeal and oil are, in turn, foods that benefit human health, states the report.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-028-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-030-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Regional policy
Parliament endorses report on reducing regional development disparities
2007-07-16 - 15:32
Investing in information technology infrastructure and education enabling everyone to use it, promoting local entrepreneurship, and building the administrative know-how to use EU regional funds productively, are key ways to reduce development disparities among EU regions, says an own-initiative report on the role and effectiveness of cohesion policy in reducing development disparities in the poorest regions of the EU, approved by a show of hands in plenary session on 12 July. The report, drafted by drafted by Lidia Joanna Geringer de Oedenberg (PES, PL), calls for "resolute action" to reduce the most acute development shortcomings in the poorest EU regions, and says Member States that have joined the EU since 2004 need special support to overcome their "institutional, administrative and economic shortcomings".
Eurostat calculates that per capita GDP currently ranges from 303% of the EU average in inner London to 24% in North-East Romania.
New Member States: a special case
Unemployment rates in some of the poorest EU regions exceed 20% . The report stresses the need to invest European Social Fund aid in improving the education and qualifications of young people, women and elderly persons and accompanying support, community and care services that improve employment opportunities.
Also, the mere fact that funding is granted does not guarantee per se that it will be put to good use.(Recital P) Authorities in some poor regions lack the appropriate skills and experience, as well as the essential matching funds (Para 4), to be able to make full use of the EU funding, says the report, which calls on the Commission to step up an appropriate training programme.
Yardstick of success
If structural funding is to be successfully implemented, says the report, then it must "ensure substantial economic growth for the poorest regions, such as will enable them gradually to catch up with the more developed regions in terms of per capita GDP"
Roll out infrastructure, foster entrepreneurship
To spur economic growth, investment and balanced sustainable development in the poorest regions, regional authorities and Member States should give priority to projects that open them up, by providing infrastructure for transport, information technology and telecommunications, says the report.
The report encourages Member States to promote entrepreneurship in schools and to support training schemes for future entrepreneurs, aimed in particular at young people, women and the elderly.
As private equity, venture capital rotating funds and micro-credits for start-ups are also vital for entrepreneurship, innovation and job creation, the report also encourages the Commission, Member States and local authorities to build an integrated system of economic and social incentives for investors, and to simplify procedures for setting up new businesses. It advocates public-private partnerships (PPPs) as an effective means of involving private capital, with due regard to the long-term impact on public finances.
Simplify grant procedures, tailor to local needs, draw on local assets
New Member States in particular find it difficult to meet complicated cohesion policy requirements, and often lack sufficient private capital to pre-finance EU grants, so potential beneficiaries are unable to obtain funds that they could put to good use. The report encourages Member States and the Community to simplify procedures, so that funds are allocated transparently, efficiently, and delivered swiftly to final beneficiaries.
The report also suggests that EU regional aid should be tailored to the specific needs of the poorest regions, and aim to exploit their specific economic potential. It encourages Member States to make these regions more attractive to investors, by drawing on natural and cultural assets to develop traditional economic activities and create new ones.
Prospects
Ms Geringer de Oedenberg notes in her explanatory memorandum that Bulgaria and Romania in particular have particularly high growth potential, and so should be well-placed to take advantage of EU regional funding.
Preliminary estimates from the Commission's fourth report on cohesion, published on 30 May, suggest that over the period 2007-2013, cohesion policy will help to increase the GDP of Lithuania, Latvia, and Czech Republic by around 8.5%, Poland by around 5.5%, and Greece by around 3.5%.
Between 1960 and 2002, Spain's GDP rose from 60.76% to almost 85% of the Community average, Portugal's from 40% to 69%, Greece's from 44% to 66% and Ireland's from 65% to 122%.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-029-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-031-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Human rights
Human rights: Iraq, Transnistria, Vietnam
2007-07-16 - 15:32
In three resolutions winding up the July plenary session, MEPs call for action to help the growing wave of Iraqi refugees; they condemn the abuses of the breakaway regime in Transnistria, Moldova; and they voice concern at a new round of persecution of dissidents in Vietnam. Iraq: more than four million refugees
In a resolution on the worsening plight of refugees inside and outside Iraq, Parliament calls on the EU Member States and the international community to stop turning a blind eye to the situation. MEPs believe financial aid should be more readily available and asylum applications should be processed faster.
Citing a wealth of statistics, the resolution says that violence, unemployment and poverty are causing many Iraqis to flee, primarily to Jordan and Syria but also to Egypt, Lebanon, Turkey and Iran. Asylum applications from Iraqis doubled in the first half of 2007.
Four million people uprooted
There are now over 2 million Internally Displaced Persons (IDPs) in Iraq, some 42,000 non-Iraqi refugees in the country and around 2 million Iraqi refugees in neighbouring states, including 560.000 children unable to attend school.
Minorities such as Jews, Mandeans and Christians face increasing discrimination, while the 15,000 Palestinians in Iraq are at particular risk. The EP criticises the attitude of the Iraqi authorities towards the Palestinians and also condemns threats by senior Iraqi officials against members of the Iranian opposition who have been political refugees in Iraq for 20 years and have legal protected status.
On a positive note, the resolution "welcomes the solidarity shown by Iraq's neighbouring countries with Iraqi refugees and invites these countries to inform the international community about the support they need to cope with the situation". It goes on to call, "together with the UN High Commissioner for Refugees for a sustained, comprehensive and coordinated international response to ease the plight of millions of people uprooted by the humanitarian crisis".
Speedier processing of asylum applications
However, Parliament argues that "the attitude of most Member States and the US to recognising protection needs of Iraqi refugees has been largely restrictive" and it is critical of the "great disparities in the way Iraqi asylum claims are being assessed in the Member States".
It calls on the Member States to "overcome their position of non-action regarding the situation of the Iraqi refugees and to fulfil their obligations under international and Community law" so as to give Iraqis in Member States the opportunity to lodge asylum applications and have them processed with minimum delay. Iraqis who do not qualify for protected status but cannot be returned should at least be given some form of legal status.
More aid needed quickly
The European Commission is asked "to urgently explore further possibilities to bring humanitarian support to the IDPs in Iraq, exercising appropriate flexibility in interpreting the relevant rules, and to assist the neighbouring countries in their efforts to host the refugee population". The procedures of ECHO, the EC humanitarian aid office, are regarded as too lengthy, due to the special constraints of the country.
Lastly, the resolution asks the Commission to inform Parliament's Budget Control Committee at its meeting of 16 July about the use of the funds allocated to Iraq, including how much of the EU funding for Iraq has been allocated to the refugee problem.
* * *
Transnistria: Moldova's breakaway region
The resolution on Moldova looks at the "frozen conflict" involving the breakaway region of Transnistria, stresses the EU's interest in seeing this situation resolved and highlights the human rights abuses in Transnistria.
According to the resolution, "the 1992 war in the Transnistrian region of the Republic of Moldova led to the establishment of a separatist, illegitimate and authoritarian regime in this region; the situation of the frozen conflict persists and human rights violations continue to be severe and widespread".
Abuses in Transnistria
Parliament "deplores the lack of respect for human rights and human dignity in Transnistria" and "condemns the continued repression, harassment and intimidation of representatives of the independent media, NGOs and civil society".
The resolution cites a number of recent cases, including those of Tudor Popa and Andrei Ivantoc, "who were subjected to degrading treatment and were prohibited from returning to their homes" as well as "the arrest and detention under charges of terrorism of all the members of the so-called Ilascu group", which it says was "an illegal act" of the Transnistrian regime.
Parliament stresses that "the separatist regime of Transnistria allows organised crime, including trafficking in arms, in human beings, smuggling and money laundering activities to flourish" and argues that "this constitutes a considerable risk to the stability of the region".
Firm backing for Moldova's territorial integrity
Looking for ways forward, MEPs call for "a rapid and final settlement to the frozen conflict in Transnistria", while emphasising "the EU's firm commitment to the territorial integrity of Moldova".
Indeed, the EU has forged closer ties with Moldova over the years, including a Partnership and Cooperation Agreement in force since 1 July 1998. An EU Special Representative (EUSR) for Moldova has been appointed and the resolution refers to Moldova's "European aspirations".
MEPs believe the Commission and Council should "envisage measures of greater and comprehensive involvement in the process of negotiation and of solving the above-mentioned conflict".
Lastly, Parliament "calls on the EU to raise the issue of the withdrawal of the Russian troops from Transnistria within the framework of EU-Russia relations".
* * *
Vietnam: hopes of progress on democracy dashed?
In a resolution on Vietnam, adopted by 68 votes to 2 with 0 abstentions, Parliament voices disappointment at the government's apparent retreat from the policy of tolerance and openness which had seemed to be taking shape last year. It urges the government to change tack and believes the EU institutions should apply some pressure.
The resolution mentions "the political opening-up of 2006, which saw the birth of independent and democratic parties" as well as an internet petition for greater democracy signed by a number of intellectuals. It points out that "the Vietnamese regime's tolerance of this spreading of democratic dissidence aroused great hope" and enabled it to join the WTO, be removed from the United States' list of violators of religious freedom and be granted permanent normal trade relations by the US Congress.
However, "since March 2007, more than 15 dissidents have been sentenced to lengthy periods in prison or under house arrest". Religious freedom is also under attack, with religious movements finding it hard to register in order to gain official recognition. In addition, the ethnic minorities of the Northern and Central Highlands, including the Montagnards repatriated from Cambodia, are still "subject to discrimination, confiscation of their land and violation of their religious freedom".
Vietnam urged to meet international norms on democracy and human rights
Parliament therefore "voices its deep concern at the new wave of persecution of dissidents in Vietnam" and calls for "the immediate and unconditional release of all individuals imprisoned for the sole reason that they have peacefully and legitimately exercised their right to freedom of opinion, freedom of expression, freedom of the press and freedom of religion" (the resolution lists a number of individuals).
Parliament calls on the Vietnamese Government "to put an end to all forms of repression towards people exercising their right to the freedom of expression, freedom of thought and freedom of assembly, in line with international law on human rights" and "repeats its call to the authorities to reform as a matter of urgency national security provisions, either revoking them or bringing them into line with international law".
MEPs want Vietnam "to carry out political and institutional reforms in order to establish democracy and genuine rule of law, beginning with the introduction of a multi-party system, a free press and free trade unions" and "to respect religious freedom and to restore the legal status of all religious communities". They also urge the government to "end the discrimination against the Montagnard community".
Pressure from the EU?
When it comes to human rights, the EU could wield some clout. The resolution points out that Vietnam receives financial assistance from the EU and its Member States, that the EU is Vietnam's main trading partner and that Vietnam already benefits from the EU's generalised system of preferences. Moreover, in March 2007 the Commission decided to increase aid to Vietnam by 30% for the 2007-2013 period (€304 million), which is largely earmarked for governance and human rights actions.
Parliament therefore takes the view that the "human rights dialogue between the European Union and Vietnam must lead to tangible improvements in Vietnam" and asks the Council and the Commission "to reassess the policy of cooperation with Vietnam", given that the 1995 cooperation agreement is supposed to be based on respect for democratic principles and fundamental rights.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-030-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-032-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Adopted texts
2007-07-16 - 15:32
Texts, as adopted by the European Parliament during the July plenary can be accessed via the link hereunder. . Adopted texts - 10-12 July 2007
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-031-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-033-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Draft agenda for September I - Strasbourg
2007-07-16 - 15:32
The draft agenda for the September plenary in Strasbourg (3-6 September) is now available and can be accessed via the link hereunder. . Draft agenda for 3-6 September 2007
EN
1
LINK
/activities/public/plenSession.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-032-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-024-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-025-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-026-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-027-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-028-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-029-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-030-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-031-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-032-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-033-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-FULL DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-FULL DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-024-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-025-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-026-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-027-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-028-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-029-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-030-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-031-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-032-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070706BRI08890 ITEM-033-EN DOC XML V0//EN
