Web Editors for a day
Youth
2007-07-31 - 08:00
The European Youth Media Days on 27-27 June saw 270 young journalists descend on the European Parliament for a series of media workshops. They came from all over Europe and from every conceivable media field - TV, the internet, radio and print. One group was charged with the task of writing a series of stories in 22 languages for the Parliament's "Europarl" website. Here we look back over those June days and see what those who took over the website thought of the experience.
-
20070705FCS08863
How it panned out
With just one and a half days to research and write a story the pressure was on the young journalists to deliver fast. They first had to suggest ideas for stories and push for their approval through an Editorial Committee. They then had to go out and get the story - be it by interviewing an MEP or cooperating with other young journalists to meet the deadlines.
Hour by hour here's how it looked:
Thursday, 28 June
9.00 a.m.
Journalists arrive and assemble for a quick pep talk explaining everything they need to know before they get underway. Before being assigned groups of 4 there is a group photo of the 22 people taking part in the website workshop in the garden as a memento of the day. Indeed it forms the banner on the front of the website.
Each group will have to produce one section of a focus - which will later be produced in 22 languages.
10.30 a.m.
Brainstorming and proposing topics. Given that they are taking part in the European Youth Media Days a consensus emerges that they should concentrate on "Youth at the European Parliament".
The sections chosen for this included:
1. Education in the EU: National or European level?
2. Interview with Manolis Mavrommatis MEP: What is the role of youth in shaping the EU’s future?
3. EU coverage in their country: How can Europe become more attractive?
4. Young MEPs in the Parliament: What voice do young people have in the EP? Can they make a difference?
Other topics suggested by young journalists include:
- Erasmus and language and culture in Europe
- European identity: how young people perceive it and what MEPs think about it
2 p.m.
An ad-hoc editorial committee is convenes to discuss the work ahead. The Editorial coordinator voices his disapproval of the tardiness of some although this is quickly diagnosed as due to delays in the Parliament's cafeteria. After some to-ing and fro-ing the sections are approved.
Friday, 29 June
9 - 12.30
Heads down for writing time - young journalists take the desks of the regular editors and work on their material. There's a lot to be done with 88 articles to be written in 3 ½ hours
1 p. m
After some last minute panicking there is a huge sigh of relief as dossiers are published
Sebastian Olenyi, editorial coordinator for one day. He said that said that in this job there are "strong guidelines and limits on what is possible on the website of EP". It went on to say that "the most difficult thing has been to fulfil the expectations and the high demand of quality, dealing with 22 people who didn't know each other".
Final product from the day Views from the day Read about the workshops
In their own words
At the end of the session after lots of hard work we asked a cross section of young people what they thought of the workshop, which for this group had taken up the whole of the Media Days event. Working in teams, interviewing MEPs and meeting strict deadlines. Some loved it, some didn't - read what they had to say below.
Rada, Romania: "The deadline, that pressure motivates you, gives you energy and activates your concentration."
Alexander, 22, Germany: "It is quite difficult to write a focus not being a journalist and especially when the input language is not your mother tongue".
Silja, 22, Finland: "We were excluded from other [Media Days] participants and didn't even get the chance to take part in the panel discussions etc. More days, more time would be the best solution for this."
Antony David, 21, Malta: "No one told me what I was going to do before. The deadlines were too tight and we hated being apart from the others."
Susana, 29, Portugal: "We got a taste of a very stressful and demanding job. Working in the workshop was a mind opening experience, in the sense that we got to know the difficulties inherent to the task."
Maria Giovanna, 22, Italy: "The time pressure was too great: we had little time to write our articles."
Jerneja, 24, Slovenia: " It was very hard to reach MEPs and to arrange interviews with them especially since the deadline was very tight."
Meabh, 24, Ireland : "The most challenging part of our work was not knowing exactly what we could write or about who. I was very familiar with the structure of the page from having read the articles many times - so at least I had a general idea."
Pawel, 23, Poland: "Working for our monthly magazine in Poland I have almost a month to create 4 or 5 articles, here I had only 15 hours to write four items. The best thing was that we were treated as professionals, and there was no option to squeal like a school-room sissy".
Bence, 22, Hungary : "For me it was the ultimate experience: the professional atmosphere and approach towards the work was something I have not experienced this way before. I learned so much during that day I am hardly able to put in words. You made me realize one more peace of what it takes to become a 'journalist'."
Roman, 25, Czech Republic: "The workshop was absolutely uninteresting for me. Unfortunately I didn't choose it voluntarily, my workshop was different but you changed it. I've seen a lot of more interesting workshops than mine. Recommendation: Next time more professional journalists and fewer politicians."
Christian, 25, Sweden: "The time pressure was undoubtedly the hardest thing about writing the Focus. We needed to get five quotes from five MEPs in just a couple of hours. The most positive experience was the teamwork and how we, a group of people with 22 different nationalities, managed to create something interesting and useful in such a short time."
Lucas, 20, France: "It was super youpi. Don't believe the ones that tell you it was too short timed or very hard. Journalists should and do manage a lot more pressure than we had to deal with. The most challenging thing was not being able to go deeper into things and to have to remain at the surface level. This made the final result a bit shallow, especially with the articles based only upon irrelevant quotes."
Improvements?
It was important that the young journalists gave their feedback both on what they observed and how they thought the European Parliament could communicate better with citizens through its website. We asked them their impressions on how it all looked from the "inside".
Alexander from Germany thinks that the website is very professional and the content is great. "I am impressed: a big wow! I had lower expectations to be honest. I was a bit sceptical, but then I realized you are well organized, the atmosphere is nice here."
Jerneja from Slovenia said she "discovered a world I didn't know. I have received what I expected from this experience."
Roman from Czech Republic - who works as a journalist - suggested bringing more order into a bit "chaotic" "europa.eu" internet gateway to the EU and make EU WebPages similar. He would prefer to see one institutional news service for the EU and suggested more interactive elements in the articles published on EP website.
What about EU communication? Is it reaching the citizen?
Alexander from Germany: "one problem of the European communication is that there is no genuinely European media (TV or radio networks). Maybe this could be a good idea to improve European communication."
Roman from Czech Republic would like more information adapted to specific context of his member state: "I would like to read that the Czech Republic is the second one in this or that, etc".
Jerneja from Slovenia says that citizens perceive local and national political issues as more important than European ones. "We don't get a lot of feedback of what the MEPs of our country do here. Maybe more advertising should be useful to improve the EU communication." Blog 1 Blog 2 Blog 3
Background to European Youth Media Days
Over three days 270 young people from all across the Europe assembled in the European Parliament in Brussels to take part in 'European Youth Media Days'. Those present included young journalists, radio and TV producers, pod casters and bloggers. Through discussions and practical workshops their job was to rethink European media and work out ways that new forms of media can cooperate across Europe.
Hosted by the European Parliament and the European Youth Press those attending were selected from over 2000 applicants who submitted short films, articles or photos on the future of European media.
Wednesday: Reception and a chance to meet
The event formally began on Wednesday with Parliament's President Hans-Gert Pöttering hosting an official reception for the 270 young media professionals. They then had the chance to speak to some of the Parliament's senior staff involved in European communication and information policy. Journalists from prominent international news organisations were also there to add their expertise.
Opening the event in the hemicycle swung by a jazz band on Wednesday, 27 June, EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering welcomed this opportunity for the EU to listen to what young people have to say. "The European Union needs your views, ideas and creativity", he said, stressing that "we need your input in shaping our society". Specifically, he called upon the young journalists to "keep an open mind to look beyond national perspectives" when discussing the EU's future.
Thursday: political debate with MEPs
The core of a Parliament is the debate that is generated within it. On Thursday the media professionals met leaders of the Parliament's main political groups and MEPs from all 27 countries in the EU. Some of the issues that dominated panel discussions included the Union's future constitutional shape, further expansion of the EU as well as foreign and security policy.
In the evening discussions continued, but in a different atmosphere as the young people were encouraged to explore other more "social" aspects of Brussels life with some of their hosts!
Friday: Production in media workshops
Creativity is a core goal of the Youth Media Days. A total of 22 workshops set about creating new media products.
Each workshop was based on a particular subject and a particular media area - for example radio, TV, websites, magazines and newspapers. To help this the Parliament was making available its "Voxbox" Multimedia-studio. All of the workshops produced something tangible - something you can watch, read or look at.
To what extent the media can be used to "spy" on us was the subject of a TV programme "Big Brother Europe is watching you" which was look at security and data protection. MEP Richard Corbitt who sits on Parliament's Civil Liberties Committee and Peter Hustinx the European Data Protection Supervisor took part.
And finally of course the website workshop described here. For a day and a half 22 young editors took over as Editors and produced some of their own material in the Parliament's 22 languages, which is available on the Parliament's site.
The event closed at Brussels City Hall on Friday where much of what has been produced over the last two days was on public display.
EN
1
PHOTO
20070716PHT09227.jpg
EN
2
PHOTO
20070716PHT09245.jpg
EN
4
LINK
http://www.europocket.tv/
EN
5
LINK
http://www.youthmediadays.eu/european-youth-media-days/workshops/
EN
6
PHOTO
20070716PHT09247.jpg
EN
7
PHOTO
20070716PHT09237.jpg
EN
8
LINK
http://www.youthmediadays.eu/european-youth-media-days/blog/
EN
9
LINK
http://mediapedia.cafebabel.com/en/
EN
10
LINK
http://www.youtube.com/mediablogger
EN
11
PHOTO
20070716PHT09235.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070622FCS08197 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
