Current Palestinian crisis "no excuse" to undermine the regional peace process, say MEPs
External relations
2007-07-12 - 13:23
Current crisis "no excuse" to undermine the regional peace process, say MEPs
The European Parliament presses its condemnation for the Hamas take-over of Gaza, while emphasizing that the current crisis should not be used as an excuse to halt efforts to reach a lasting peace. An EP resolution adopted by a large majority also urged the resumption of political dialogue in Lebanon, and argued for a dialogue with Syria to resolve the conflicts in the region.
The House condemned Hamas's seizure of military control over the Gaza Strip, and expressed its "understanding and support for President Abbas' extraordinary decisions given the serious circumstances." MEPs welcome the Council's decision to resume normal relations with the Palestinian authority, including direct financial support to the government.. They also called for the "release of all the imprisoned Palestinian former ministers, legislators and mayors, and Israeli corporal Gilad Shalit," while welcoming the release of BBC journalist Alan Johnston as "a positive step forward."
Parliament urges the "resumption of the internal political dialogue between Palestinians," and noted that "the current crisis is not an excuse to undermine the prospect of peace." MEPs welcome Israel's decision to transfer parts of the withheld Palestinian tax and customs revenues, but called for a "complete and regular transfer" of all these funds. Members also called on Israel to remove roadblocks, stop the extension of settlements, and halt the building of the security wall beyond 1967 borders. The House condemns both Qassam missile attacks on Israel from Gaza, as well as military interventions by the Israeli army.
Lebanon - call for immediate release of two Israeli soldiers
Members urge the kidnappers of two abducted Israeli soldiers, Eldav Regev and Ehud Goldwasser, to give a sign of life of their captives, and called for their immediate release. The resolution also argues for a "re-launch of the dialogue for national unity" in the country in order to achieve political stability. The resolution strongly condemns the terrorist attack on Spanish soldiers of UNIFIL stationed in Lebanon. It welcomes the UN Security Council resolution setting up the international Tribunal to try those responsible for the assassination of former Lebanese Prime Minster Rafik Hariri and other political murders.
Wider Middle East Peace Process
MEPs recall the "valuable contribution of the Arab Peace Initiative," and called on Israel to recognize the window of opportunity that it offers. They also emphasise that "neither preconditions nor unilateralism help" the peace efforts in the region, and said that "dialogue with Syria [was] one of the key factors" in this context.
20070709IPR08944 Text, as adopted by the EP on 12 July, will shortly be available here
EN
1
PHOTO
20070712PHT09163.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
