The Week Ahead 3-9 September 2007
Institutions
2007-08-31 - 09:26
Plenary Session – Strasbourg
Forest fires in Greece . MEPs begin the session by debating a Commission statement on the catastrophic forest fires in Greece and how to improve responses to such disasters. (Monday, vote on resolution Tuesday)
Financial instability. On the eve of the ECB’s latest interest rate decision, Parliament will debate the impact on the real economy of recent instability in the financial markets with the Commission and Council. (Wednesday)
Portuguese President. Aníbal Cavaco Silva, President of Portugal, will address MEPs in a formal sitting. He will then join a press conference with EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering. (Tuesday)
Terrorism. The fight against terrorism will be debated with Commission and Council. One aspect of this issue – restrictions on liquids in airline cabins – will be the subject of a vote following an earlier debate. (Wednesday) A wider resolution will follow in October.
Gdansk shipyard. The threat to the future of the iconic shipyard in Gdansk will be the subject of a debate with the Commission. (Tuesday)
Single Market Review. Parliament is set to adopt a report on the wide-ranging review of the EU’s single market, including suggestions for removing barriers and inefficiencies. (debate and vote Tuesday)
Alcohol. A report on the EU’s strategy on reducing alcohol related harm will be put to the vote. (debate Tuesday, vote Wednesday)
Milk and sugar. MEPs will have their say on Commission plans for changes in the milk market. (debate Tuesday, vote Wednesday) Meanwhile the Agriculture Committee will adopt its report on reform of the sugar market. (Monday)
Transport of dangerous goods. Legislation on the transport of dangerous goods is one of several transport issues due for discussion. (debates Tuesday, votes Wednesday)
EP/Lebanon. President Pöttering will meet Lebanese politician Michel Aoun, who will also take part in a meeting with the EP’s delegation for the Mashreq countries and a press conference. (Wednesday)
20070831IPR09914 For full details see 'The Agenda'
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20073600AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
