Plenary sessions: Home is where the Hemicycle is...
Institutions
2009-10-19 - 15:21
In the hemicycle opposite ends of the political spectrum face one other The Parliament reconvenes this week in the "Hemicycle" Parliamentary Chamber in Strasbourg for its October plenary session. MEPs meet 12 times a year in Strasbourg for four days and in Brussels for two day sessions, whose frequency can vary. You can watch the plenary sessions live but before that, you might want to have a look at the following short guide.
Around the Strasbourg Plenary in 4 days
Monday : The session is opened by the President of the European Parliament (Jerzy Buzek) at 1700. He makes a number of announcements - on procedure, changes to the agenda, the arrival of a new member or the departure of another. The President has also often taken this opportunity to send a message of condolence following a tragedy or disaster and may, in such cases, lead a minute’s silence in the Chamber. This is followed by "one-minute speeches", when MEPs who have asked for the floor get 60 seconds to speak on any topic of current interest they wish to raise. This is followed by items on the agenda for debate.
The seven Political Groups will have spent the day holding last minute meetings to finalise their positions and discuss any changes to the agenda.
Tuesday : The sitting starts early and usually finishes late in the evening. MEPs begin with votes on whether to accept Commission or Council requests for urgent procedures to be applied by Parliament on particular pieces of legislation. The voting time is normally at noon on reports debated in the morning or the previous day.
Wednesday : The most important legislative votes, and in particular those which require an absolute majority (at least 369 of the 736 MEPs voting in favour) tend to take place. Voting usually takes place between 1200 and 1300. This is also the day when ministers or prime ministers from the country holding the EU presidency will most often take part in debates with MEPs.
Thursday : The final items on the week's agenda are voted on around midday (between 1100 and 1300). By tradition, the session ends in the afternoon with (three) short debates raising human rights issues from around the world, followed often by votes on relevant resolutions.
Brussels plenary sittings start on Wednesday afternoon and continue until midnight, resuming the following morning and finishing with votes around midday on Thursday.
Who sits where in the Hemicycle?
The Parliament's Chamber - the Hemicycle - is in the form of a semicircle so all sides of the political spectrum can see each other - even if they rarely see eye to eye on many subjects.
MEPs are seated in their Political Groups with the group leaders in the first rows.
The President of the Parliament – or one of the 14 vice-Presidents acting as the "in the chair" president - sits facing MEPs, in the middle of the chamber at the front. From his (or her -in the case of a female Vice-President) perspective, the groups can be seen as follows, from left to right:
MEPs from the Confederal Group of the European United Left/Nordic Green Left sit, appropriately enough, on the left. Then there is the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , followed by the Group of the Greens/European Free Alliance, and the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe . The Group of the European People's Party (Christian Democrats) are in the centre and on the right of the Chamber with the European Conservatives and Reformists Group and the MEPs who are not part of any particular group (non-attached) behind them. The members of the Europe of Freedom and Democracy Group have their seats at the back on the far right.
At either side of the chamber a block of seats is reserved for the Commission and for ministers from the Council presidency – currently Sweden.
All Parliament's sessions are held in public and there is a public gallery where people can listen to debates. Part of the gallery is reserved for journalists and the diplomatic corps.
What is on the agenda and how is it decided?
You name it - the Parliament has probably discussed it - everything from testing cosmetics on animals to international treaties is debated in the Plenary. As well as rejecting, amending or adopting proposed EU laws, other roles stemming from the EU treaties include adopting the EU budget, voting on a new European Commission, approving international treaties and overseeing reports from other institutions.
With so many competing topics, the final decision on what to include in the agenda is made the Thursday before the Plenary Session, by the Conference of Presidents, which is made up of the President of Parliament and the leaders of all the political groups.
If you would like to see what is on the agenda for the next Strasbourg session, click on the first link. You can watch live the plenary session through the second link.
20060901STO10229 Plenary agenda Watch live! Newsletter 19-22 October Updated focus on the October plenary
EN
1
PHOTO
20060901PHT10217.jpg
EN
2
A
http://www.socialistsanddemocrats.eu/gpes/index.jsp?request_locale=EN
EN
3
A
http://www.alde.eu/en
EN
4
A
http://www.eppgroup.eu/home/en/default.asp?lg1=en
EN
5
A
http://www.ecrgroup.eu/
EN
6
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?reference=2009-10-2&language=EN
EN
7
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/frd/live/live-video?language=en
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20091008BRI62121 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20091009FCS62255 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
