The time is not ripe to propose the introduction of an MSY system, says the EP
Fisheries
2007-09-06 - 12:35
The European Parliament deplores the "deficient analysis" and "inadequate solutions" offered by the Commission's communication "Implementing sustainability in EU fisheries through maximum sustainable yield (MSY)". In a report adopted the House states that "the strict application of MSY would result in the short term in a considerable, and in some cases drastic, reduction in activity, employment and income for the Community fleet."
Maximum Sustainable Yield (MSY) is a reference point whose objective is to maximise the economic yield of a fishery in relation to the biological capacity of the stock.
In its communication "Implementing sustainability in EU fisheries through maximum sustainable yield", the Commission proposes a change in fisheries regulation through a change in the management model that will allow the sustainable use of fisheries resources in order to guarantee the industry's viability. In the Commission's own words, fisheries should be managed "looking for success rather than to seek merely to avoid failure".
In the face of such a challenge as that posed by changing the model of Community fisheries management, "it is regrettable that the Commission communication is somewhat simplistic, since it fails either to give a clear account of the need for this change of approach or to provide a detailed description of the type of model to be opted for", says the rapporteur, Carmen FRAGA ESTÉVEZ (EPP-ED, ES).
MEPs deplore the "absence of an in-depth evaluation of what applying an MSY model would actually mean", in terms of its shortcomings, the particularities of its application, and the potential risks of any errors in the model. They regret, notably, the absence of an analysis of the evolution of the MSY concept and the potential advantages of the different approaches.
According to the EP, "the time is not ripe to propose the introduction of an MSY system.". MEPs say that a deeper and more rigorous analysis is needed of the problems, shortcomings and objectives of the Community's conservation and management policy as such, "with a view to deciding, with all political courage, the most suitable measures for introducing the changes that are most needed to the present Common Fisheries Policy."
The House believes that the Commission must seize this opportunity to devise a system of access to resources that puts the accent on sustainability, discourages discards, simplifies the technical measures, eliminates discrimination and excessive competition for stocks, introduces the necessary flexibility, and boosts the sector's competitiveness.
The report underlines that any change to the management system must necessarily include "suitable and financially acceptable compensation mechanisms", and that this will require an assessment of the social and economic impact of the final proposal.
MSY not appropriate for multi-species fisheries
The EP also warns that it will be difficult to apply the MSY model to multispecies fisheries (i.e. the majority of those in the EU), since "if the MSY applied were that of the main species the others could be overfished, while if, as would seem logical, one applied that of the most vulnerable species it would be necessary to stop catching those species that were in a good biological state, with adverse effects in economic, employment and competitiveness terms, a situation which would be in total contradiction with the notion of MSY as such."
20070903IPR09988 Implementation of sustainable fishing in the EU on the basis of maximum sustainable yield Text, as adopted by the EP on 6 September, will shortly be available here
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A6-2007-0298 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
