ECB President Trichet tells MEPs transparency and cooperation key
Economic and monetary affairs
2007-09-12 - 15:21
Recent turmoil in the financial markets shows the need for more transparency and cooperation between Europe's Central Banks. That was the message Europe's Chief central banker Jean Claude Trichet took to MEPs when he met Parliament's Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee. He was joined by Internal Market Commissioner Charlie McCreevy and Monetary Affairs Commissioner Joaquín Almunia in the ad-hoc meeting on 11 September.
In spite of the recent events, the European Central Bank's forecast for the economy in the 13 member euro-zone is still positive as far as growth is concerned. This was echoed by Commissioner Almunia who released figures estimating 2007 GDP growth of 2.8% for the 27 members of the EU, down 0.1 per cent compared with previous projections.
The Spaniard went on to tell MEPs that there is there is good reason to have confidence in the EU economy because of its "solid financial foundation". Referring to recent financial turbulence he said that "no-one could foresee this financial turmoil...but it's too soon to draw conclusions...we don't have to overreact".
Earlier, Internal Market Commissioner Charlie McCreevy said: "we need to remain vigilant and draw lessons."
Subprime loans - subprime rating agencies?
The problems of the US subprime mortgage market and the knock-on effect they have had on global markets was the backdrop to the meeting. In particular the way in which credit ratings agencies calculate risk has been an open question.
During the hearing, MEPs, including Committee Chair Pervenche Berès (PSE), Alexander Radwan (EPP-ED) and José Manuel Garcia Margallo y Marfil (EPP-ED), called for more transparency in order to restore consumer's confidence.
Mr Trichet and Mr McCreevy talked about potential conflicts of interest of the rating agencies. Mr Trichet proposed a possible voluntary benchmarking of "good practice" to improve their operations.
Dutch MEP Ieke van den Burg (PSE), stressed the fact that these events should represent a "lesson to be learned", suggesting to Mr Trichet that the ECB could be more involved in the supervision of the EU financial markets. "In the EU banking system supervision is decentralised", said Trichet. "What we need is more team cooperation among national Central Banks," he told MEPs.
Consumer confidence "essential"
He also called for prudence and realism: "we have to restore consumer confidence, also by improving transparency...the ECB itself is an example of transparency, we are the only central bank who explains in real time how and why we reacted as we did".
In reply to a question by Mrs Berès about minimising similar turbulence in the future, Mr Trichet said that "we live in a market economy that is partially based on taking risks...whenever we take great risks we can be punished or rewarded".
He said that ECB has warned several times in the past years about possible risks in the markets and affirmed that the ECB "has shown its capacity to react properly to the turmoil. "I agree that we have to continue thinking about how to deal with non-regulated agencies. We need an open discussion about this".
ECB independence is fundamental
Finally, answering MEPs' questions on whether recent events would encourage those seeking to review the ECB's statute, Mr Trichet firmly defended the Bank's independence. He invited the committee to consider the effect on long term interest rates in the euro-zone should markets entertain any doubts on this.
On 9 October EU Finance Ministers will meet to discuss the situation and the EU is expected to publish its full growth forecasts for 2008 early in October.
20070906STO10164 Info on Hearing: 11 Sept Article on financial turmoil: 30 August Debate in Strasbourg Plenary: 5 Sept Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee website ECB website
EN
1
PHOTO
20070912PHT10311.jpg
EN
5
LINK
/activities/expert/committees/presentation.do?committee=2351&language=EN
EN
6
LINK
http://www.ecb.eu/home/html/index.en.html
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070910IPR10214 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823STO09819 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070830STO09911 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
