Recall of Chinese toys - MEPs voice concerns
Consumers
2007-09-17 - 10:04
-
Toys generally bring children - and often their parents - pleasure. So the recent recall of 21 million toys by US manufacturer Mattel over concerns they contain lead has raised alarm. MEPs on Parliament's Internal Market Committee had a face to face meeting with EU Consumer Commissioner Meglena Kuneva on 12 September to assess the level of danger to European children. She confirmed her faith in existing safety rules and said she had launched a two month review of all existing checks.
She called the review a "last warning" saying that if dangers remain "we will impose the next layer of measures. Among them is a ban on products".
Mattel has already said that it was removing the products from shops and would intercept incoming shipments. The Chinese authorities have promised to ban all lead from toy making.
Toy safety in Europe is currently covered by the General Product Safety Directive - GPSD. This places the onus on manufacturers and importers to ensure that products are safe and authorities are informed if there is a problem. The enforcement of these regulations is left with individual EU Member States. The European Commission currently coordinates a "RAPEX" rapid alert system for non-food dangerous goods. This means any problems in one place are communicated immediately to all EU members.
China world's leading toy manufacturer
The fallout for US toy giant Mattel has been huge. As well as recalling over 20 millions toys its reputation has already been severely tarnished by reports of conditions in Chinese toy factories. China is the world's number one producer of toys due to cheap labour and manufacturing costs.
Speaking of international trade, Commissioner Kuneva told MEPs that "from factory floor to supermarket shelf often spans the globe". A report in October is due to assess the Chinese response to the safety issues raised.
Some of the toys affected by the safety fears are some of Mattel's biggest sellers including Batman toys and Sesame Street's "Big Bird" and "Elmo" characters. Accessories to the iconic "Barbie" doll have also been recalled over lead contamination fears - although Ken has remained on the shelves unscathed.
MEPs worried as Christmas approaches
Christmas may be some time off but the toys that will be sold in Europe during the festive season are already arriving in large numbers from China. British MEP Arlene McCarthy who chairs the Internal Market Committee asked fellow MEPs and the Commissioner: "can we reassure parents by saying that their children will receive safer toys in Christmas?"
Ms McCarthy reminded fellow Members that she had previously called for "tougher controls to intercept dangerous goods at the border and stronger national inspection and enforcement to ensure dangerous toys don't reach the shelves".
MEPs on the Committee from different political groups generally agreed with the Commissioner that better enforcement is necessary. Finnish MEP Alexander Stubb (EPP-ED) said the RAPEX system worked well but stressed the need for more cooperation.
Ms Kuneva reassured MEPs that stringent checks would be made for the Christmas period. However, she said the discussions have wider implications. "The present debate is not just about toys and China, it embodies profound issues related to our ability to build consumer confidence in an open trading model, to better regulation and basic confidence in governance".
MEPs vowed to closely monitor the results of the Commission's two month reappraisal of the rules.
20070906STO10167 China and product safety: frequently asked questions Parliament's Internal Market Committee Commissioner Kuneva
EN
1
PHOTO
20070913PHT10391.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://europa.eu/rapid/pressReleasesAction.do?reference=MEMO/07/299&format=HTML&aged=0&language=EN
EN
3
LINK
/activities/expert/committees/presentation.do?committee=2355&language=EN
EN
4
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/commission_barroso/kuneva/index_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
