MEPs assess Trichet's and ECB's handling of market turmoil
Economic and monetary affairs
2007-09-13 - 15:26
Jean-Claude Trichet speaks to MEPs on Tuesday
Following recent turmoil in the financial markets we asked MEPs from the major parties in Parliament whether they had confidence in the European Central Bank's handling of the affair. On Tuesday 11 September ECB President Jean Claude Trichet called for greater transparency in the international financial system to restore consumer confidence. MEPs also raised the alleged conflict of interest that rating agencies (who calculate financial risk) have.
Are you confident in the ECB's handling of current market turmoil?
Udo Bullmann (PSE- Germany): ECB president Trichet is well aware of the problems related to the situation. We expect the ECB in its future monetary decisions to take into account growth and the development in the labour markets just as it now takes account of this crisis.
Ieke van den Burg (PSE - the Netherlands): What the ECB did "ex post" is positive; the problem is that the ECB is not able to act "ex ante". The present crisis shows that there is a lack of oversight by the fragmented system of prudential supervisors and central banks. We desperately need on top of this a strong European supervisor with adequate powers to monitor the risks of the unregulated and regulated financial activities of banks and non banks.
Gunnar Hökmark (EPP-ED - Sweden): Yes I am. The independence of the ECB and the manifested ability to act together with substantial strength gives me confidence.
Karsten Friedrich Hoppenstedt (EPP-ED - Germany): The ECB has reacted in a good and flexible way. The extent of the instability would have been even greater if the ECB hadn't insisted on its own independence geared towards price stability.
Lapo Pistelli (ALDE- Italy): The hearing (with Trichet) confirms once again the necessity of a strong initiative on the powers of supervision. As often is the case, Europe reacts after the fact. But it finds it hard to find adequate means to prevent similar crisis.
Wolf Klinz (ALDE, Germany): The ECB's handling was appropriate and responsible. By supplying the necessary liquidity, the ECB proved itself able to react quickly. The ECB however did not solve the real problem. Measures to improve the transparency in derivative markets and in the work of credit agencies as well as measures to strenghten the prudential supervision of the European banking system can only be achieved in the medium- to long-term.
Guntars Krasts (UEN - Latvia): The ECB has reacted promptly. Just a few weeks ago its main worry was inflation pressure, now after what has happened, Mr Trichet's main worry is to get out of this crisis with the least possible damage to euro area growth. His comments provided me with trust that the ECB will make right decisions to avoid a real crisis and maintain its strong grip on monetary policy.
20070913STO10347 EP Press Info: 11 September ECB President in Parliament: 11 September
EN
1
PHOTO
20070913PHT10353.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070910IPR10214 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070906STO10164 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
