Liquid ban, terrorism and financial turbulence dominate Wednesday Plenary
Institutions
2007-09-06 - 12:35
The US sub-prime mortgage market prompted the recent financial crises
MEPs Wednesday called for a review and possible repeal of restrictions on the taking of liquids onto planes, citing cost and the "disproportionate" nature of the measure. In a debate on terrorism, MEPs criticised ineffective EU action and the failure to appoint an EU anti-terrorism coordinator, while Europe's Security Commissioner lauded anti-terror arrests in Germany and Denmark. Later Members debated the financial crisis and called for greater supervision of financial instruments and lenders.
Liquid restriction on planes: MEPs urge review, possible repeal
Fed up with handing over drinks and perfumes to security staff at airports? MEPs have called for a rethink of the policy in light of the cost and disruption caused by in their view "disproportionate" measures. In a resolution passed on 5 September MEPs urged the Commission to review and (if there are no new facts) to repeal restrictions on liquids.
In the resolution MEPs recognise the cost of the current restrictions to airports, operators and passengers as well as the "substantial inconvenience and disruption".
Later in a press release Transport Commissioner Jacques Barrot said,"the regulation cannot be repealed so long as the threat of liquid explosives remains and we have not developed other methods of effectively controlling it ".
The restrictions on liquids and gels in hand luggage were introduced in November 2006 following a foiled plot to blow up several transatlantic airliners.
MEPs raise questions on fight against terrorism
The fight against terrorism and the level of cooperation between European countries was also debated on Wednesday morning, particularly the state of current anti-terror legislation and data sharing. The continuing absence of a European anti-terrorism coordinator drew sharp comments from MEPs.
The speakers for the main groups, the Centre right EPP-ED, Socialist PSE and Liberal ALDE group all urged Europe to do more.
Manfred Weber (EPP-ED) called for an assessment of current laws on the fight against terrorism and said that the roots of terrorism need also to be addressed at the cultural level. Michael Cashman (PES) said that the 27 Member States of the Union should act in conjunction with their allies, including the US. For the Liberals Alexander Alvaro said that there is no long-term strategy for the fight against terrorism. "I do not see any movement in terms of measures. There is no real plan. We have to define the role Europe is going to play" he told the House.
Franco Frattini, the Commissioner for Freedom, Security and Justice noted that 2 days ago terror suspects were arrested in Germany and Denmark. He described this as a "a fantastic result." He went on to say that although all sources reflect that a threat for new terrorist acts remains high". Frattini said a new package of measures will be adopted this autumn, while Manuel Lobo Antunes, Portugal's Secretary of State for European affairs, representing the Council said the new EU anti-terrorism co-ordinator would be appointed soon.
Financial turbulence: MEPs urge oversight of complex financial products
In a debate on the recent financial instability brought on by disturbances in the US "sub-prime" mortgage market in the US, MEPs backed the European Central Bank's response to the crises and called for a proper oversight of financial services and markets to limit the risks of bad lending.
John Purvis for the EPP-ED group blamed "new financial instruments" that are so complex that even banks could not understand them. "Normally conservative but naive banks have been tempted too by high rated instruments too good to be true". He praised the ECB for a "sensible" reaction.
Robert Goebbels of the PSE group called for greater supervision of financial markets and financial lenders and said a lack of information and transparency aggravated the crisis. Victims are families taking mortgages on the basis of eternal growth in the property market. He asked why the ECB has paid out more to shore up markets than the US Fed.
Margarita Starkevičiūtė of the ALDE group said the crisis had ultimately been caused by aggressive financial policies outside EU, when trying to resolve the .com bubble. The EU cannot dictate decisions in third countries, but can have dialogue with their financial supervisors. She called for regulation of the non-bank sector where "even supermarkets are involved" in lending.
Commissioner McCreevy: "need to remain vigilant and draw lessons"
Internal Market Commissioner Charlie McCreevy said "I hope that the Boards of all financial firms will examine their actions and draw appropriate conclusions. We believe that 'light touch', principle-based regulation is the best approach for the financial sector. It has proven its value. But we need to remain vigilant and draw lessons. All parties need to take their responsibility – and take it seriously".
Next week Parliament's Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee will question ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet about the Bank's handling of the liquidity crisis. You can watch the hearing live on the website on Tuesday at 1500 .
20070830STO09911 Live from Strasbourg Press release on liquids: 5 Sept Press release on the debate on terrorism: 5 Sept Financial markets - background: 30 August
EN
1
PHOTO
20070905PHT10110.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/eplive/vod/livestream/default_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823IPR09766 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823IPR09765 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070823STO09819 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
