Maximising the impact of human rights dialogues
Human rights
2007-09-06 - 12:35
Parliament adopted an own-initiative report calling on the Commission and Council to ensure a greater degree of coherence in the EU's human rights dialogues with third countries. MEPs stress the need for Parliament to be informed of the content of ongoing dialogues. They also urge the use of more stringent criteria and monitoring mechanisms.
The report, drafted by Elena VALENCIANO MARTÍNEZ-OROZCO (PES, ES) concerns the human rights dialogues that the European Union conducts with third countries. These rights, according to the report should encompass "not only civil and political rights but also social, environmental, economic and cultural rights," and the "dialogue objectives should be based on the principle that human rights are universal, indivisible and interdependent." In addition, the report warns that "the promotion and defence of human rights in Third countries should not be conditioned by geopolitical or geo-strategic alliances."
The draft report notes that "there is a wide variety of dialogues, each based on different structures, formats, frequencies, and methodologies, thus obscuring the picture and creating confusion about EU action in this area." It offers some recommendations on how to improve the mechanisms. MEPs call on the Council to "set clear criteria for the initiation, suspension or termination of a dialogue," and also urge it to put in place "a post-electoral protocol mechanism to monitor and support the democratisation process, which includes the involvement of the civil society at all stages."
China, Russia, Iran in the spotlight
Although the report focuses on the overall process, and not the individual dialogues or countries concerned, it does single out a number of countries for special attention.
The report emphasises "the need to considerably strengthen and improve the EU-China human rights dialogue" and "stresses that China’s human rights record remains a matter of serious concern". The Commission should ensure "that its trading relationship with China is linked to human rights reforms".
The human rights situation in Russia is described as "worrisome", the key areas being freedom of association, freedom of speech and freedom of the press and the media. MEPs urge the Commission and Council to lay down "concrete obligations and establish efficient mechanisms for monitoring and checking fulfilment of the obligations Russia has taken on".
MEPs are also concerned that the human rights dialogue with Iran has been interrupted since 2004 due to Iran's lack of co-operation. They urge the Commission, meanwhile, to continue financing projects aimed at promoting good governance and to support women's and children's human rights in Iran.
European Neighbourhood Policy
The main purpose of the European Neighbourhood Policy is to establish a privileged relationship with the EU’s eastern and southern neighbours on the basis of a mutual commitment to common values, especially the rule of law, good governance and human rights. MEPs believe "the EU dialogues could have a greater impact on reform in the ENP neighbours" and the report draws attention to "the continual deterioration of the human rights situation in Azerbaijan", which it says underlines the need "to establish a Human Rights Subcommittee as soon as possible with that country". It also calls on the Council to consider the possibility of establishing a human rights dialogue or consultation mechanism with Libya and Syria. The report also stresses the need to set up an "institutionalised human rights subcommittee with Israel, replacing the current provisional mechanism."
20070903IPR09987 Functioning of the huam rights dialogues and consultations on human rights with third countries Text, as adopted by the EP on 6 September, will shortly be available here
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5430322
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
