Reform Treaty MEPs push for inclusion of Charter and citizenship
Future of Europe/European integration
2007-09-17 - 17:31
l to r; Reform Treaty MEPs Duff, Brok, and Barón
The three MEPs charged with representing the Parliament in discussions about a new reform treaty have spoken of some of the unresolved issues, particularly whether the Charter of Fundamental Rights should be in the treaty or annexed to it. References to EU citizenship and the extent of cooperation on justice matters are also being debated. Ahead of the hoped for October deadline MEPs Elmar Brok, Enrique Barón and Andrew Duff briefed us on developments.
The MEPs - representing the three largest political blocs in the Parliament - form part of an "Intergovernmental Conference" charged with drawing up a new treaty. Meeting in June, EU leaders decided to ditch the Constitution and take account of reservations by some countries and their electorates. In July Parliament voted to empower Messrs Brok, Barón and Duff to represent its interests.
Charter and citizenship are Parliament's "red lines"
Of particular interest to the Parliament is that any new treaty should include specific references to people being granted EU citizenship as well citizenship of their own state. In addition to this the Parliament is keen for the Charter of Fundamental Rights to be included in the text. Some countries - notably the UK and Poland - would prefer a formula where the Charter is simply referred to.
According to Spanish Socialist Enrique Barón these issues are "red lines" for the Parliament as representative of citizens. He says the proposals "have been accepted by the majority of the countries" although he concedes "there is resistance from the United Kingdom". He goes on to explain that "we do not want exceptions from the Charter to become irreversible and create two categories of Europeans". One possible solution to this problem could be to leave the Charter out of the new treaty whilst having a "solemn proclamation" of it at a later date.
What are the tricky points?
According to British Liberal Andrew Duff, "there are still some serious political problems to be resolved - notably on the Charter of Fundamental Rights and the UK opt-outs on justice and home affairs and the Schengen border system". He explained further saying that "t he Parliament is keen for the Charter of Fundamental Rights to be legally binding. But some countries - notably the UK and Poland - want to opt out".
He went on to say that these problems also include "the role of the European Commission, Court of Justice and Parliament in foreign and security policy". He also mentioned the "Polish problem on Council decision making".
Elmar Brok gave a slightly more upbeat assessment and stressed the points where progress has been made. "On one hand, a great number of technical questions were solved at this level. On the other hand, the more complex and politically sensitive questions were identified and sufficiently prepared at the technical level to be dealt with at the political level. In most cases, the different options have been prepared, it will now be for the Foreign Ministers and Heads of State and Government to decide which option to follow".
Mr Barón mentioned other issues where he and his colleagues are pushing for progress."We are in favour of a better dialogue with our social partners and a coherent external policy, an efficient decision-taking procedure and subjects related to justice and home affairs".
Is an agreement likely before October?
The physical task of drawing up the text is in the hands of legal experts and jurists. The involvement of Parliament's staff allows the three representatives to be briefed daily on developments. The last meeting of the IGC before the summit of EU leaders 18-19 October will take place on 16 October.
Whether agreement will be reached by then is an open question. Andrew Duff is optimistic: There "will probably be an agreement." Elmar Brok was more cautious: "there is no guarantee of success, but the current state of negotiations clearly indicates that an agreement is within reach. The Union has no alternative than to decide on the reforms in order to be able to react efficiently to global challenges".
.
One complicating factor could be the Polish election on 21 October just days after the summit. Commenting on this Mr Barón said "the Polish people need to solve the existing dichotomy between a pro-European population and a government that is not pro-European". Only a few weeks now remain for the final haggling on this long path to be concluded.
20070913STO10363 MEPs vote in favour of IGC: 16 July Reform Treaty update: 29 August Opening statements: 23 July
EN
1
PHOTO
20070716PHT09219.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070712STO09169 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070829IPR09875 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070720IPR09679 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
