Opening of the session: tribute to Lord Bethell, new debate on Burma
Institutions
2007-09-24 - 18:24
At the opening of this week's Strasbourg plenary session, Parliament's President, Hans-Gert Pöttering, paid tribute to former MEP Lord Nicholas Bethell, who died on 8 September this year. Lord Bethell was an appointed Member of the European Parliament from 1975 to 1979 and an elected Member from 1979 to 2003. A vice-chairman of the Political Affairs Committee, "he fought against oppression around the world, notably in the former Soviet bloc", Mr Pöttering reminded the House.
Lord Bethell was also the driving force behind the creation in 1988 of the EP's Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought (the finalists for this year's prize are to be chosen tonight, 24 September, at a meeting of the EP foreign affairs and development committees).
In addition, President Pöttering referred to the situation in Myanmar/Burma, calling on the authorities there to allow their citizens to demonstrate freely and reiterating the EP's hope that Aung San Suu Kyi would be allowed to come to Parliament to receive the Sakharov Prize awarded to her in 1990. Lastly, he announced that two Spanish soldiers had died within the last few hours in an explosion in Afghanistan. The House observed a moment's silence in memory of Lord Bethell and the victims of terrorism.
Agenda changes: addition of debate and vote on Burma
The House voted in favour of two changes to this week's agenda. Following up on President Pöttering's statement, MEPs voted to add to the agenda a debate on Burma with the Council and Commission. This will be held on Wednesday afternoon, with a vote on a resolution on Thursday. The debate on the Zatlouka report on efficiency and equity in European education and training systems is postponed from Tuesday to Wednesday evening.
One change to the Brussels plenary session of 10-11 October was adopted: the joint debate on Community statistics (Bowles and Van den Burg reports) is postponed to the Strasbourg plenary session in late October to allow time to reach a first-reading agreement.
Highlights of September II Strasbourg Plenary
The House will debate and vote on three conciliation agreements on opening up the EU's railway market. Parliament will also debate and vote on a report on the setting up of the European Institute of Technology. Parliament holds its key debate on immigration, focusing on legal migration and the fight against illegal immigration. The House also returns to the issue of secret detentions and transfers following the report it adopted in February into CIA activities. "Dangerous toys imported from China" will be a key issue for the European Parliament with MEPs debating and voting on a resolution. MEPs will also vote on a report on the right to vote and stand in elections to the European Parliament for EU citizens residing in another Member State.
Monday 24 September 2007
The session opens with a debate on a report renewable energy which calls on the Commission to present by the end of 2007 at the latest a proposal for a renewable energy legislative framework. The report also urges the Commission to propose a sectoral approach within the legislative framework, setting clear and realistic binding targets for the electricity, transport and heating and cooling sectors.
The last point on Monday evening is a joint debate on the community's railways with MEPs set to debate and vote on three conciliation agreements. The agreements, dealing with the opening up of the rail market, a European licence for train drivers and the rights of rail passengers, were reached in June this year after the Council accepted the EP's final demand for a review every five years of any exemptions Member States grant their domestic railway networks from the rules on passenger rights.
Away from the plenary, at 7pm, MEPs will reduce the current five candidates for the 2007 Sakharov Prize to a short-list of three during a joint meeting of the Foreign Affairs Committee, Development Committee, and the Human Rights sub-Committee.
Tuesday 25 September 2007
Tuesday starts with a joint debate on sugar. To avoid an arbitrary reduction of quotas which would penalise the various stakeholders of the European sugar industry, the way the restructuring regime operates must be improved, says the EP Agriculture Committee. Two consultative reports are set to provide Parliament's response to the European Commission's plans for speeding up reform of the sugar sector.
MEPs will also debate and vote on a resolution on the import of dangerous toys manufactured in China. The recent recall of 21 million toys by US manufacturer Mattel over concerns they contain lead has raised alarm. MEPs on Parliament's Internal Market Committee had a face to face meeting with EU Consumer Commissioner Meglena Kuneva on 12 September to assess the level of danger to European children. She confirmed her faith in existing safety rules and said she had launched a two month review of all existing checks. Commission Vice-President Günter Verheugen in charge of Enterprise and Industry will also take part in the debate.
The House will then turn to a legislative report on the setting up of the European Institute of Technology. A proposal to set up the Institute is backed in a first-reading report by the Industry Committee. However, MEPs in the committee want the EIT's name to include "innovation" and say it should be established only after a pilot phase in which two or three "Knowledge and Innovation Communities" run projects, to test its feasibility. MEPs in the committee also want the Council to negotiate the EIT's funding with Parliament.
MEPs then focus on a report on working towards a common European foreign policy on energy. "The Energy Charter Treaty should be the cornerstone of the common European foreign policy on energy," says a report by the Foreign Affairs Committee. The own-initiative report, by committee Chairman Jacek Saryusz-Wolski (EPP-ED, PL), also advocates creating a post for a "High Official of Foreign Energy Policy", to co-ordinate the EU's activities in the field, and recommends diversification and increased energy efficiency to improve the EU's energy security.
Wednesday 26 September 2007
The key debate of the week is on immigration focusing policy plans for legal migration and the fight against illegal migration with the participation of Commission Vice-President Franco Frattini . The House will also debate two own initiative reports relating to immigration on a policy plan for legal migration and policy priorities in the fight against illegal immigration.
The afternoon sees the European Parliament return to a well known issue with a debate on secret detentions and unlawful inter-state transfers involving Council of Europe member states. Parliament's report drafted by Claudio Fava (PES, IT) and adopted in February, deplored the passivity of some Member States in the face of illegal CIA operations, as well as the lack of co-operation from the EU Council of Ministers, was approved with 382 votes in favour, 256 against with 74 abstentions.
The House will vote on a report from Andrew Duff (ALDE, UK, Liberal Democrat East of England) on the right to vote and stand in elections to the European Parliament for EU citizens residing in another Member State. A Commission proposal that would make it easier for EU citizens to stand or vote in European Parliament elections while living in Member States other than their own is being put forward the Constitutional Affairs Committee. However, the committee's consultation report also inserts two new provisions to improve the portability of electoral rights within the EU: one on multiple candidatures and the other on deprivation of electoral rights.
Thursday 27 September 2007
The House will debate a non-binding report on equality between women and men in the EU (2007). MEPs call on the Commission to propose awareness-raising campaigns, the exchange of best practice, dialogues with citizens and public-private partnership initiatives. They also say the Commission should monitor compliance by Member States with existing Community policy on male-female equality, particularly employment policy.
20070920IPR10515 Briefing - 24-27 September 2007 - Strasbourg Plenary Final draft agenda - 24-27 September 2007 Audio recording
EN
2
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?language=EN&reference=2007-09-2
EN
3
MULTIMEDIA
20070921MLT10573.asf
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070831BRI09932 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
