A roadmap for renewable energy in Europe
Energy
2007-09-25 - 12:41
Parliament adopted an own-initiative report on a roadmap for renewable energy in Europe which calls on the Commission to present, by the end of 2007 at the latest, a proposal for a renewable energy legislative framework. The report also urges the Commission to propose a sectoral approach within the legislative framework, setting clear and realistic binding targets for the electricity, transport and heating and cooling sectors.
Boosting renewables
The House emphasises the importance of creating and implementing Renewables Action Plans (RAPs) at Community and national levels and stresses that these should serve to contribute to a real Common European Energy Policy. Parliament calls on the Commission to ensure that the forthcoming legislative proposal concerning renewable energies contains strong measures for the promotion of renewable electricity, with the aim of increasing its share in the EU from the present level to at least double that amount by 2020.
The report regrets both that regional and local authorities in the EU continue to show too little interest in harnessing and using renewable energy sources. MEPs deplore the fact that the EU target of a 12 % renewable energy contribution to the EU energy mix by 2010 will, in all likelihood, not be met.
"Enormous development potential of offshore wind energy"
The report stresses the enormous development potential of offshore wind energy and the significant contribution it could make to Europe's independence from energy imports and to climate protection, while pointing out that enormous efforts are still needed to fully develop this potential. The House therefore calls on the Commission to draw up an offshore wind energy action plan, embodying an efficient European approach to offshore technology and promoting stronger interconnections.
Heating and cooling - double the amount by 2020
On heating and cooling, MEPs call on the Commission to ensure that any proposal for a framework directive for renewables contains strong measures for the promotion of renewable heating and cooling with the aim of increasing its share in the EU from the present level of approximately 10% to at least double that amount by 2020.
Transport and biofuels
The report welcomes the Commission’s proposal for promoting biofuels and other renewable energies for transport by means of imposing a binding target of 10%, provided that it can be proved that such fuels are produced in a sustainable way. The European Parliament stresses that the sustainable use of biofuels would reduce oil dependency and CO2 emissions in the transport sector, however the committee finds that a fair balance between food and energy production should be sought.
Finally, MEPs welcome the European Parliament's switch to renewables for its electricity uses and urges the other EU institutions to do the same.
20070823IPR09781 Road Map for renewable energy in Europe Text, as adopted by the EP on 25 September, will shortly be available here Statement by rapporteur Britta Thomsen (PES, DK) following adoption of the "Road Map for Renewable Energy in Europe" by Parliament on 25 September 2007
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5479322
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
3
MULTIMEDIA
20070925MLT10704.asf
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
