Plenary vote on the future of the Community's railways
Transport
2007-09-19 - 14:43
The "third rail package" - three Council/European Parliament conciliation agreements on the opening up of the rail market, a European licence for train drivers and on passengers' rights - will be put to a plenary vote at Parliament's September II session. At this (third reading) stage in the co-decision procedure, Parliament and the Council may only accept or reject the texts agreed by their conciliation committee delegations, in June 2007.
The three "third railway package" reports were on:
- the development of the Community's railways (rapporteur: Georg Jarzembowski (EPP-ED, DE)),
- passengers rights and obligations (rapporteur: Dirk Sterkcx (ALDE, BE)) and
- the certification of train crews (rapporteur: Gilles Savary, (PES, FR)).
To reach the June 2007 conciliation agreements, Parliament and the Council had to settle their differences over passenger rights, facilities for people with reduced mobility, crew certification and other issues including accident liability, compensation, insurance, information, ticketing and train quality.
The breakthrough came when Council accepted Parliament's demand for a review every five years of any exemptions that Member States may grant their domestic railway networks from the rules on passenger rights.
This note briefly summarizes the state of play.
20070918BKG10497
Liberalising the rail market
International passenger rail services within the Community will be opened up for competition from 1 January 2010. However, the Commission must assess developments, no more than two years after the directive enters into force, to see whether further liberalisation, to include domestic services, should also be envisaged.
A report on the application of the directive, to be tabled by the Commission in 2012, will look at progress in implementing the directive and assess market developments, including the state of readiness for a further opening up of the market. Development of the Community's railways report: EP procedure file
Passengers' rights and obligations
The proposed EU regulation on rail passengers' rights and obligations was originally intended to apply only to international journeys but after tough negotiations with the Council, MEPs succeeded in extending it to include passengers on domestic journeys.
Under the conciliation agreement, all rail passengers will enjoy a set of basic rights to do with, for example, the liability of companies for passengers and their luggage, and also the right to transport of people with a reduced mobility from 2009, when the regulation enters into force.
Compensation for delays
From then on, passengers will be entitled to compensation for delays for which the operator is responsible. The compensation for delays to cross-border services will amount to 25% of the fare for a delay of 60 minutes or more and 50% for a delay of 120 minutes or more. Eventually, these arrangements will also apply to all long-distance services.
Member States may exempt long-domestic rail services from the regulation's provisions on non-basic rights (such as the right to take a bicycle on the train), for an initial period of five years, which may be subsequently be extended for two further periods of up to five years each. Urban, suburban and regional services may be granted an indefinite exemption from these same provisions.
Easier access for disabled people and cyclists
Under the new rules, railway undertakings must inform passengers of their rights and obligations. Companies must put in place non-discriminatory access rules for the transport of disabled people and persons with reduced mobility. At unmanned stations, railway undertakings must make every reasonable effort to give disabled people and persons with reduced mobility access to travel by rail. Passengers must also be enabled to take bicycles by train, provided that these are easy to handle and that the rolling stock permits this.
EP rapporteur Dirk Sterckx stressed in June that this conciliation agreement had been the outcome of extremely arduous negotiations. "The fact that is was so difficult to persuade all Member States to grant basic rights to rail passengers shows how poorly railway authorities treat their customers nowadays. By reaching this agreement, we have done all rail passengers in the Community a service. In its original proposal, the European Commission wanted to grant rights only to international passengers. Now all passengers will enjoy a range of basic rights".
Same train, same rights
This means, for example, that passengers who take the Brussels-Cologne train, but get off at Liège, just before the frontier with Germany, will enjoy the same rights as those who take the same train, but get off at Aachen, just after it. Passenger rights and obligations report: EP procedure file
A European licence for train drivers
The proposed directive would require train drivers to hold a European certificate stating that they meet minimum requirements relating to medical fitness, basic education and general professional skills, so as to facilitate compliance with each Member State's national rules.
Parliament has succeeded in ensuring that crew members performing safety-critical tasks, as well as train drivers, may be included within the scope of this directive.
The European Railway Agency is to table a report, 18 months after the directive enters into force, identifying other train staff that perform safety-critical tasks and should be subject to a similar system of licences.
Parliament won an agreement in conciliation that no more than 12 months thereafter, the Commission is to table a report accompanied, if appropriate, by a proposal for a new law. Certification of train crews and drivers report: EP procedure file
A parliamentary success
Speaking in June, the leader of Parliament's conciliation committee delegation, Vice-President Alejo Vidal-Quadras (EPPP-ED, ES) was confident that the negotiations with Council had been successful. "This agreement gets away from old-fashioned obsessions with national borders and gives basic rights to passengers on all railway journeys and not just to these on international services, as the Council wanted. In particular, passengers on all long-distance journeys will be treated the same, whether or not their journey crosses national borders", he said.
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=241532
EN
2
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=241522
EN
3
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=241512
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
