The Week Ahead – 24-30 September 2007
Institutions
2007-09-21 - 09:44
Plenary Session – Strasbourg
Immigration. MEPs are to debate reports dealing with both legal and illegal immigration after hearing statements from the Commission and Council on the issue. (debate and votes Wednesday)
Death penalty. Following the recent failure of the Council to agree the creation of a European day against the death penalty, MEPs debate a statement from the Council and adopt a resolution on a moratorium on capital punishment (debate Tuesday, vote Thursday).
3rd Railway Package. Legislation on the opening up of the rail market, a European licence for train drivers and on passengers' rights will be debated and put to a final vote, following agreement between Parliament and Council representatives in the Conciliation Committee (debate Monday, vote Tuesday).
Dangerous toys. MEPs will debate a statement from the Commission on potentially dangerous toys imported from China (debate Tuesday, vote Wednesday).
Sakharov Prize finalists. A joint meeting of the Foreign Affairs and Development Committees will choose the three finalists for this year’s Sakharov Prize for freedom of thought. (Monday)
EIT. Plans for a European Institute of Technology reach their first reading legislative vote in Parliament (debate Tuesday, vote Wednesday).
Energy. Parliament will debate reports on the prospects for renewable energy (debate Monday, vote Tuesday) and for a common foreign policy on energy issues (debate Tuesday, vote Wednesday).
Sugar reform. MEPs will give their views on the Commission’s plans for reform of the sugar market (debate and vote Tuesday).
Equal opportunities. Reports on equality between men and women and on non-discrimination on the basis of race and ethnic origin are on the agenda (debate and vote Thursday).
EP/Croatia. EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering will make an official visit to Croatia (Thursday- Friday).
Ukrainian elections. A 14-strong delegation of MEPs will be in Ukraine to observe the Parliamentary election there on 30 September (Friday-Monday 1 October).
20070615IPR07818 For full details of all the week's events, see 'The Agenda'
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20073900AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
