EP urges Council to present a resolution on the moratorium on the death penalty to the UN
Human rights
2007-09-27 - 12:46
MEPs called on the Council to present a resolution on the moratorium on the death penalty to the 62nd UN General Assembly, in order to adopt it before the end of the year. In a resolution passed by 504 votes in favour, 45 against with 14 abstentions, the House also reiterates its full support for the establishment of a European Day against the death penalty on 10 October, calling on the future Polish government to fully support this initiative.
The Council has been unable to reach a decision on the European Day against the death penalty, because the Polish government has been blocking it. It argues that any such day should also condemn abortion and euthanasia. Legislative elections are taking place there on 21 October, and the Parliament called on the future Polish government to back the project of a European Day against the death penalty by "fully support[ing] this initiative that reflects basic values of the European Union."
Worldwide moratorium on the death penalty
The House urged the Presidency to "present a resolution on the moratorium at the opening of the 62nd United Nations General Assembly, [...] in order to adopt it before the end of this year." During the debate yesterday afternoon, the Presidency stated that it would table a resolution "by early- to mid-October." The UN's Third Committee (social, humanitarian and cultural affairs) could vote on the draft resolution in October of this year, allowing for a vote in the General Assembly in December.
Debate 25 September 2007
The proposed Council decision on a moratorium on the death penalty was debated by MEPs and Council representatives on Tuesday afternoon. The two key topics were the status of the resolution to be submitted to the UN General Assembly on a universal moratorium against the death penalty, and the Polish opposition in the Council to establishing a European Day against the death penalty.
Political group speakers
Speaking for the EPP-ED, Laima Liucija ANDRIKIENĖ (LT) said that the EU should stand together on the UN resolution, despite its differences on other issues, such as the European Day against the death penalty.
For the Socialists, Martin SCHULZ (PES, DE) cited an interview with Polish President Lech Kaczynski, in which the latter expressed his support for the death penalty, but noted that the political climate in Europe did not favour its reintroduction. "The European Parliament must ensure that the political climate in Europe stays hostile towards any efforts to reintroduce the death penalty," Mr Schulz said. He asked the Council Presidency how long it would tolerate in silence the fact that an EU Member State has paralyzed the Council on this issue.
Marco PANNELLA (ALDE, IT) argued that the universal moratorium could have been achieved as long ago as 1994, but that successive Council presidencies have refused to take responsibility and push for its adoption in the UN.
Konrad SZYMAŃSKI (UEN, PL) asked how the EU, from its comfort in Brussels, could tell third countries that they should abolish the death penalty. He said politics touches the question of life and death in other areas too, such as abortion, euthanasia and biomedics, and that all of these subjects needed to be considered.
Monica FRASSONI (Greens/EFA, IT) asked why the Council decided that it needed unanimity on the question of the European day against the death penalty. "You could have forced a vote on this issue," she said, calling the failure to take a decision a "missed opportunity".
Luisa MORGANTINI (GUE/NGL, IT) said it was "saddening to know that the Europe we have always defended has come to include such views" as those expressed by Mr Szymanski. "We need to isolate voices who still argue against" the abolition of the death penalty, she said.
Jean-Claude MARTINEZ (ITS, FR) said the support for the death penalty was a "prehistoric aberration," while Irena BELOHORSKÁ (NI, SK) urged the five EU countries who have not yet ratified Article 13 of the European Convention on Human Rights to do so.
Individual speakers
Hélène FLAUTRE (Greens/EFA, FR) asked how a country could possibly instrumentalise the subject of the death penalty, and told the Council that it should not tolerate such positions. Józef PINIOR (PES, PL) said that Mr Szymanski's remarks reminded him of Iranian President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad's speech in New York. "As far as I'm concerned, your government has left my country, and gone towards the positions of Iran and Belarus," he told Mr Szymanski. Genowefa GRABOWSKA (PSE, PL) said the Polish government's decision was due solely to internal political considerations to do with the upcoming elections.
Council Presidency response
The Council Presidency represented by Secretary of State for European Affairs Manuel LOBO ANTUNES replied that it plans to table a resolution to the UN in early to mid-October. Responding to more insistent questions by Ms Frassoni about which articles required unanimity in Council to set up a European Day against the death penalty, he replied that Council had decided that decisions of this nature require unanimity.
20070926IPR10740 Implementation of the Council decision concerning the moratorium against the death penalty
-//EP//TEXT MOTION P6-RC-2007-0357 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
