EP ready to set tone for Turkey talks - Ria Oomen-Ruijten
External relations
2007-10-03 - 11:24
Turkey's accession to the EU under the spotlight
Turkey's candidature for the European Union is coming back into the spotlight and the European Parliament wants its concerns taken account of. Ahead of the European Commission's 7 November annual progress report, the EP will outline what it sees as key issues.
With recent elections in Turkey complete and confirming the previous prime minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan in office, as well as the election of Abdullah Gül as President, over the objections of the military (a sign of success for a mature Turkish democracy, according to the draft EP resolution), attention has returned to Turkey's aspirations to join the EU.
Turkey already enjoys formal candidate status and negotiations are open, meaning that the Commission reports regularly on its progress in meeting the conditions required for accession. As with all potential accessions, it will ultimately fall to Parliament to give its assent. Small wonder then that, given the importance of the relationship with Turkey to the future of the EU, MEPs are keen that their views should be brought to bear at this early stage.
Ria Oomen-Ruijten explains
EP rapporteur, Dutch Christian Democrat Ria Oomen-Ruijten explained the report and how she sees the future of EU-Turkey relations.
What is the purpose of the motion for resolution that will be discussed and voted upon in the Foreign Affairs Committee this week?
In November the European Commission will present its progress report on Turkey. This resolution will be voted before the presentation of this report. Therefore, its purpose is not to react to the progress report, but to address those issues on which the Commission should focus while examining Turkey's progress. Most important, Parliament's Resolution aims to widen the scope of the Commission's report. We want, for example, to strengthen the need for social cohesion, more information on the EU-Turkey Civil Society Dialogue and effective involvement...in the social-economic development of South East Turkey.
What are today the strongest and weakest points of Turkey as a candidate country for EU membership?
The reason the Commission issues progress reports is to identify the strongest and weakest points. Over the last years there has been a slowing down of the reforms needed. To date, all elections are behind us and I hope the new Turkish Government, which has a strong mandate and benefits from popular trust will speed up the process of reforms. The government has already indicated that it is strongly committed to the reform process. This is a positive sign.
What in your view will be the fundamental factors which ultimately determine the nature of the relationship between the EU and Turkey? What will matter more in the end: Turkey's readiness to join, or the EU´s readiness to accept it?
In the end all Member states and Turkey must ratify the outcome of the negotiations. The result of the negotiations must be carried by the parliaments of Turkey as well as the EU countries. The European Parliament also has a voice. Popular support for enlargement is needed...At this time, it is too soon to predict the outcome. The accession negotiations were opened in 2005 and that was the starting point for a long lasting and open-ended process.
Among other issues highlighted in the draft resolution for further action are: the role of the army, respect for fundamental human rights and freedoms, protection of women's rights, implementation of the zero-tolerance-to-torture policy as well as protection of minority and cultural rights.
What's next?
The EP draft resolution will be voted on during the 24 October plenary session, following statements by the Council and the Commission. The Commission's annual progress report on Turkey will be published on 7 November.
20070927STO10901 Motion for a resolution on Turkey Foreign Affairs Commitee More on Ria Oomen-Ruijten Read press info about the Committee meeting adopting the resolution and listen to the audio statements
EN
1
PHOTO
20071002PHT11091.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/meetdocs/2004_2009/documents/re/683/683967/683967en.pdf
EN
3
LINK
/activities/expert/committees/presentation.do?committee=2346&language=EN
EN
4
LINK
/members/expert/searchForm/view.do?partNumber=1&name=Oomen-Ruijten&id=1122&language=EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071001IPR11001 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
