MEPs take "a critical look" at the Commission's administrative reform
Budgetary control
2007-10-04 - 14:00
There is still room for improvement in preventing nepotism and protecting whistle-blowers, commented Budgetary Control Committee MEPs on Thursday, at a two-day a public hearing to assess on the effectiveness of the Kinnock staff reforms. This hearing was held with a view to preparing the 2006 budget discharge.
"We are here to take a critical look at the administrative reform undertaken by the Commission and whether all the recommendations have been implemented", said EP Rapporteur Inge Grässle (EPP-ED, DE). "All these issues will come up again and be very important in the nomination of the next Commission in two years", she added.
It's tough to adapt to new priorities
Former Justice and Home Affairs Commissioner Antonio Vitorino pointed out the College was stretched due to an ever-changing political context. As "one of the biggest challenges" he cited the difficulty of allocating the necessary human resources to reflect the new, emergent political priorities, while disarticulating other departments when needed. "The capacity of the Commission to get rid of certain activities is very limited for political reasons, often due to pressure from Council and Parliament", he said.
Furthermore, Mr Vitorino underlined how difficult it was to assess the cost-effectiveness and quality of some policies: "It is very cheap to do a terrorist attack; its prevention has no price", he pointed out, in a clear reference to the efforts made at EU level to address sensitive security issues in recent years.
Between a rock and a hard place
Unsurprisingly, it was the issue of Commissioners' budgetary responsibilities that drew the strongest comments from speakers.
Mr Vitorino wants a "periodical reporting mechanism, flexible enough to adapt to the key changing political priorities", but also flagged up a recurring theme: "The problem is that the implementation of some of the functions rests solely with Member States and this can disrupt the reporting assessment".
This "implementation" problem arises because EU budget management is shared between the Commission and the Member States, who are responsible for as much as 80% of the EU's money management. Since the budgetary responsibility of Commission Directorates-General rests with their Directors-General (who sign their departments' yearly synthesis reports), the national share of responsibility stressed by Mr Vitorino is effectively left out of the loop.
Some MEPs have long urged Commissioners to take individual responsibility. One is 2004 discharge rapporteur Jan Mulder (ADLE, NL), who commented: "A civil servant cannot be held solely responsible, so the Commissioner should co-sign the synthesis reports".
"Commissioners don't sign the annual activity reports but they definitely share political responsibility over them. I wonder if co-signing might help", added Josef Bonnici, a member of the European Court of Auditors.
Are whistle-blowers unprotected?
Disagreements were rife, too, about the protection of "whistle-blowers", as staff who report irregularities in the EU institutions are known.
The Commission's Chief Accountant, Brian Gray felt affirmed that there are sufficient rules to protect whistle blowers in the Commission. MEP Paul van Buitenen (Greens/EFA, NL) disagreed, saying: "Wake up, I receive so many EC staff members in my office to denounce issues that I am compiling a nice file. That this is happening in Parliament shows that the Commission does not have sufficient procedures to protect whistle blowers".
President of the EC Central Staff Committee Cristiano Sebastiani, shared Mr van Buitenen's view, arguing that there was indeed a lack of real protection for whistle blowers and criticising the "nationalisation" whereby Directors-General are selected by country as part of an informal "quota system".
Nepotism & favouritism
Asked by Rapporteur Grässle about "cases of nepotism at the Commission", Professor Jan Wouters of Louvain University explained that a lot could be improved in the Code of Conduct for Commissioners.
To avoid conflicts of interest, he said, the definition of nepotism should be expanded to include "favouritism with regard to granting specific projects to relatives or friends", as the current rules deal only with financial interests and activities.
Commission views
Commission Director General for Personnel Claude Chêne, considered the reform proposed by the Independent Group of Experts in 1999 to be "very good in conceptual terms" and declared himself "satisfied with its implementation".
"However, decentralisation comes with strings attached", he explained. "It costs money and it fosters bureaucratic procedures, with some people getting the feeling they need to over-protect themselves". In any case, he concluded, decentralisation is good only if closely co-ordinated by the central services: "It will only work properly if heart and voices are singing the same song ".
Asked by Bowuslav Liberadzki (PSE, PL) whether the Barroso Commission had postponed the administrative reforms following EU enlargement in 2004, Chêne replied: "No, we have never been so efficient in organising an enlargement! We have met all the goals from a human resources point of view, recruiting staff efficiently and fast. Targets had never been hit so well before".
2007-10-03 Committee on Budgetary Control In the chair: Nils Lundgren IND/DEM SE
20071003IPR11141
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
