Burma: prepare targeted economic sanctions, say MEPs
Human rights
2007-09-28 - 10:48
Monks protest in Burma
The European Parliament has added its voice to the protests mounting worldwide against the Burmese security forces' violent repression of anti-government demonstrations. In a resolution adopted by 563 votes to 3 with 4 abstentions, MEPs backed the demonstrators, condemned the brutal reaction of the authorities and called for the international community to prepare "targeted economic sanctions" against the regime should it fail to respond.
With fresh news arriving by the hour of the deaths, injuries and arrests of monks and ordinary civilians in Burma as they protest against the military government, the European Parliament approved a brief but far-reaching list of demands, some directed at the Burmese government but others aimed at the international community, including China, which many MEPs believe has failed to do enough in the past.
Burmese regime condemned
The resolution adopted today "applauds the courageous action of the Burmese monks and tens of thousands of other peaceful demonstrators in confronting the anti-democratic and repressive regime in Burma and utterly condemns the brutal response by the Burmese authorities". The EP "expresses its horror at the killing of peaceful protestors, insists that the Security Forces return to barracks and calls for recognition of the legitimacy of the demands" being made as well as for the release of arrested demonstrators and other political prisoners, including Aung San Suu Kyi.
MEPs also decry the regime's "current illegitimate constitutional process" and call instead for "a fully representative fully representative National Convention".
China and Russia urged to back a UN statement on the regime
With a visiting parliamentary delegation from China looking on from the gallery of the Chamber, Parliament chose to send a pointed message regarding their government's role in the situation. The resolution calls on China - and also Russia - to fully support a UN Security Council statement condemning the regime's use of brutal force.
Parliament also calls on the Security Council itself "to empower the UN Secretary-General to take action in order to facilitate national reconciliation and a transition to democracy in Burma, and for the UN General Assembly to take appropriate action".
EU to take lead in pushing for targeted economic sanctions
In a key demand, MEPs press "the EU Council as a matter of urgency, to liaise with the United States, ASEAN and other members of the international community in order to prepare a co-ordinated series of additional measures, including targeted economic sanctions, that might be taken against the Burmese regime if it resorts to violence and does not respond to the call for a return to democracy".
Lastly, the resolution asks the European Commission to provide funding via the European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights "to actively support the pro-democracy movement and NGOs that works for the restitution of good governance in Burma".
Parliament has sought to draw attention to the situation in Burma in numerous resolutions over the years, including one earlier this month. EU measures currently in place include a travel ban on Burma's leaders, an arms embargo and a ban on military cooperation - but no economic sanctions. The EU and the USA yesterday issued a joint declaration, which, among other things, calls on the Security Council to "consider further steps including sanctions". (See links below.)
Debate
In Wednesday's debate prior to the vote, Mr Lobo Antunes , Council President-in-Office, said Burma was "at a crossroads". The EU's 27 Member States had issued a declaration urging the Burmese government to respect the right to peaceful demonstration, while foreign policy high representative Javier Solana had called on the government to exercise restraint. The EU had also threatened tougher sanctions.
Commissioner Louis Michel said the international community must try to persuade the government to promote national reconciliation and that in particular China, India, Japan, South Korea and ASEAN must be convinced to play their part. The imminent visit to the country of the UN Special Envoy would be very important. If the Burmese regime was willing to set out a roadmap leading to dialogue and elections, it could count on the EU's support.
Among the EP political group speakers, Geoffrey Van Orden (UK) for the EPP-ED said "the EU prides itself on its attention to human rights and yet seems incapable of acting effectively against tyrannical regimes", but now "it is high time we stopped wringing our hands and got serious". Nevertheless, the key to change lay with Burma's neighbours, notably China. Mr Van Orden had spoken to the leader of a Chinese delegation at the EP today who, while stressing China's policy of non-interference in other countries' internal policies, did say that China would "urge flexibility" on the Burmese regime. Mr Van Orden added that the EU must adopt tougher sanctions - and stick to them. He also criticised Total Oil for "helping to prop up the military junta". Lastly, he said it was a pity the Council and the Commission had not listened to Parliament more closely on this issue in the past.
Barbara Weiler (DE) voiced the indignation of the Socialist group about the events in Burma and said the UN Security Council must take steps to tackle the situation, particularly by urging China to use its influence. It was no longer an option for the regime "to batten down the hatches". She called on Burma to press ahead with its long-awaited constitution and hold democratic elections.
Annemie Neyts-Uyttebroeck (ALDE, NL), on behalf of her group, said that the EU must protest, "not just with words but with deeds", though like other speakers she stressed the key role of Burma's neighbouring countries. The oppression in the country was not just political - there was poverty too, despite its rich natural resources. The regime must understand that Aung San Suu Kyi was not alone and should free her now, along with the people taken prisoner today.
For the UEN group, Brian Crowley (IE) wondered if people had to be "gunned down in the streets and it to appear on television cameras before the international community will respond". He added "We can no longer remain silent" and said "let us act to condemn the violence against peaceful protest but let us also ensure that we can give support to those protesters".
Raul Romeva (ES), for the Greens/EFA group, said Burma was facing a situation of no-return and that the demonstrators had sent a clear message to the junta and the world. He added his voice to the calls to free members of the opposition, including Aung San Suu Kyi.
Bastiaan Belder (IND-DEM, NL) told the House that, after decades of misrule, Burma had degenerated almost into a province of China, and that China bore a heavy burden of responsibility for the situation.
Luca Romagnoli , a non-aligned Member, who said the Burmese regime was based on drug-smuggling, drew particular attention to the plight of the country's Karen minority.
20070926IPR10742 EP resolution of 6.9.2007 EU-USA joint declaration of 26.9.2007 EP resolution adopted on 27.9.2007
EN
1
PHOTO
20070926PHT10841.jpg
EN
3
LINK
http://www.eu2007.pt/UE/vPT/Noticias_Documentos/20070926uestatemts.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070903IPR09991 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0420 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
