Israel's actions in Gaza "fair," says Knesset's Foreign Affairs Committee Chairman
Security and defence
2007-10-02 - 15:05
MEPs from the Security and Defence Subcommittee debated the security situation in the Middle East with the Israeli Knesset's Foreign Affairs and Defence Committee Chairman, Tzachi Hanegbi in Brussels on Tuesday. Mr Hanegbi said he looked forward to the November meeting on Middle East peace, and noted that Iran's nuclear ambitions were the most crucial issue for the region as a whole.
Jana Hybaskova (EPP-ED, CZ), who had invited Mr Hanegbi, asked about the deteriorating humanitarian conditions in the Gaza strip since Israel declared the area a "hostile entity". Mr Hanegbi replied that whilst he did not wish "even one innocent Palestinian to suffer," political pressure needed to be put on Hamas, and, overall, Israeli actions in the Gaza Strip seemed to him to be "fair". Israel does not want a "terrorist state of 'Hamastan' in the middle of [its] heartland", but the Palestinians in Gaza need to understand that putting their trust in organisations such as Hamas or Islamic Jihad is "a mistake", he said.
Middle East peace process
Mr Hanegbi was cautiously optimistic about the next international meeting on the Middle East, to be held by the US in November, saying that Palestinian Authority President Mahmoud Abbas is a man committed to peace. He expected core issues such as the right of return of Palestinian refugees and the demarcation of borders to be addressed at the meeting, but said settlements and the final status of Jerusalem would probably have to wait until the next phase of negotiations.
Replying to a question by Ana Gomes (PES, PT) about possible discussions with Syria on the Golan Heights, Mr Hanegbi said Israel is open to direct, bilateral talks, without preconditions. He nevertheless felt that Syrian demands for US mediation between the two sides were simply a ploy to gain international legitimacy at a time when when Syrian involvement in political assassinations in Lebanon is under international scrutiny.
Iran and non-proliferation
Iran 's nuclear ambitions are "the most crucial issue" in the Middle East today, said Mr Hanegbi. An Iran with nuclear weapons would drive all other states in the region to acquire nuclear arsenals too, he said. Replying to a question by Tobias Pflüger (EUL/NGL, DE) on plans for military action against Iran, Mr Hanegbi said Israel "does not believe in military action," as it would simply postpone the problem. He called for a political settlement, involving the entire international community, but observed that Iran would not be interested in negotiations unless the military option was "kept on the table."
Several Members asked whether Israel would consider signing the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT), in order to reduce tensions in the region about its (currently undeclared) nuclear arsenal. Mr Pflüger also asked for more information on the reported Israeli air force attack on a Syrian target in early September and any further plans in this regard.
2007-10-01 Subcommittee on Security and Defence In the Chair Karl Von Wogau EPP-ED DE
20071001IPR11000
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
