Iraq needs full sovereignty to improve security, says Iraqi Parliament Speaker
External relations
2007-10-02 - 16:43
"Iraq's social fabric has been destroyed," Mahmoud Al-Mashadani, the Speaker of the Iraqi Parliament told the Foreign Affairs Committee today. MEPs asked him what the EP could do to help. "We need the international community to say: enough of this slow killing of Iraqis," and the multinational force needs to leave the country as soon as possible, the Speaker said.
"The so-called liberation effort brought down not only the Saddam regime but the entire state, including economic and security institutions," the Speaker said. "Our infrastructure was intentionally destroyed," he added, and now "we are a failed state according to international standards." Whenever Iraqis succeed, "the occupying forces are congratulated, and whenever they fail to provide security, we are labelled ineffective", noted Mr Al-Mashadani.
Sectarian violence
José Ignacio Salafranca (EPP-ED, ES) asked about the roots and causes of the violence currently ravaging the country. Mr. Al-Mashadani replied that "sectarianism was not a problem in the past," and noted the fact that several members of his delegation were in cross-sectarian marriages. He added that the multinational force has been "wary of sufficiently arming the Iraqi forces," which he said contributed to the lack of security in the country.
"Is the idea of separating Sunni and Shia regions not a recipe for civil war?", asked Philippe Morillon (ALDE, FR). "We need to have a federation," and to keep Iraq unified, replied the Speaker, agreeing that separating Sunni and Shia populations would open the door to a new sectarian war, and that a partition of the country was not a realistic option. "Europe has a responsibility to support reconciliation in Iraq", said Nickolay Mladenov (EPP-ED, BU).
Foreign military presence
The Speaker emphasized the problem of limited sovereignty in Iraq. "The Chief of the Iraqi military obeys American military commands," he said, arguing for a withdrawal of foreign troops as soon as possible. Tobias Pflüger (EUL/NGL, DE) asked whether he had a timetable in mind for this withdrawal. Mr Al-Mashadani replied that he does not have "a concrete timetable in mind for the withdrawal of the multinational force," but that Iraq must "concentrate on plans to build up our security, instead," so as to make such a withdrawal possible.
Miguel Portas (EUL/NGL, PT) asked for comments on the presence in Iraq of private security companies such as Blackwater, which has been recently accused of opening fire on civilians without provocation. Mr Al-Mashadani replied that such companies "obey no law," and do not "respect Iraq's sovereignty." He also confirmed statements by Giulietto Chiesa (PES, IT), who said Iran was known to be providing assistance to Iraqi insurgents. "Many regional agendas exist to destabilize Iraq," Mr Al-Mashadani said.
Diversity of Iraqi views
Several other Iraqi MPs took the floor, some noting that "torture in prisons run by the interior ministry is widespread," others saying that international reports of human rights violations in Iraq are exaggerated. Véronique De Keyser (PES, BE) expressed concern about corruption in all levels of government, which made European Union aid very difficult to administer. An Iraqi MP, Omar Khalaf Al-Jabbuuri asked the European Union to conceive a "Marshall Plan for Iraq," while also saying that Europe needed to recognise "that we have the right to fight the occupiers."
2007-10-02 Committee on Foreign Affairs In the Chair Jacek SARYUSZ-WOLSKI EPP-ED PL
20071001IPR10997
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
