Serbia's "European Destiny": Oliver Dulić, President of the Serbian Parliament
Institutions
2007-10-16 - 12:22
70% support for EU integration process
The convening of the Serbian parliament by its President Oliver Dulić of the Serbian Democratic Party on 1 October marked the end of a protracted period of national political deadlock whose battle lines were largely drawn around attitudes to European integration. Former student protest leader Dulić, at 32 the youngest ever incumbent of his position, is a leader of pro-integration opinion.
With its tormented recent history – the Milošović years, the bloody break-up of Yugoslavia, violence in Kosovo, UN sanctions, the 1999 NATO bombing campaign, the assassination of its prime minister, the ongoing search for indicted war criminals – Serbia has been cut off from the European mainstream for many years. Even now, fully 70% of Serbian students have never travelled outside their borders. However, many Serbs now seek to turn the page and a new generation of young reform-minded politicians is looking to a more hopeful European future for their country.
During a recent seminar for parliamentary officials in Belgrade organised by the European Parliament, the web team took the opportunity to talk to Speaker Dulić about Serbia's path towards European integration, its people and its mood.
Mr Dulić, Serbia's European integration process is a highly contentious issue in the Serbian Parliament. What are the big issues in this debate?
The biggest factor in our relations with the EU is the final status of Kosovo. We have a very tough debate here about the role of the EU in this process. As a European-oriented politician, I am always very glad to see that the EU plays a very positive role, seeking a solution in accordance with international standards respecting the interest of both sides. A compromise in this process is crucial for Serbia. This is not only a face-saving policy for our country, but a crucial part in the historical reconciliation between Serbs and Albanians, which is most important for the stability of the Balkans.
Then there is of course the internal debate in the EU. There are persistent questions on the European side about "enlargement fatigue" or possible doubts over whether the Western Balkans should be part of the EU or not.
However, if we find a solution on Kosovo avoiding unilateral recognition by the US and EU and which ensures a Serbian voice in this process, and if the enlargement process develops normally, I am sure that our European integration process will continue without major problems.
How does the Serbian population see European integration? As a pro-European politician, how do you "sell" Europe to voters?
Latest polls show nearly 70% support for the EU integration process, which is very encouraging for those of us working for change in our society. Of course, as in other countries, some people will probably turn against the integration process as it actually impacts their own lives. In the early part of the process, you always feel more negative than positive impacts. But in strategic terms people understand that European integration is our destiny. The EU guarantees a normal, safe life as well as a better economic perspective for our country. So I am optimistic about the support of the Serbian population.
However, this is a very particular moment. We have a powerful and dangerous mixture of, on one hand, national frustrations and open status questions, and, on the other, a very tough economic situation. This is rich soil for radicals and populists in gaining an edge over more rational opponents who try to explain the realities of the situation. We pro-integrationists point to the good examples in the region of those who have chosen European integration as their final destination. We show that the EU is a stabilising factor; we show how EU integration provides answers for many problems in our society.
Serbia's recent history has been traumatic, with the 1990's referred to as the "lost decade". How do you assess the morale of the country? Is it a self-confident county? An uncertain country?
More uncertain than self-confident. Unfortunately, we like to show we are strong, but this is our weakness. We are an interesting, talented people, but sometimes very destructive, especially in the region. When Serbia exports security, stability, good ideas, we are the best players in the region. Sadly, we can also export destruction - and we are also very good at that. So we have to find our role. We have to play an important role in stabilising this region, using all those good characteristics which are part of our identity.
It is remarkable to see such a young individual occupying your position as the president of a national parliament. Do you see your youth as an asset?
It's true, I'm pretty young, I'm 32. But I'm twice the age of democracy in Serbia! So I'm probably representative of the new generation of politicians in Serbia, one not loaded with the problems of the past. I am a pretty tolerant guy; I come from a multiethnic background; I am always ready to find a compromise with people on various issues, which is probably why I'm here. I arrived at a very tough moment for political life in Serbia, with massive quarrels between the political parties, and a reason why I was proposed by my party is that we want to push new, young people and to provoke other parties to do the same. Now is the time to bring forward a new generation of politicians free from the old quarrels of the past. I'm only the first in this process, and I think my youth is more an advantage than a disadvantage.
20071012STO11625 EP Interparliamentary Delegation for South East Europe Information from the European Commission concerning Serbia Serbian National Assembly "Headlines" interview with Carla del Ponte Ongoing Kracin report on relations between the EU and Serbia
EN
1
PHOTO
20071016PHT11743.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/delegations/presentation.do?delegation=2449&language=EN
EN
3
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/enlargement/serbia/index_en.htm
EN
4
LINK
http://www.parlament.sr.gov.yu/content/eng/index.asp
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070622STO08192 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A6-2007-0325 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
