Brussels session opens: Death penalty, Bulgarian medics, EU Summit, Gaza strip
Institutions
2007-10-11 - 11:51
Pöttering: "we pay tribute to all victims of the death penalty"
On International day against the death penalty, Hans-Gert Pöttering welcomed released Bulgarian medics who were sentenced to death in Libya. MEPs debated the upcoming informal summit on the reform treaty. Parliament's 3 representatives said they believe political agreement is possible but have concerns on ratification and the extent of opt outs. One of them - Elmar Brok - welcomed more EP involvement in justice, agriculture and budget. MEPs also debated the future number of seats per country.
MEPs applauded as the president paid tribute to the 5 Bulgarian nurses and 1 Palestinian doctor in the Parliament's public gallery. Until their recent release the medics had faced the death penalty in Libya after being falsely accused of infecting hundreds of children with the AIDS virus.
Mr Pöttering reaffirmed Parliament's opposition to the death penalty - he reminded the House that MEPs had passed 3 resolutions against it in this year alone.
Debate ahead of informal Lisbon Council on reform treaty
Ahead of a meeting of EU heads of state and government in Lisbon on 18-19 October, MEPs debated the text of the new reform treaty. Parliament has 3 representatives helping draft the reform treaty. German Christian Democrat Elmar Brok noted the treaty would give the EP equal legal weight with the Council over justice, agriculture and budget. He also wanted Parliament to have a say in the appointment of a "high representative" to oversee EU foreign policy.
Spanish Socialist Enrique Barón regretted a lack of transparency in the drafting process but said this was the nature of intergovernmental deals. He said the new treaty would reinstate EU citizenship and make the Charter of Fundamental Rights legally binding. He also called for EU leaders to be "loyal to the compromises" reached.
British liberal Andrew Duff said he thought agreement possible but was worried about the "quality" of the agreement and the emergence of a "self service Europe" propelled by demands for opt outs by the UK and Poland.
Portugal's Secretary of State for European Affairs Manuel Lobo Antunes told MEPs that negotiations had finished and the Portuguese Presidency hopes to reach political agreement at the EU Summit. Margot Wallström, the European Commissioner in charge of institutional relations said a reform treaty would help the EU deal with the challenges of globalisation.
The majority of the speakers from the political groups supported the draft treaty and stressed the importance of returning the European agenda to more citizen-based issues. To read what the group leaders and other MEPs said about the reform treaty, click on the first link below.
MEPs concerned about humanitarian crises in Gaza Strip
Also on Wednesday, Parliament debated together with representatives of the Council (Portuguese Manuel Lobo Antunes) and the Commission (Benita Ferrero-Waldner) the humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip. Most MEPs noted Israel's responsibility for the situation and the humanitarian crisis. Belgian MEP Véronique De Keyser (PSE) said "it is unacceptable that a people is dying slowly, in a huge open air ghetto, watched by cameras from across the globe, with no rights to develop, move freely, educate their children, a people whose survival has a heavy price for us".
Others, like Charles Tannock (EPP-ED), stated that "Israel has already retired troops from Gaza, but this gesture does not seem to count for the critics" and added, "Hamas still wants Israel to disappear".
Mr Lobo Antunes agreed that economic support is an incentive for peace, while Ms Ferrero-Waldner said that "we can give a lot of humanitarian aid, but in the end the solution has to be political", even if she admitted that "at the same time, we cannot forget the humanitarian side" of the conflict. The resolution will be voted on Thursday.
Numbers of MEPs per country after 2009
The number of MEPs per country was the subject of a debate Wednesday afternoon. A recent report on the issue by French MEP Alain Lamassoure (EPP-ED) and Romanian Socialist Adrian Severin was recently backed by Parliament's Constitutional Affairs Committee.
For more details on the issues mentioned above see the press releases below.
20071008STO11299 10 October - EP President Pöttering calls for the abolition of death penalty Reform treaty debate in full Debate on seat issue Background to seat issue: 10 October
EN
1
PHOTO
20071011PHT11484.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071010IPR11464 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071008IPR11352 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071008IPR11353 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071008STO11298 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
