Brussels plenary 10-11 October: Bulgarian medics, air transport, EP seats
Institutions
2007-10-15 - 18:03
Pöttering speaks out on World day against the dealth penalty
The Brussels plenary session was a busy one with MEPs approving the reallocation of EP seats following the 2009 election, the EU-US open skies agreement and a report aimed at eradicating the murder of women in Mexico and Central America.
On the World Day against the death penalty (10 October), EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering stated that the European Parliament opposed the death penalty. He paid tribute to the freed Bulgarian medics who were present in the Parliamentary Chamber. Mr Pöttering recalled that the Bulgarian medics were held in custody in Libya for eight years and said that the European Parliament had, on several occasions, called for the freeing of the medics and had opposed the death penalty. MEPs also debated the forthcoming European summit of heads of state and government to be held in Lisbon on 18 and 19 October. There was much debate as to the merits of the new Reform Treaty and how it compared to the Constitutional Treaty.
20071015FCS11665
Wednesday in plenary: Death penalty, Bulgarian medics, EU Summit, Gaza strip
Pöttering: "we pay tribute to all victims of the death penalty" On International day against the death penalty, Hans-Gert Pöttering welcomed released Bulgarian medics who were sentenced to death in Libya. MEPs debated the upcoming informal summit on the reform treaty. Parliament's 3 representatives said they believe political agreement is possible but have concerns on ratification and the extent of opt outs. One of them - Elmar Brok - welcomed more EP involvement in justice, agriculture and budget. MEPs also debated the future number of seats per country.
MEPs applauded as the president paid tribute to the 5 Bulgarian nurses and 1 Palestinian doctor in the Parliament's public gallery. Until their recent release the medics had faced the death penalty in Libya after being falsely accused of infecting hundreds of children with the AIDS virus. Mr Pöttering reaffirmed Parliament's opposition to the death penalty - he reminded the House that MEPs had passed 3 resolutions against it in this year alone. Debate ahead of informal Lisbon Council on reform treaty Ahead of a meeting of EU heads of state and government in Lisbon on 18-19 October, MEPs debated the text of the new reform treaty. Parliament has 3 representatives helping draft the reform treaty. German Christian Democrat Elmar Brok noted the treaty would give the EP equal legal weight with the Council over justice, agriculture and budget. He also wanted Parliament to have a say in the appointment of a "high representative" to oversee EU foreign policy. Spanish Socialist Enrique Barón regretted a lack of transparency in the drafting process but said this was the nature of intergovernmental deals. He said the new treaty would reinstate EU citizenship and make the Charter of Fundamental Rights legally binding. He also called for EU leaders to be "loyal to the compromises" reached. British liberal Andrew Duff said he thought agreement possible but was worried about the "quality" of the agreement and the emergence of a "self service Europe" propelled by demands for opt outs by the UK and Poland. Portugal's Secretary of State for European Affairs Manuel Lobo Antunes told MEPs that negotiations had finished and the Portuguese Presidency hopes to reach political agreement at the EU Summit. Margot Wallström, the European Commissioner in charge of institutional relations said a reform treaty would help the EU deal with the challenges of globalisation. The majority of the speakers from the political groups supported the draft treaty and stressed the importance of returning the European agenda to more citizen-based issues. To read what the group leaders and other MEPs said about the reform treaty, click on the first link below. MEPs concerned about humanitarian crises in Gaza Strip Also on Wednesday, Parliament debated together with representatives of the Council (Portuguese Manuel Lobo Antunes) and the Commission (Benita Ferrero-Waldner) the humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip. Most MEPs noted Israel's responsibility for the situation and the humanitarian crisis. Belgian MEP Véronique De Keyser (PSE) said "it is unacceptable that a people is dying slowly, in a huge open air ghetto, watched by cameras from across the globe, with no rights to develop, move freely, educate their children, a people whose survival has a heavy price for us". Others, like Charles Tannock (EPP-ED), stated that "Israel has already retired troops from Gaza, but this gesture does not seem to count for the critics" and added, "Hamas still wants Israel to disappear". Mr Lobo Antunes agreed that economic support is an incentive for peace, while Ms Ferrero-Waldner said that "we can give a lot of humanitarian aid, but in the end the solution has to be political", even if she admitted that "at the same time, we cannot forget the humanitarian side" of the conflict. The resolution will be voted on Thursday. Numbers of MEPs per country after 2009 The number of MEPs per country was the subject of a debate Wednesday afternoon. A recent report on the issue by French MEP Alain Lamassoure (EPP-ED) and Romanian Socialist Adrian Severin was recently backed by Parliament's Constitutional Affairs Committee. For more details on the issues mentioned above see the press releases below. Post-Briefing -10-11 October 2007 - Brussels plenary session
Thursday in plenary: EU-US air transport, airport capacity
MEPs backed the EU-US "open skies" agreement The European Parliament Thursday gave the green light to the EU-US "open skies" air transport agreement, which will come into effect in March next year. It emphasised the need to reduce the effect of aviation on climate change and wants to be fully consulted on the next stage of talks on EU-US air transport. Separately, the EP called for a "master plan" to enhance airport capacity. MEPs also discussed the problem of feminicide in Mexico and Central America.
Speaking on the open skies agreement, the rapporteur, Belgian Socialist Saïd El Khadraoui called it a step ahead and an "improvement on the current situation". With greenhouse gas emissions from aircraft growing, Members stressed the importance of the US and EU taking steps to counter this. Emissions from planes are particularly harmful as they are released high in the atmosphere where the air is very thin. The original EU-US agreement was ruled to be incompatible with EU law by the European Court of Justice in 2002. Action to avert crisis over airport capacity The capacity of Europe's airports to cope with increasing demand was discussed on Thursday. Figures show that demand for flights will be 2.5 times higher in 2025 than they were in 2003. With this growth more than 60 airports around Europe will not be able to cope with the demand at peak times. Danish Liberal Anne Jensen drafted a report calling for the development of a "master plan" to coordinate European airport capacity. It calls for better use of existing capacities and more cross border cooperation. The EP backs the report, which stresses the importance of air transport in ensuring territorial, economic and social cohesion in the Union, in particular with regard to remote, peripheral and island regions, as well as the economic importance of airports for job creation, particularly at regional level. The EP calls on the Commission to draw up a plan, although Ms Jensen conceded that countries have to work out a solution for themselves. "At the end of the day, it's the Member States, which have the competence to build and increase the airports. The master plan has to be a tool or a method, to ensure that Member States coordinate their initiative" she said. European Transport Commissioner Jacques Barrot called the report a "good basis" and said he would respect Parliament's wishes. Murders of women in Central America and Mexico MEPs asked for a strengthened fight against corruption and impunity, as well as against the inefficacy of the judiciary system. They urged the countries of Central America to take all necessary steps to enable violence against women to be combated effectively and called on the European institutions to work for cooperation between the EU, its Member States and the countries of Central America and Mexico. Composition of the European Parliament after European elections in June 2009 The EP agreed to a new allocation of seats in the European Parliament after the next legislative elections, in 2009. MEPs call for a revision of the proposed distribution of seats for the 2014-2019 parliamentary term. The report was adopted with 378 votes in favour, 154 against and 109 abstentions. The question now moves to the meeting of EU leaders in Lisbon on Thursday and Friday for further discussion.
EN
1
PHOTO
20071015PHT11693.jpg
EN
2
PHOTO
20071011PHT11484.jpg
EN
4
PHOTO
20071012PHT11615.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071008BRI11349 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
