EP praises Turkey's renewed commitment to reform, notes remaining areas of concern
External relations
2007-10-24 - 10:59
MEPs welcome the recent elections in Turkey, especially the new government's renewed commitment to reforms, in a resolution adopted. The resolution also indicated areas in which further progress was still necessary, especially concerning the content of upcoming constitutional reforms, while also expressing concern about possible Turkish military actions in Northern Iraq. It also calls on the Turkish and Armenian Government to "start a process of reconciliation for the present and the past.
The resolution on EU-Turkey relations, drafted by Ria Oomen-Ruijten (EPP-ED, NL), congratulates Turkey on its recent legislative elections, and "welcomes the election of the new President as a sign of strength of the Turkish democracy." The House also welcomes "the commitment of the new government to enhance the reform process in the coming months and years," as well as "the intention of the new Turkish government to adopt a new and civilian constitution which would protect fundamental human rights and freedoms."
Members supported the opening of negotiations on the energy chapter, and encouraged Turkey to join the European Energy Community, given the country's importance as a transit hub for gas supplies. They also noted that the accession negotiations opened two years ago were "the starting point for an open-ended process."
Political reforms
The Parliament strongly condemns the murders of Hrant Dink and Andrea Santoro, and "underlines the urgent need to efficiently combat all types of extremism and violence." The House expresses its concern about "the repeated interference of the Turkish Armed Forces in the political process, and stresses that further efforts are needed to ensure full and effective civilian control over the military," calling for parliamentary supervision of the secret services, gendarmerie, and police forces, as well. The resolution "deplores that a number of persons is still being prosecuted under Article 301 of the penal code" and regards the freedom of expression and the freedom of the press as "a number one priority of the government."
Turkey's neighbours
The House urges the Turkish government "to implement the provisions stemming from the Association Agreement and its Additional Protocol," noting specifically in relation to the Cyprus question that "the withdrawal of Turkish forces would facilitate the negotiation of a settlement." It also reiterates its call on the Turkish and Armenian Government to "start a process of reconciliation for the present and the past."
While strongly condemning the violence perpetrated by the PKK, and calling on it to declare an immediate and unconditional ceasefire, the resolution "urges the new government to launch a political initiative favouring a lasting settlement of the Kurdish issue." It points out the need for a "comprehensive strategy for the social-economic development of the South East of Turkey," and underlines the need to "pursue the fight against terrorism proportionate to the threat, and with full commitment towards international legal instruments and standards."
The Parliament "is deeply concerned about the consequences of a possible cross-border military action by Turkish troops in northern Iraq," and "appeals to Turkey to refrain from engaging in any disproportionate military operations violating Iraq's territory." It urges Turkey and Iraq "to step up military and police cooperation to effectively prevent terrorist activities from Northern Iraq in order to de-escalate the tense situation at the Turkish-Iraqi border."
European Commission's role
The resolution asks the Commission to provide "targeted support to civil society," with a particular attention to the South East of the country. MEPs also called on it to report specifically on the implementation and effectiveness of the financial support instrument to the Turkish Cypriot community. (Par. 24) Finally, the report calls on the Commission to publish the results of its monitoring of political criteria in its forthcoming progress report, including the following aspects: judiciary reforms, combating corruption, respect for fundamental rights and freedoms, implementation of the zero-tolerance-to-torture policy, and the protection of women and minority, religious, and cultural rights.
The Commission and the Council debated with MEPs this morning on the upcoming progress report and on EU-Turkish relations in general. Enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn noted that the Commission condemns the PKK terrorist attacks, but also urged Turkey to seek a political solution to the Kurdish issue, in conjunction with Iraqi regional authorities. He noted that the Commission supports a call for a process of reconciliation between Turkey and Armenia, and that the reform of Article 301 was crucial to any coming to terms with the country's past. He ended by saying that the EU needs to stick to the accession perspective of Turkey, as it was laid out before negotiations started. The Commission's annual progress report on Turkey's accession is due to be published on 6 November.
Debate preceding the vote 24 October 2007
Many MEPs expressed concern about freedom of expression and the reform of Turkey's penal code. However, many groups supported the accession negotiations. The House expressed concern over terrorist incursions by the PKK into Turkey with Commissioner Olli Rehn recalling that the PKK is on the EU terrorist list. The European Commission will announce its latest progress report on 7 November.
Commissioner Olli Rehn told the House that Turkey had come though its constitutional crisis successfully, the elections had been held in accordance with democratic principles so he could say that "democracy had the last word". The new government's mandate should enable fresh momentum to be found.
The Commission supported the Turkish government's commitment to reform and to signing the Ankara Protocol but it needed to make progress on issues such as Article 301 of the Penal Code, adoption of the Law of Foundations (granting freedom of religion), military-civilian relations, women's rights and corruption.
Turning to current events, the Commissioner said Turkey faced constant cross-border attacks from the PKK. The EU condemned all terrorist attacks and understood Turkey's need to protect its citizens. At the same time, the EU was committed to the territorial integrity of Iraq and was keen for Turkey and Iraq to cooperate to solve this problem.
A "European perspective" for Turkey was crucial to the reform process within the country. The EU was making such reform a condition of progress in the accession negotiations but, he stressed, the EU must on its side stick to its own commitments: it must keep its word!
He looked forward to the opening of two chapters in the negotiations in the next few weeks - consumer affairs and trans-European networks. Lastly, he emphasised that Parliament's contribution would be taken into account in the Commission's progress report.
Political group speakers
This debate and resolution are directed to the Commission - as input to the progress report - but also to debate in the Council, said rapporteur Ria OOMEN-RUIJTEN (EPP-ED, NL) adding that the report describes progress on agreements, but also what not has been achieved.
"We expect the Turkish government to pursue reform", said the rapporteur, stressing that Parliament had sought to "broaden and deepen" debate with Turkey and noting that the need to safeguard freedom of expression features prominently in the report.
The new constitution "must not become a pretext" for avoiding necessary changes, such as reforming Article 301 of the penal code, she stressed.
Finally, the rapporteur noted that good relations with neighbours are vital. "If we do not recognise the past, there can be no future", she said, urging the Commission to support both Armenia and Turkey.
"Reform has to be stepped up a gear" to produce effective plurality and freedom of expression in Turkey, said Hannes SWOBODA (PES, AT).
A peaceful, political solution is needed to the Kurdish question, but this "cannot happen while terrorism continues", he said, adding that he hoped that the Kurds' political representatives would "heed this message", and that "offers must [also] be made to the Kurdish population of Turkey", as part of the solution.
This report is a good text, embodying a surprising level of consensus, and one which "sends a positive and constructive signal" to Turkey, said Alexander LAMBSDORFF (ALDE, DE).
"Turkey has a strong government with a clear mandate - and it should use to move forward on reforms, for the sake of its own economy and society", he said.
The Copenhagen criteria "must continue to be used as a litmus test" for determining whether Turkey should join the EU, he said, stressing the need to reform not only Article 301, but also 302, to remove restrictions on the freedom of speech. Further reforms are needed to protect fundamental rights, especially of women, and electoral rights, he added.
The PKK has "stepped up its terror campaign" said Mr Lambsdorff, offering his condolences to the families of Turkish soldiers killed in the fighting. But anti-terrorist measures must be "proportional, limited in time, and likely to bring about a peaceful resolution", he concluded, reiterating the need for EU dialogue with Turkey.
For the UEN group, Sebastiano (Nello) MUSUMECI (UEN, IT) said that one year on from the EP's last resolution on Turkey, some core questions remained. Turkey did not recognise Cyprus, an EU Member State, Article 301 of the constitution still needed reform and discussion of the Armenian genocide was still taboo. The government's muscular response to the PKK's attacks risked exacerbating the geopolitical crisis in the region. Progress had been made, he acknowledged, such as the increased presence of women in various walks of life. He concluded, however, by posing a question. Does Europe want to be a major political or cultural entity?
Joost LAGENDIJK (Greens/EFA, NL) said that unfortunately today's debate was being overshadowed by the terrorist acts in Turkey. What was Turkey to do? There was no easy answer, when 50 people had been killed but the military option was not the solution. In his view, the problem lay not in the Iraqi mountains but inside Turkey, where some people didn't want a political solution. He called for support for all those on both sides who sought a peaceful political settlement.
Kyriacos TRIANTAPHYLLIDES (GUE/NGL) conceded that progress had been made by Turkey, but that a lot remained to be done. Turkey would have to open up its ports to Cypriot aircraft and vessels, recognize it in all international institutions and withdraw all Turkish troops from the occupied part of Cyprus. "We believe that Turkey's path to enlargement must be expedited, we must encourage Turkey to implement the necessary reforms, but Turkey must acknowledge the genocide perpetrated against Armenians", he said.
Georgios GEORGIOU (IND/DEM) criticised Commissioner REHN, accusing him of suggesting that "anyone who fights for freedom is a terrorist. I wonder if we might not be acting in haste to view Turkey as being under attack. Let's face it, Turkey has troops deployed in a Member State of the European Union and Turkey is not in compliance with the demands of the EU."
Philip CLAEYS (ITS) stressed that his party is opposed to Turkish accession. "Barely any progress has been made by Turkey since the accession talks were launched, especially regarding human rights and the treatment of minorities." Mr Claeys criticised that Turkey was preparing a major military incursion into Iraq. He also said that Turkey "is not a European country and does not belong into Europe" and that a privileged partnership would be preferable to fully fledged membership.
Jim ALLISTER (NI) named his biggest concerns regarding Turkey, including honour crimes, gross human rights abuses, absence of religions freedom and attacks on Christians. "Genuine freedom of religion is often the touchstone of a country's binding commitment to human rights. In Turkey's case, it has much to do including the legal status of religious groups and property rights, but fundamentally the right to worship freely and the right to convert must be respected."
British speakers
Gerard BATTEN (IND/DEM, UK) said that the resolution emphasises that Turkey must fully comply with the Copenhagen criteria as a basis for accession to the EU. The report, he said, also urges the Turkish Government to bring its approach to freedom of religion in line with those principles as defined by the European Court of Justice.
Since Kemal Atatürk Turkey has maintained a secular state against the growing power of fundamentalist and literalist Islam. I wonder whether the Turks realise that entering the EU will fundamentally undermine their ability to resist militant Islam. If Turkey joins the EU, their Islamists will use the human rights legislation as a shield from behind which to advance their jihad in Turkey and Europe.
The British people, Mr Batten said, are coming to realise that if Turkey joins the EU another 70 million people will have the right to come to Britain. Turkish accession, he said, will be a disaster for the Turks and a disaster for Britain.
Charles TANNOCK (EPP-ED, UK) said that according to The Times newspaper of London, the recent US Congressional resolution on the Armenian genocide was appallingly timed. So when is it a suitable time to talk about genocide, he questioned.
The Armenian lobby is so vociferous in this Parliament precisely because of the apparent conspiracy of silence that has surrounded the genocide question for almost a century. The murder of the Turkish-Armenian journalist Hrant Dink should have provided a period of national reflection but sadly this did not happen.
Nevertheless reconciliation between Turkey and Armenia, including the reopening of the closed border, is an important element of Turkey's efforts to join the EU. But in my view no true democracy can be in denial of its past, even its deepest and darkest secrets.
Just as important is a lasting settlement of the conflict in Cyprus which remains at an impasse caused by the presence of occupying troops in an EU Member State as well as non-implementation of the Ankara Protocol.
Article 301 of the penal code on insulting Turkishness has resulted in many convictions and in March – rather bizarrely in my view – a court in Istanbul issued an order denying access to the video-sharing website YouTube when allegations on the sexuality of the founding father of modern Turkey, Kemel Atatürk, were made.
A lot clearly still needs to be done, he concluded.
Richard HOWITT (PES, UK) welcomed the strategic partnership between the UK and Turkey announced by Prime Ministers Brown and Erdogan in London yesterday, including positive cooperation in combating organised crime and terrorism. I call on other Member States to do the same.
Mr Howitt also welcomed the youngest female Turkish MP elected, Ayla Akat, who was in Brussels last week as one of a number of Kurdish MPs returned to the Turkish Parliament for the first time in 14 years, who, he said, give us hope that the problem of Kurdish cultural and political rights could be solved through democracy and not through violence.
Commissioner's response to the debate
Responding to the debate Commissioner Olli REHN said that with today's debate and subsequent resolution, this House sends some very clear messages to Turkey. Now is the time, he said, to step up the reform efforts in the country for the sake of the Turkish citizens and also for making serious progress in the EU accession negotiations. There is, he said, strong emphasis on reforms without unnecessary delay as regards the freedom of expression, the infamous Article 301, and other equivalent articles as well as religious freedoms. Likewise progress on women's rights, trade union rights, as well as cultural and religious rights and international obligations over Turkey.
"Moreover, we condemn terrorist attacks and we understand the Turkish need to protect its citizens but we also urge Turkey to seek a political solution in cooperation with Iraqi regional authorities and the international community and to show a sense of proportionality in its response to PKK terrorism.
Concerning the Armenian issue the Commission supports Parliament's call, as expressed in your draft resolution, for a process of reconciliation between Turkey and Armenia. This is the best and most effective way in time that would lead to genuine results over reconciliation and justice.
We also consider that all the issues including the Armenian issue in Turkey should be debated openly and peacefully within the Turkish society in the name of freedom of expression. Therefore the reform of Article 301 is also essential for a serious and effective debate on the Armenian issue that could lead to genuine reconciliation.
The current restraints over freedom of expression have a chilling effect and even contribute to creating an atmosphere of intolerance and hatred, as was unfortunately and sadly shown in the case of the assassination of Hrant Dink earlier this year.
Finally, we have to recall one thing. I do, and you have also, set very strong demands for Turkey as regards the reform process and rightly so. At the same time, we need to recall that the equation works only if both sides do what they have got to do. That means, when we are firm we also must be fair. We have to keep our word and stick to the accession perspective of Turkey as outlined in the negotiation mandate. "
20071023IPR12108 Text, as adopted by the EP on 24 October, will shortly be available here Audio, 08:22 Audio, 06:43 Audio, 19:23 Audio, 16:59
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
2
MULTIMEDIA
20071024MLT12204.asf
EN
3
MULTIMEDIA
20071024MLT12210.asf
EN
4
MULTIMEDIA
20071024MLT12222.asf
EN
5
MULTIMEDIA
20071024MLT12346.asf
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
