Council go-ahead for third railway package respects Parliament's signals
Transport
2007-10-23 - 19:26
The Council on Tuesday approved three conciliation agreements on the third railway package, ending a legislative process begun in 2004. The agreements, on the opening up of the rail market, a European licence for train drivers and rail passengers' rights, were struck in June, after the Council agreed to an EP demand for a five-yearly review of any exemptions that Member States grant domestic railways from the passenger rights rules. Parliament adopted the same text in plenary on 25 September.
Passenger rail services At Parliament's request, international passenger rail services will be opened up to competition from 1 January 2010. However, no more than two years after the directive enters into force, the Commission must assess developments, to see whether further liberalisation, to include domestic services, should be envisaged. European licence for train drivers The directive on a European licence for train drivers will apply from 2009. The Council incorporated in its decision Parliament's wish that other staff performing safety-critical tasks should also eventually be subject to a similar system of licences. It has been agreed that the European Railway Agency will draw up a report on this issue 18 months after the directive enters into force. Following pressure from Parliament, no more than 12 months after this the Commission must present a report. This means that by 2012, crew members other than train drivers may be included within the scope of the directive. Rail passengers' rights The regulation on the rights and obligations of rail passengers was originally intended to apply only to passengers on international journeys, but Parliament successfully fought to include passengers on domestic journeys. Member States may exempt long-distance domestic rail services from the regulation's provisions on non-basic rights (e.g. the right to take a bicycle on the train), initially for five years, which may subsequently be extended for two further periods of up to five years. Urban, suburban and regional services may be granted an indefinite exemption from these same provisions. And when this law enters into force, compensation in the event of delays on cross-border services will be 25% of the fare for a delay of 60 minutes or more and 50% for a delay of 120 minutes or more, but only if the operator can be held responsible for the delay. Eventually, this would apply to all long-distance services. A success for the Parliament Earlier, the chair of Parliament's negotiating team, Vice-President Alejo Vidal-Quadras (EPP-ED, ES) welcomed the conciliation agreement by saying that "it gets away from old-fashioned obsessions with national borders and gives basic rights to passengers on all railway journeys and not just those on international services, as the Council wanted".
20071023IPR12196
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
