Tuesday in Plenary: Reform Treaty, budget 2008, blue card
Institutions
2007-10-24 - 15:15
Thumbs up for reform - Portuguese PM José Sócrates
During the debate on the new Reform Treaty MEPs were agreed that it would produce a more democratic, transparent and efficient EU. Members also discussed draft proposals for the EU's 2008 budget and called for an increase of funding for the European satellite navigation system, Galileo. The hemicycle Chamber also saw a debate on a proposed "blue card" system for highly skilled immigrants to the European Union.
Outcome of Lisbon Summit welcomed in key debate
The agreement reached by government leaders on 18 October will give birth to the new Lisbon Treaty, to be signed on 13 December. It received a broad welcome across the House as an enhancement of EU democracy, bringing noteworthy progress for the Parliament and greater transparency and efficiency to decision-making.
The man who hosted the Summit at Lisbon - Portuguese PM José Sócrates - told the House that "Europe needed a speedy agreement and it got one. It needed a turn towards the future and it did it".
Mr Socrates outlined what he considered the key improvements in the new Treaty;
more European Parliament participation in the legislative process
improved decision making through extension of qualified majority voting.
a clear list of the domains in which EU members transfer powers to the Union.
strengthening the supervisory role of the national Parliaments.
giving binding legal force to the Charter of Fundamental Rights.
A key issue for Parliamentarians was the number of seats in Parliament after 2009. Mr Sócrates took the opportunity to clarify the question of the number of seats in the EP. He confirmed it would be composed of 750 members plus its President and that no member of the House would see his or her rights curtailed as a result of the new arrangement.
Leading MEPs call for Union to move forward
Reaction from political group leaders was generally positive, though many regretted the fact that the new treaty had not been more ambitious. Such voices included Joseph Daul (EPP-ED), who concluded "we have got a European project based on the genuine welcoming in of the citizens", but added, "now it's time to move from words to deeds." For the PES Group,
Martin Schulz (PES) emphasised the need to move the agenda on to matters of direct concern to citizens: "now we can concentrate on doing what the people want from us".
For the ALDE Group Graham Watson, was among those regretting the "poverty of aspiration", but acknowledged that the new treaty "gives us the capacity to confront challenges of globalisation".
The UEN, represented by co-chair Brian Crowley, described the treaty as delivering "what the EU needs". Monica Frassoni, of the Green-EFA group, on the other hand, expressed her disappointment at what she saw as a backward step from the previous constitutional treaty, which was, in her view, more democratic and transparent.
Francis Wurtz, chair of the GUE-NGL group, expressed his belief that Europe's political leaders had failed to heed the voice of the people and take on board their criticism.
Outright opponents of the new treaty included Nigel Farage (Ind/Dem), calling the text a "copy" of the constitution produced by "euro-nationalists" and Jean-Marie Le Pen (ITS), who saw a threat to the independence and identity of nations.
MEPs consider 2008 EU budget
The EU budget for 2008 was debated in the afternoon, through 2 reports. In its draft report, Parliament's Budget Committee seeks to increase the overall amount of the Council's draft budget. The most significant increases of EU budget would be for Galileo (navigation system by satellite) and aid for Palestine and Kosovo.
Finnish ALDE Budget rapporteur Kyösti Virrankoski criticized the Council's cuts to the Commission's initial budget proposal, especially on growth and employment, "although it is a priority". He underlined the Budget Committees key proposals, among which include:
Increased funding for Galileo and European Institute of Technology (EIT).
increased aid for Palestine and Kosovo.
MEPs on the Committee reversed the Council’s cut of EU agencies.
Speaking on behalf of the EPP-ED Group, British MEP Richard Ashworth said the budget is "moving in the right direction to offer value for money". French PSE Member Catherine Guy-Quint said "the amount of less than 130 billion euros, i.e. 0.99% of the GDP, is very limited and cannot fulfill the hopes for the development of European policy". The vote at the first reading is on Thursday.
Immigration "Blue card" - MEPs react
In the course of the day, attention also focused on the proposed blue card system for highly skilled workers from outside the EU, recently presented in a Commission press conference.
Reacting to this proposal, the Chairman of the Civil Liberties Committee Jean-Marie Cavada (ALDE) welcomed the proposal but said MEPs “shall examine carefully the safeguards they provide to limit the brain drain from developing countries".
The rapporteur on immigration Manfred Weber (EPP-ED) said “the new rules must not put additional pressure on the millions of unemployed in the EU member states. Claudio Fava (PSE) said the “final text should be braver. In addition to the legal channels of immigration, there should be true and effective free movement of workers on all of the European territory".
Pesticides - MEPs support protection of water sources
Following Monday's debate, in a first reading vote Parliament approved new EU legislation on pesticides. MEPs voted to ban aerial spraying with pesticides and to prohibit the use of pesticides in buffer zones round water courses. They also approved plans to ban or at least restrict pesticides in parks and sports grounds. However, they threw out proposals to divide the EU into three zones for the purposes of approving new pesticide products. The Council must now consider its reaction.
20071019STO11863 Debates live Briefing Budget 2008 Story blue card: 26 September 07 Reform Treaty Reform Treaty debate in full Pesticides briefing: 23 October 07
EN
1
PHOTO
20071024PHT12216.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/eplive/vod/livestream/default_en.htm
EN
5
LINK
http://www.consilium.europa.eu/cms3_fo/showPage.asp?id=1317&lang=en&mode=g
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071012BRI11613 ITEM-006-EN NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070921STO10548 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019IPR11928 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071019IPR11929 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
