Highlights of November plenary: Sarkozy, soil protection, sport, Commission work programme
Institutions
2007-11-12 - 11:25
French President Nicolas Sarkozy will address the Plenary in Strasbourg on Wednesday. Among other key events during the 12-15 November session are political party funding, greenhouse gas emissions trading, soil protection, sport and the Commission's 2008 work programme. MEPs will also discuss the current sitution in Pakistan on Wednesday. Watch the plenary live from 1700 CET on Monday.
Monday 's plenary session opens with a debate on the role of sport in education with a report that says physical education should be compulsory in school and children should have at least three PE lessons a week.
The House then turn its attention to the protection of soil . Floods, landslides, desertification and climate change are among the reasons why a strategy for soil protection is needed in Europe, according to an own-initiative report. That is followed by a report on the scheme for greenhouse gas emission allowance trading . The Environment Committee wants tougher CO2 emission limits, and a stipulation that the emissions trading scheme should include flights between the EU and third countries, as well as intra-EU ones, by 2010, rather than 2012 as the Commission had proposed. Tuesday starts with a debate on the Commission legislative programme and work programme for 2008 . Its priorities are: "growth and jobs, sustainable Europe, an integrated approach to migration, putting the citizens first and Europe as a world partner. " At midday on Tuesday, French President Nicolas Sarkozy will address the House in a formal sitting. Later the House will debate the regulations governing political parties at the European level and the rules regarding their funding . Any new rules could affect the long term planning of parties and could permit the creation of European political foundations. At this stage the outcome of the debate and the vote are not sure.
The EP will also debates the complaint by Boeing against Airbus before the WTO after hearing a statement from the European Commission. Wednesday 's key debate of the plenary is on: The European interest: succeeding in the age of globalisation , the discussion paper presented to Heads of State and Government at the Lisbon summit in October.
At 1500 CET, the House will debate the dramatic situation in Pakistan with statements from the Council and Commission. MEPs and NGOs have criticised the imposition of a state of emergency in Pakistan last Saturday by President Pervez Musharraf. Later MEPs will question the Commission and Council on preparations for the Bali conference on climate change. Parliament then turns its attention to strengthening the European neighbourhood policy . The Foreign Affairs Committee notes that although some common threads such as visa facilitation and the encouragement of civil society and people-to-people contacts exist, the Eastern, potentially candidate countries and the Southern Mediterranean Neighbourhood countries, need to be dealt with in quite different ways. On Thursday MEPs will discuss social reality stocktaking 2007 . The Employment and Social Affairs Committee calls on the Commission and Member States to pursue "an ambitious objective of reducing poverty, especially among working people, in Europe". As usual the session ends with three debates and votes on human rights issues in the world, on this occasion, the topics are: Christian communities in the Middle East, Uzbekistan and Somalia .
20071107STO12745 Briefing - 12-15 November 2007 - Strasbourg plenary session Watch the plenary live
EN
1
PHOTO
20071109PHT12824.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/eplive/public/livebroadcast_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071105BRI12655 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
