Dealing with the regional impact of earthquakes
Regional policy
2007-11-14 - 12:25
MEPs adopted a reoport on a series of ways to improve the EU's ability to cope with earthquakes. The Council should agree on the new EU Solidarity Fund regulation, to help repair earthquake damage faster, the Commission should draw up a joint EU earthquake action plan and Member States should step up research into earthquake damage prevention and crisis management, says an own-initiative report by Nikolaos Vakalis (EPP-ED - EL).
Earthquakes caused the deaths of 1.5 million people worldwide In the twentieth century, and cost an estimated at €75 billion in the last quarter century alone, says the report. The EU's most seismically active areas are Italy, Greece, Romania, Bulgaria, Cyprus and Slovenia, but Germany, Austria, the Czech Republic, France, Spain, Portugal and Malta are also at significant risk . Large areas of the EU are also subject to mining-related rock-mass tremors, which cause similar damage, it adds.
Take stock, plan joint action
The report calls on the European Commission to draw up a communication on earthquake hazards, damage prevention, management and repair and a technical protocol for joint action by the EU in the event of earthquake disasters, focusing on critical transport, energy, telecommunications and health infrastructures and on the roles of national, regional and local authorities.
Solidarity
The Council should decide without delay on the new Solidarity Fund regulation, as part of the co-decision procedure, so as to help repair damage fast and flexibly, including simplifying the requisite financial procedure (Parliament made its observations on time limits and eligible actions in May 2006), says the report.
Step up research, share special skills
The Commission should help formulate an earthquake research agenda, and Member States should step up research on ways to prevent damage, manage crises and reduce the impact of disasters, in tandem with the Seventh Research Framework Programme, says the report, adding that the Commission and Member States should also encourage the setting up of centres of excellence in scientific, technological and architectural innovation.
The report calls for public information campaigns on prevention and preparedness and university courses, master's and Ph.D programmes in disciplines such as earthquake-related engineering.
The Commission and Member States are also urged to promote special European training and best practice exchange programmes in the special skills required to prevent and deal with earthquake damage.
Build in earthquake resistance
The report calls on the Commission and Member States consider upgrading ancient buildings and monuments, as well as public buildings of strategic importance for civil protection and other critical infrastructure, so as enhance their earthquake resistance.
It also urges the Commission to recommend that Euro code 8 earthquake resistance provisions be included in the planning regulations of all vulnerable Member States, and calls on EU and Member State authorities to consider applying these provisions to old buildings as well as new ones.
Co-ordination and civil protection
The report calls on the Council and the Commission to take due account of earthquakes when finalising the revised legislative framework for civil protection.
It advocates co-ordinating Community, national, regional and local action, in the spirit of the Barnier report, and recommends introducing a "binding co-ordination system" for prevention, management and protection measures, including observation and early warning mechanisms, data bases and the exchange of best practices, and urges each Member State to create a single, co-ordinated, civil defence management system to this end.
Finally, the report reiterates the House's support for the establishment of a European Civil Protection Force and calls on the Commission to submit a proposal for one.
20071109IPR12790 The regional impact of earthquakes Text, as adopted by the EP on 14 November, will shortly be available here
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5498552
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
