Wednesday in Plenary: Globalisation, Russia and Bali climate conference
Institutions
2007-11-15 - 12:17
Climatic meltdown; MEPs discussed climate change
The economic and social aspects of globalisation and how it will affect people in the European Union was debated Wednesday morning. The day also reports on the problem of soil erosion in Europe and relations with Russia adopted in separate votes. Ahead of the December Bali conference on climate change, MEPs questioned the Council and Commission and stressed the need to succeed in negotiating a post-2012 framework on climate change.
Need for "fair" Globalisation
The challenges and possibilities that globalisation present was the subject of a debate between MEPs and representatives of the Council and Commission. It comes ahead of the Bali conference where international action to build a post Kyoto future will begin. Thursday will see MEPs vote on a resolution on the issue.
The draft resolution says that the EU is already a global player and has benefited from open markets. It also notes that the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund is up and running to provide compensation and financial help for those who may have lost their jobs due to changes in the labour market. The Parliament has already approved the use of the fund for redundancies in the car industry in France last July.
Commission President José Manuel Barroso said that "globalisation impinges on all our lives" but should also be seen as "an opportunity for the EU to assert its values".
Reaction of MEPs
Taking up the theme of all of us being affected Joseph Daul for the EPP-ED group said that "globalisation is not an abstract concept, but a fact of everyday life". He went on to say that "globalisation must be fair, smoothing out differences among countries and improving the welfare of the poorest", stressing that the exploitation of children cannot be tolerated.
The need for a social Europe was stressed by Martin Schulz of the PSE Group. He said that "Commissioners must acknowledge that a common economic policy needs to be based on social policy, including the yardstick of equality of rights around the world".
Graham Watson (Liberal, ALDE) told the House that "India, China and Brazil have caught the wave of opportunity", while "too much of Europe fears the wave crashing over it...it is not citizens we need to convince, it's Member States."
Following on from Wednesday's debate, Parliament will vote on a resolution Thursday.
EU-Russia summit resolution: MEPs call for free elections
MEPs adopted a resolution on relations with Russia that notes concern about human rights, democracy and freedom of expression in the country. It came following the EU-Russia Summit in October. Other areas of concern voiced in the resolution include freedom of expression and the rights of civil society and individuals to challenge the authorities.
MEPs also called on the country's leaders to ensure free and fair elections for the Duma and the Presidency. The resolution also welcomed Russia's bid to join the WTO and initiatives towards visa-free travel between the EU and Russia. It also called on Russia to cooperate on international issues such as Kosovo and Iran.
Strategy for the Bali Conference on Climate Change
Ahead of the Bali conference Italian MEP Guido Sacconi (as author of the oral question) opened the debate with the Council and Commission.
He said that "our aim to limit global warming to 2 degrees compared to pre-industrial era" and that to do this "an international treaty" is needed. He told the House that as Europe was responsible for 14% of total emissions "we cannot solve the problem on our own".
Parliament's rapporteur, Finnish MEP Satu Hassi, (Greens/EFA) told MEPs that "we have to get all industrialised countries including the US, on board". She went on say that "we also need to get China and India on board: they need to adopt binding emissions targets". She finished her remarks by telling the House that "negotiating a post-2012 framework on climate change is "the greatest challenge faced by international diplomacy".
European Energy Commissioner Stavros Dimas said that the EU must set the tone and play a pioneering role; it has already begun doing so by way of proposals for revision of the Emissions Trading Scheme (ETS), capping CO2 emissions from cars and using renewables".
MEPs vote on a resolution on Thursday on the issue which has been drafted by Satu Hassi for the temporary committee on climate change.
Soil protection to prevent erosion, contamination
The Parliament gave its first reading approval to the first EU directive on soil protection. MEPs aim to promote the sustainable use of soil, to prevent soil degradation due to climate change - or to mitigate and remedy its consequences. The proposed directive should end the fragmentation of EU soil policy. Parliament's rapporteur was Cristina Gutierrez-Cortines (EPP-ED). On Tuesday the EP adopted a report by Vittorio Prodi (ALDE) on behalf of the Environment Committee calling for a thematic strategy on soil protection.
ITS - the end
Also on Wednesday Parliament's Vice-President Edward McMillan-Scott (EPP-ED) announced the end of the "Identity, Tradition and Sovereignty" Group in Parliament as it fell below the required number of MEPs (20) needed to form a political group. This is due to the fact that Romanian MEPs in ITS left over alleged remarks made by Alessandra Mussolini about Romanian people.
This group was formed in January 2007, bringing together MEPs from seven countries. Members of the group have described it as "right wing" and "nationalist".
20071109STO12837 Press-Info: Globalisation Commission Communication on globalisation Press-Info: Petitions: MEPs wish to see EU law enforced Press-Info: Framework for the protection of soil Press-Info: EU-Russia relations after the Mafra Summit Press-Info End of the Identity , Tradition and Sovereignty political group as Romanian MEPs leave Results of votes on Wednesday 14 November 2007
EN
1
PHOTO
20071114PHT13058.jpg
EN
3
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/commission_barroso/president/pdf/COM2007_581_en.pdf
EN
8
LINK
/news/expert/tous_les_epvotes/default/default_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109IPR12792 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109IPR12789 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071113IPR12975 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109IPR12793 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071114IPR13088 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
