Post-Briefing - 12-15 November 2007 - Strasbourg plenary session
2007-11-16 - 12:46
Selected highlights of the Strasbourg plenary session 12-15 November 2007:
NB: An audio summary of 12-15 November 2007Strasbourg plenary session is available and can be accessed he re : Opening of the November plenary session in Strasbourg - Pöttering sends condolences to families of deceased and Finnish people after shooting in Finland / anti-personnel mines
At the opening of the Strasbourg plenary session, EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering spoke of the shooting at a school in Tuusula, Finland, which left several people dead. He sent his heartfelt condolences to the people of Finland and the families of the deceased.
Sarkozy to MEPs in Strasbourg: "Europe must be alive, a grand ideal and a grand promise"
In an address to MEPs in Strasbourg, President Sarkozy stated that Europe must represent hope for a better life and a better world, a grand ideal and a grand promise. Mr Sarkozy said that Europe could not be machine, and called for a strengthening of European defence and the setting up of a committee of wise-men on the future of Europe. "The institutional question has been settled. What remains are the political questions. They must be asked without fear, debated without taboos", he said.
End of the Identity , Tradition and Sovereignty political group as Romanian MEPs leave
Vice-President of the European Parliament Edward McMillan-Scott (EPP-ED, UK), announced the end of the Identity, Tradition and Sovereignty Group in the European Parliament as they fell below the required number of MEPs (20) needed to form a political group. The announcement was made at the end of the voting session in Strasbourg.
MEPs set out how to get the most out of globalisation
Following on from Wednesday's keynote parliamentary debate on the Commission's paper "The European interest: succeeding in the age of globalisation", MEPs today adopted - by 435 votes to 86 with 32 abstentions - a wide-ranging resolution calling for the EU to take full advantage of globalisation while addressing the many challenges it entails.
Clear skies ahead: MEPs vote to curb airline emissions by including them in European trading scheme
In adopting a first-reading report, MEPs backed the Commission's plan to include the aviation sector in the EU emissions trading scheme(ETS). While the Commission had proposed capping ETS allowances for CO2 emissions at 100 percent of aircraft operators' average annual emissions during 2004-2006, the EP went even further, reducing the number of ETS-authorised emissions for aviation to 90 percent. The House also voted to exclude all military flights from the scope of the directive.
Framework for the protection of soil - flexibility for the Member States
The European Parliament adopted its first-reading report on the first EU directive on soil protection. Among the key points adopted by MEPs is the setting up of public inventories of contaminated sites within the EU and the need for Member States to draw up remediation strategies. MEPs reinstate a list of potentially soil polluting activities. Member States will be allowed some flexibility as to how they put the directive into practice.
Halving greenhouse gas emissions by 2050: MEPs outline the mandate for Bali
Binding emissions targets for all industrialised countries; a global "cap and trade" system; and a 50 percent cut in greenhouse gas emissions by the middle of this century. These, according to a resolution adopted today by the European Parliament, should be some of the EU's core targets for the upcoming UN Climate Change Conference in Bali.
Dealing with the regional impact of earthquakes
MEPs adopted a reoport on a series of ways to improve the EU's ability to cope with earthquakes. The Council should agree on the new EU Solidarity Fund regulation, to help repair earthquake damage faster, the Commission should draw up a joint EU earthquake action plan and Member States should step up research into earthquake damage prevention and crisis management, says an own-initiative report by Nikolaos Vakalis (EPP-ED - EL).
Musharraf must put an end to de facto martial law and ensure prompt, fair and free elections, say MEPs
The European Parliament "expresses its solidarity with the legitimate protests" by thousands of Pakistanis, "condemns the violence of the police" against them, and "demands unequivocally that an end be put to the state of emergency" in the country. In a resolution adopted today in Strasbourg, MEPs demand the restoration of judicial independence and fundamental freedoms, and call on President Musharraf to "renounce his position as head of the army."
European Neighbourhood Policy: visa facilitation, conditionality and supporting civil society are key, say MEPs
The European Parliament adopted a report in plenary today assessing the European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP). The House noted that although some common threads such as visa facilitation and the encouragement of civil society and people-to-people contacts existed, the Eastern, potentially candidate, countries and the Southern Mediterranean Neighbourhood countries needed to be dealt with in quite different ways.
MEPs underline that free movement is a fundamental EU principle and call for support for Roma
In adopting a joint resolution on the right of EU citizens and their families to move and reside freely within the territory of the EU, MEPs reaffirm the value of the free movement of persons as a fundamental principle of the European Union,. MEPs advocate the establishment of a network of organisations dealing with the social inclusion of Roma as well as the promotion of awareness-raising instruments regarding the rights and duties of the Roma community.
MEPs congratulate nine new Member States for joining the Schengen area
In adopting a joint resolution on the enlargement of the Schengen area of free movement to the Czech Republic, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Hungary, Malta, Poland, Slovenia and Slovakia, MEPs stress the symbolic and historic importance of the event with a view to ending the former divisions in Europe. MEPs congratulate them on the tremendous efforts in order to be ready and to respect all the Schengen requirements in such a short period of time.
MEPs say poverty is still too widespread
In an own-initiative report on Social Reality Stocktaking, the European Parliament calls on the Commission and Member States to pursue "an ambitious objective of reducing poverty, especially among working people, in Europe". The report by Elizabeth Lynne (ALDE, UK) welcomes the Commission's forthcoming proposal to make 2010 the European Year of Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion. However, it also highlights the scale of the effort needed.
Human rights: religious persecution, Uzbekistan, Somalia
In its three human rights resolutions adopted at the end of this week's session, Parliament highlights the persecution of religious believers, particularly Christians, in certain countries; endorses the Council's recent decision to suspend visa restrictions on the Uzbekistan authorities; and calls for an immediate ceasefire in Somalia as well as action by the international community.
Adopted texts from the Strasbourg plenary session 12-15 November 2007 can be found here :
The draft agenda for the Brussels plenary session 28-29 November 2007 can be found here :
20071109BRI12778
EN
1
A
/eplive/expert/multimedia/20071116MLT13266/media_20071116MLT13266.mp3
EN
2
A
/eplive/expert/multimedia/20071116MLT13266/media_20071116MLT13266.mp3
EN
3
A
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
4
A
/sides/indexPartSession.do?reference=2007-11&language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Opening of the November plenary session in Strasbourg - Pöttering sends condolences to families of deceased and Finnish people after shooting in Finland / anti-personnel mines
2007-11-16 - 12:46
At the opening of the Strasbourg plenary session, EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering spoke of the shooting at a school in Tuusula, Finland, which left several people dead. He sent his heartfelt condolences to the people of Finland and the families of the deceased. Mr Pöttering then made a statement to mark the 10th anniversary of the signing of the Ottawa Convention banning the use and transport of anti-personnel mines. While welcoming the progress made, he called for a final effort to secure full ratification of the convention by all countries in the world.
The President announced that a special plenary session would be held in Brussels on 18 December starting at 3pm, to enable the Portuguese Council presidency to report to Parliament on the achievements of its term of office and the outcome of December's EU summit.
One change was made to the week's agenda. The Council and Commission made statements on Wednesday on the situation in Georgia. This item was debated with the Obiols/Tannock report on the European neighbourhood policy and Parliament will vote on a resolution on the subject at its Brussels plenary session on 28-29 November. Adopted texts Agenda for the next session
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert.do#
EN
2
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?reference=2007-11&language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Sarkozy to MEPs in Strasbourg: "Europe must be alive, a grand ideal and a grand promise"
2007-11-16 - 12:46
In an address to MEPs in Strasbourg, President Sarkozy stated that Europe must represent hope for a better life and a better world, a grand ideal and a grand promise. Mr Sarkozy said that Europe could not be machine, and called for a strengthening of European defence and the setting up of a committee of wise-men on the future of Europe. "The institutional question has been settled. What remains are the political questions. They must be asked without fear, debated without taboos", he said. In his welcome to French President Sarkozy, EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering stressed the commitment which France had continuously given to the idea of a united Europe. "In 1849 Victor Hugo spoke out in favour of a union of European states. In the 100 years since, many efforts were made and notably on the initiative of the French. The present day EU is no exception, it is the result of 1950 Schuman plan."
He also thanked President Sarkozy for his efforts in supporting the constitution and the Reform Treaty: Sarkozy had "decisively demonstrated commitment to the constitution", and contributed to a solution in Reform Treaty.
"After your election, you invited me to the Élysée Palace as first non-French guest. I want to thank you, you demonstrated not only your commitment to Europe but also the appreciation to the EP as a body representing Europeans", said Pöttering.
French President Nicolas Sarkozy addressing MEPs in Strasbourg said: "Thank you for allowing me to reaffirm before you France's commitment to Europe and to tell you that in voting "no" to the European Constitution, the French people were not expressing a rejection of Europe but rather their heightened expectations of Europe.
European integration is the embodiment of a common will among the peoples of Europe, who acknowledge common values and a common civilisation and who wish to keep them alive. It is the embodiment of a common will of the peoples of Europe who acknowledge common interests and wish to affirm them. It is the embodiment of a common will of the peoples of Europe who have chosen to put what brings them together ahead of what keeps them apart.
Europe cannot just be a machine, an administrative machine, a legal machine, a machine for issuing rules, regulations, directives, and a machine for manufacturing constraints, rules and procedures.
When the people say "no", we cannot say the people are wrong. We must ask why they said "no".
We all know that the French "no" and the Dutch "no" to the European Constitution expressed far more than the rejection of a text, however important that was.
In that "no", there was a cry of anguish, a disappointment that was shared by millions of men and women in Europe who had begun to despair of Europe because they felt it no longer protected them, that it had become indifferent to the problems of their lives, that it was no longer speaking to them.
"Noes" were a disaster
These "noes" were a disaster. They plunged Europe into the gravest crisis of its history. But this crisis, which could undo Europe, could also be salutary if it led all those who are unfailingly committed to its cause to reflect on the reasons for this disaffection and on the goals of this extraordinary human experiment that no-one had attempted before.
If Europe has managed to find a way out of the impasse into which the failure of the draft European Constitution plunged it, it is because the heads of state and government at the Brussels summit, realising that the fate of Europe lay in their hands, took a political decision. That day in Brussels, their political determination swept away all the obstacles which until then had seemed insurmountable.
Their political decision was to take note of the failure of the draft Constitution.
The simplified treaty is a political victory of Europe over herself. It is a victory of European consciousness expressed in politics.
The institutional question has been settled. What remains are the political questions. They must be asked without fear, debated without taboos.
Europe has chosen democracy, and in a democracy one must be able to debate everything: budgetary policy, trade policy, monetary policy, industrial policy, fiscal policy, all policies whatever they may be.
New committee of wise-men on the future of Europe
In European democracy, it is necessary to debate the final goals and the objectives of Europe. This is why I have proposed to create a committee of wise-men to reflect on the future and in order that we can debate together the different possible futures of Europe. So that we can design the face and contours of the Europe of tomorrow. If not, how can we ask the people of Europe to have confidence if the future of Europe?"
Democracy - deep identity crisis
The peoples of Europe are undergoing a deep identity crisis. This is a crisis which lies both in the nations and in that idea of civilisation which all Europeans have in common and which makes up the real unity of Europe. It is a crisis linked to globalisation and the mercantilisation of the world.
To begin Europe with the economy, with coal and steel, with trade, was a stroke of genius by the founding fathers. But politics has lagged behind economics, and culture even more so.
Europe must ensure it is not perceived as a threat to identities but as a form of protection, as a way of keeping them alive, as a multiplier of power and influence, as much at the level of thought and culture as at the material level and the political level.
Europe wishes to set an example in the fight against climate change but Europe cannot accept unfair competition from countries that impose no environmental constraints on their companies.
We all have different ideas and views on every subject. This is no reason not to talk about them. On the contrary, we must debate them until we manage to bring our views close enough to construct a common policy. For if we agree to discuss only the subjects on which everyone agrees, the crisis of Europe lies not behind us but before us.
All these questions will be at the centre of the French presidency's priorities.
Creation of a European defence identity
What does our European commitment mean for each of us if we are incapable of debating the creation of a European defence and the renewal of the Atlantic alliance? What does our European commitment mean if each of us not able to contribute to his or her own defence and to the defence of all?
This is what I have done by making every effort to convince Britain to sign the simplified treaty. Because Europe needs Britain.
But I have done more: I wanted France to propel Europe's growth forward once more, to contribute to Europe's dynamism and prosperity once again. Because when France is doing well, the whole of Europe benefits. When France is doing well, Europe also does better.
Simone Veil said: "All the states of the Community today face three major challenges: peace, freedom and well-being, and it seems that only the European dimension can enable them to deal with these challenges."
I wish to make these words my own, because we still face those challenges. These are the challenges that the public expects Europe to deal with.
We have no more time to lose if we are to deal with them.
We have no more time to lose to ensure that the people can regain confidence in Europe.
We have already lost enough time."
In response to the speech, President Pöttering said: "We place our trust in the French Presidency of the European Union which will take over at a key moment of the Union's history including the ratification of the Reform Treaty. The European Parliament stands shoulder to shoulder with you in this effort to guarantee the success of your Presidency in the interest of all Europeans."
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
End of the Identity , Tradition and Sovereignty political group as Romanian MEPs leave
2007-11-16 - 12:46
Vice-President of the European Parliament Edward McMillan-Scott (EPP-ED, UK), announced the end of the Identity, Tradition and Sovereignty Group in the European Parliament as they fell below the required number of MEPs (20) needed to form a political group. The announcement was made at the end of the voting session in Strasbourg. Mr McMillan-Scott, who was chairing the sitting, said: "I have today received letters from Mrs Daniela Buruianä-Aprodu and Mr Cristian Stanescu announcing their decision to leave the ITS Group. Parliament takes note of this decision with effect from today, 14 November 2007.
Taken together with the announcements already made this week concerning 3 Members leaving the group, I conclude that the number of members of the ITS Group has now fallen below the minimum of 20 Members required to form a political group laid down by Rule 29, paragraph 2. (see link)
Parliament therefore takes note of the fact that the ITS Group no longer fulfils the conditions of the Rules of Procedure for the formation of a group. As a consequence, the group ceases to exist with effect from the moment of this announcement."
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
MEPs set out how to get the most out of globalisation
2007-11-16 - 12:46
Following on from Wednesday's keynote parliamentary debate on the Commission's paper "The European interest: succeeding in the age of globalisation", MEPs today adopted - by 435 votes to 86 with 32 abstentions - a wide-ranging resolution calling for the EU to take full advantage of globalisation while addressing the many challenges it entails.
The resolution firstly notes that "globalisation of the economy creates new opportunities for the EU", which is "one of the major beneficiaries of the open world economy". Competition and trade: a level playing field It then stresses that "the EU can only achieve its Lisbon objectives internally by being active and united on the global stage" and therefore welcomes "the intention to develop a coherent external dimension of the Lisbon Strategy", focusing on regulatory cooperation, convergence of standards and equivalence of rules to promote fair competition and trade. MEPs also point out that "without vigorous enforcement of EU competition rules", the advantages of the single market and the benefits of EU participation in a global market could be diminished. Backing for ECB independence The resolution "defends the independence of the ECB in setting monetary policy and in managing the effect of volatility of global financial markets" and emphasises that "the appreciation of the euro exchange rate is the result of mounting imbalances in third countries and sluggish demand in the euro area". MEPs believe that "the surge in demand for natural resources, basic products and services driven by the growth of developing economies may bring about inflationary pressure on the EU Member States’ economies" and argue that "anti-inflationary economic policy tools with strategies of technological growth and a framework for possible macroeconomic adjustment and improved coordination should be prepared by the EU Member States". Among the responses needed, MEPs say that "Europe needs a faster transformation of innovation into new products and services" and they back "the Commission's demand for a 'knowledge triangle' of research, education and innovation" and "expects more effective investments in new skills, lifelong learning and modern education/training systems". Joined-up policy-making Parliament notes the Commission's proposal to align different EU policy initiatives so as to ensure a coherent response to internal and external challenges. In this context, it urges "the development of an 'EU smart green growth initiative' bringing together all the main existing EU economic instruments" and calls on the Commission "not to disconnect environmental policies from economic and employment policy", adding that "the fight against climate change must constitute the backbone of the EU's review of the 'three-year Lisbon cycle' ". Moreover, to cope with climate change, as well as international organised crime, supranational action and supranational institutions are needed, believe MEPs. Social protection and flexicurity Turning to those left behind by globalisation, MEPs note that "EU citizens often equate globalisation with falling European output and job losses". They therefore urge the Commission and Member States to better inform European citizens about all aspects of globalisation and the need for a policy at EU level to face these challenges. They also welcome "the Commission's statement that more attention will be given to active inclusion and equal opportunities, that adequate social protection should be promoted and the fight against poverty reinforced" and they support "the adoption of a balanced set of common principles regarding flexicurity, combining flexibility and security for employees and employers on the labour market". Lastly, Parliament stresses that "the EU urgently needs to have a common borders and immigration policy", while "leaving it to individual Member States to decide on numbers admitted" and that efforts are needed "to make a success of inward migration for all parties".
Debate - Wednesday, 14 November 2007
Globalisation: MEPs debate the challenges and opportunities
In a debate titled "The European interest: succeeding in the age of globalisation", MEPs debated with the Council and Commission the many facets of this phenomenon, the problems and the benefits it brings and the best ways to manage it in future. The debate was based on a Commission paper discussed by the Council on 19 October at the informal summit of Heads of state and government in Lisbon. MEPs will vote on a resolution on this topic on Thursday 15 November.
Council
Opening the debate on behalf of the Council, Portugal's European affairs minister, Manuel Lobo Antunes, stressed that globalisation was not just an economic and technological phenomenon but essentially a political one. It had two sides: people were losing jobs and feeling threatened but "jobs are also being created, price levels are lower, trade in goods and services is growing".
The key was "to manage globalisation", to retain political control. He believed "Europe can lead and shape globalisation". The "new institutional set-up" provided by the reform treaty and the new cycle of the Lisbon strategy would underpin Europe's approach. However, he stressed that "reform must now speed up" and there must be a consistent strategy to deal with globalisation.
The minister identified migration as a key issue, pointing out that "the Union's demographic growth is increasingly supported by migratory flows" which help make up for the low level of labour market flexibility within the EU. He also said that the external dimension of the Lisbon strategy had been discussed recently by the Council, with a special emphasis on financial market instability and climate change.
He believed that "Europe has the conditions and the duty to guide the process of globalisation" and said that the Lisbon summit of 13-14 December will adopt a declaration on globalisation, to show Europe's citizens that their leaders are determined and committed to "increasing the Union's ability to influence the agenda of globalisation". Concluding, Mr Lobo Antunes said the Portuguese presidency sincerely believed that "Europe must have a constructive role to play in building a world which is fairer and better balanced".
Commission
In the words of Commission President José Manuel Barroso "globalisation impinges on all our lives" but should also be seen as "an opportunity for the EU to assert its values".
Certain key points could be identified: "we have a responsibility to protect our citizens without being protectionist"; we must be "open but not naïve", in other words there must be "no free ride to those who do not respect certain principles"; in addition, Europe gains "from a rules-based system" and the EU's experience "leaves it uniquely well placed to provide a good basis for regulation at a global level".
Since the Lisbon strategy was revamped in 2005, "almost 6.5 million extra jobs have been created in the EU of 27", said Mr Barroso, and "eight million are expected to be created over the period 2007-2009". Four priorities had been crucial: research and innovation, a better business environment, greater employability, and energy and climate change. These had given the strategy "a much sharper focus". He particularly stressed research and innovation, thanking Parliament for its support on Galileo and the European Institute of Technology, and said the Commission favoured adding a fifth freedom to the four already in the treaties, namely "freedom of circulation of knowledge in the EU".
He acknowledged there must be a "greater focus on the social dimension" and hoped the Council would approve the "flexicurity" principles agreed between the social partners before the summer. Looking to the future, the Commission president singled out "vigorous implementation of outstanding reforms, stronger emphasis on skills and education, concrete steps to convert Europe in low-carbon economy" as the next priorities.
However, he added that " We also need to do more to ensure that the Lisbon Strategy progresses at an even pace in all Member States. A slower pace of reform in one Member State has obvious knock-ons in the others."
In conclusion, said Mr Barroso "I really believe it is not only in the European interest … but that in the age of globalisation the world also needs a more committed Europe".
Political group speakers
"Globalisation is not an abstract concept, but a fact of everyday life", said Joseph DAUL (EPP-ED, FR). "Citizens look to us to find solutions", he insisted, to protect them from terrorism, the whims of financial markets, skyrocketing grain prices, and cheap but potentially dangerous imported goods.
"Globalisation must be fair, smoothing out differences among countries and improving the welfare of the poorest", he continued, stressing that the exploitation of children cannot be tolerated. "The opening up of Europe is a motor of global investment", said Mr Daul adding that the take-up of EU standards "can help to improve quality control worldwide", although the EU must also ensure that "Brazil, China and India deliver on their responsibilities". To take advantage of new opportunities, the EU needs to step up R&D investment and help small and medium-sized enterprises to play their role as drivers of growth. But it must also help its citizens adjust to change, for example by facilitating life-long learning. And with oil at 100 dollars a barrel, the EU clearly needs a common energy policy to ensure secure supplies of clean, efficient energy and this must include the option of civilian nuclear power, he said. The "EU must protect without being protectionist", Mr Daul concluded.
The title of the debate made it all too clear that Parliament, the Council and the Commission need to discuss their role in this process, said Martin SCHULZ (PES, DE). Negotiations to prepare today's resolution had brought out not just different perspectives on globalisation's risks and opportunities, but a veritable "rift" between the EPP-ED and Socialist groups, he continued.
Whilst Mr Schulz agreed with some of what the Commission President had said, Commissioners must acknowledge that a common economic policy needs to be based on social policy, including the yardstick of equality of rights around the world, said Mr Schulz. The "economy first", understood as deregulation to maximise profit and boost growth at the expense of social security, "might please the right", but it is the "wrong approach", he stressed.
The European Commission is clearly "not a Socialist El Dorado", continued Mr Schulz, but its centre-right politicians should nonetheless bring forward proposals to "rein in" international financial capitalists and the "Wild West capitalism that is threatening whole economies". "If we don't legislate, our electorate will hold it against us", Mr Schulz concluded.
"We have just heard the language of the past", said Graham WATSON (ALDE, UK). "India, China and Brazil have caught the wave of opportunity", while "too much of Europe fears the wave crashing over it" he continued. If Europe sits on its hands because national leaders – citing citizens’ concerns – contest the EU's agenda, we will miss the chance to shape globalisation in Europe's collective interests, he warned. "It is not citizens we need to convince, it is Member States. Survey after survey has shown that most of our citizens see the European Union, not national government, as best placed to manage globalisation" he continued.
"The division in our politics is no longer between left and right over economic policy but between those who respond to global challenges by pulling up the drawbridge and those who advocate the open society".
If the EU is to use its critical mass to enable Europeans to shape globalisation, then "Where are your policies? Your timetable"? Mr Watson asked Mr Barroso, adding that this communication was "rich in rhetoric, but rather poor in proposals". Mr Watson looked to forthcoming single market review for ideas on growth and jobs, and to the legal migration policy, hoping it encompasses the concerns of countries of origin. MEPs also await urgent action on cutting energy use and fighting cross-border crime, he added. "If we are creating a global market we need a new global social contract, reconciling the competing demands of flexibility and fairness", he said. That includes "fashioning a fair deal for developing countries in Doha, clinching a contract on carbon emissions in Bali, and building an international approach to financial markets, focusing on regulatory co-operation, convergence of standards and equivalence of rules." "And we must look forward, with Victor Hugo, to the day when the only battlefields are those of markets open for business and the human spirit open for ideas", he concluded.
Mirosław Mariusz PIOTROWSKI (UEN, PL) began by stating that "globalisation is an irreversible phenomenon and [that] this is something that certain EU Member States should bear in mind and respond accordingly ..[..].. The Union's action should not harm the economy of its Member States." Mr Piotrowski then referred to the political sphere where he pointed out that "action should not lead to the demise of national identities." He concluded by referring to the 'layer-upon-layer' of bureaucracy which he sees as part of the EU, saying that "we somehow cannot see the truth before our eyes."
Referring to the Commission's paper, Jean LAMBERT (Greens/EFA, UK) began by stating that "I think that what we have seen is an absolute failure of imagination given the situation that we face." She commented on the paper's claim that we are facing a third industrial revolution, pointing out that "we need to take the lessons of the past industrial revolutions." She agreed that it is true that we need to rebalance the trade, social and environmental dimensions of globalisation, but added that "we're still talking as if it's the quantity that matters, not quality." Ms Lambert welcomed the Commission's conference on this issue next week and went on to say that the guidelines in this area need to be revisited and revised. She concluded by stating that Lisbon and Gothenburg still need to be integrated - "that's the challenge. This document doesn't face up to it and I'm not convinced the Parliament does either."
Jiří MAŠTÁLKA (GUE/NGL, CZ) criticised the joint motion on globalisation. "I'd like first and foremost to express my disappointment over the joint motion for a resolution. The motion doesn't reflect European interests at all, it doesn't even reflect the interests of the majority of citizens of the EU." It would offer the people nothing at all, they would simply be told: "Globalisation - like it or lump it." Something against its adverse effects must be done, said Mr MAŠTÁLKA. His group would place its focus on poverty reduction: "The resources available to us have to be used to give people the right to properly paid work and minimum wage", among other things.
Godfrey BLOOM (IND/DEM, UK) criticised the French President Sarkozy's speech yesterday in the EP and said that "it was all humbug". He accused Sarkozy of hypocrisy: "He stood for free trade. But of course if other countries were for protectionism, so was he. He stood four square for democracy. The people were entitled to have their views heard. But then, it would seem, ignored, as the people of France and Holland have been ignored." The French could not have another referendum "because that might lead to an English referendum, and of course we all know the British would reject the new Constitution. Oh, sorry, Treaty." Referring to President Sarkozy, Mr Bloom also said: "He is a European first, but a Frenchman through and through; he is a Frenchman first, but a European through and through - ok, with a bit of Hungarian goulash thrown in."
Dimitar STOYANOV (ITS, BU) said he "would like to remind the Commission and Council that globalisation is a process that does not exist per se" and that "European policy will determine whether globalisation will evolve or not." He went on to criticise the Commission: "Does the Commission want to develop or slow down the process? The single market is no guarantee for the development of Europe." Referring to the Council which had stressed the importance of global competitiveness, Mr STOYANOV said there were many European countries that could not even work within the single market. "I anticipate that the Lisbon strategy will fail in Bulgaria because, as we have said time and again, our country was not ready to join the EU."
Jana BOBOŠÍKOVÁ (NA, CZ) said that "we need to make sure that Europe's position in the world is as strong as possible." This means, among other things, concluding WTO talks, reducing farm subsides, and having a more robust policy towards China. "To succeed, we need to cut back regulation in SMEs." The Barroso Commission had promised just this but had got "stuck in the rut." Furthermore, "the Union must speak with one voice or face ridicule." Referring to Mr. Schultz's comments about wild-west capitalism, Mr BOBOŠÍKOVÁ pointed out that "this is communist rhetoric, communists treated financial markets in this way and we know what happened to the Communist countries."
British and Irish speakers
Timothy KIRKHOPE (EPP-ED, Yorkshire, Conservatives, UK) said that to survive and prosper, Europe needs to face up to the challenges of globalisation. Fulfilling the Lisbon Agenda is central to Europe’s future prosperity and we need to make sure that a deal is finally secured in the World Trade talks. Reform of the common agricultural policy - not only a fair deal for EU farmers but also for those in the developing world. We must, he said, push further and faster on the deregulation agenda, freeing business and industry to compete on competitive terms with China and India, and we must make real progress supporting Chancellor Merkel’s efforts to create a transatlantic common market.
Welcoming the Commission President's recent statement on globalisation, he quoted that "protectionism cannot make Europe wealthier; protectionism would impoverish, not protect, our citizens." This is a crucial statement and one that all European governments should heed now.
Seán Ó NEACHTAIN (UEN, North West, Fine Fáil, IE), speaking in Irish, said that he believed that the EU had gone too far in its concessions in the WTO. The EU, he said, had offered 46 percent reduction in import tariffs. "We should keep our food production at home", he said. The US, he said, had not conceded anything, "look a the recently published Farm Bill". EU average tariffs were now only 4 percent where in Asia and South America there were as high as 30 percent. India and China must open their markets to competition.
Jim ALLISTER (NI, Northern Ireland, Ulster Unionist, UK) stated that for an increasing number of constituents globalisation means desolation, as factory after factory pulls out and moves East. He reported that two week ago, in Limavady in his own constituency, Seagate Technology announced its closure with 960 job losses, leaving that small town reeling. It is not just the lure of cheap labour, but our crippling burden of regulation on European industry that is devastating our manufacturing, he said.
Two immediate steps would help: a lowering of the threshold for the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund. One thousand job losses in Paris is bad, but in a small town like Limavady it is catastrophic. So the threshold should be lower for smaller economies. Secondly, the EU needs to loosen its state aid prohibitions so that things like modest industrial derating might help keep manufacturing afloat. Concluding Mr Allister invited the Commission to respond positively on those two specifics.
While Jill EVANS (Greens/EFA, Wales, Plaid Cymru, UK) agreed that there is potential for the EU to take a very positive role, to date economic globalisation has led to the acceleration of environmental degradation, poor conditions for workers and growing social imbalances. On a local level it has come to mean job insecurity and worse, the loss of jobs in manufacturing and services, which Ms Evans saw at first hand in her own community in Wales with the closure of the Burberry factory which meant the loss of hundreds of jobs in a very poor area, a convergence area. The EU can help by making sure it improves labour and social standards across the world, including the cost of climate change in the market price to avoid environmental dumping. The effects of globalisation make social protection even more important for workers and for communities.
Concluding, Ms Evans agreed that the way forward is to support small business and provide long-term sustainable jobs, high quality jobs, and she hoped that the proposal for a small act will help to achieve this in the long term.
Sarah LUDFORD (ALDE, London, Liberal Democrats, UK) said that the EU can only achieve its objective by being active and organised on the world stage and this is particularly true of migration. Migration, she said, deserves to be a priority on the EU agenda, on a par with climate change and energy. We see the pressure from outside; we see the social tensions and indeed the racism from inside the EU. But still there is no comprehensive EU policy on legal as well as illegal immigration, and on integration.
Concluding Ms Ludford said that we should not forget the potential of global communications and especially the Internet to promote human rights. Globalisation and the Internet and other global communications are a very potent force for good. That is also part of globalisation.
Robert STURDY (EPP-ED, Eastern, Conservatives, UK) said that we must look upon China and India as an opportunity for Europe. On unemployment, while he acknowledged that it is difficult to keep employment, Mr Sturdy said that if we do not allow ourselves to be part of a global market, then we will get nowhere. He believed that there is a huge opportunity here which we should embrace. We must, he said, look at such things as free trade agreements. Morocco at the moment has signed a free trade agreement with the United States, he reported. Concluding, Mr Sturdy asked the Commission to allow business and industry to get on with doing what they are supposed to do. But, he warned, be very careful about the legislation you put in place which damages European opportunities.
Sharon BOWLES (ALDE, South East, Liberal Democrats, UK) said that the EU has unique power at supranational level to shape things and to challenge excesses. In July, in the Financial Times it said: ‘Brussels is the regulatory capital of the world and cannot be ignored from Washington to Tokyo’. So, she said, if we have got it, let us use it, but judiciously. "What is the purpose of a competitiveness agenda if it is not to maintain our position in the world? What is the purpose of a single market if we fail to get it properly completed? Stop the faint-hearted excuses. The EU is absolutely about meeting the challenges. We just need to get on with it before natural selection catches up."
Gary TITLEY (PES, North West, Labour, UK) said that what is needed is a global Europe which sets a completely new agenda for globalisation, resting on the principles of openness, fairness, and the importance of cooperation between Member States. We know, he said, what the challenges are and, in his view, climate change and migration are the two biggest, but we need to maintain high growth and jobs. He highlighted issues such as an effective social agenda, terrorism and crime and promoting security beyond our borders and dealing with poverty. We need, he said, a radical and fundamental shift, not only in our policies, but in our entire thinking in the European Union. Action is needed and delivering on promises and fulfilling all the potential that the EU has.
Stephen HUGHES (PES, North East, Labour, UK) said the employment guidelines have become virtually invisible, hiding the very wide variability in Member State performance against the range of indicators and targets they are supposed to meet under the employment strategy on youth unemployment, integration of older workers – a range of factors. In some Member States, he said, spending on lifelong learning and active labour market measures has actually not improved but declined over the last five years, This, he said, is disastrous for the Lisbon process overall.
On flexicurity, Mr Hughes said that the work of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs makes it clear that both employment security and job security are important. So, he said, we will do our best to help produce a good set of principles on flexicurity but they must then lead to an amendment to the guidelines. President Barroso said earlier: 'if it ain’t broke, don’t fix it.' Well, it is broken and it needs fixing.
Philip BUSHILL-MATTHEWS (EPP-ED, West Midlands, Conservatives, UK) said that development of knowledge economy by promoting employability, strengthening skills, and in that way success for Europe in the age of globalisation can mean success for individuals, success for people, which is what the EU should be very much more about.
He drew attention to the 25% reduction in simplification of existing EU legislation. Let us, he said, see some real delivery on this across the board, sooner rather than later, as this will particularly benefit SMEs. In this context, he encouraged a wholesale review of the Working Time Directive, where much more lateral thinking is required of us all, he said..
Adding an external dimension to the single market is all very well, he said, but let us get the internal dimension first, completing our own single market before we develop grand ambitions outside. He agreed that this is not just for our economic progress but also because this will deliver social progress.
Council and Commission responses
Replying to the debate on behalf of the Council, Mr Lobo Antunes said that if one point could be agreed, it was surely that "globalisation is here to stay". The question then was how to turn it to Europe's best advantage. "Globalisation must serve humankind, not vice-versa", he said.
Of the measures needed, one was to reform the social model, "not to weaken it but to adjust it", he emphasised. On the environment, Europe had already proved its worth as a "pioneer" and must do so again at the Bali conference on climate change in December. As to the external dimension of the Lisbon strategy, Europe must "invite others to share our values" and to agree standards on the economy, environment and social systems. Only in this way could we achieve of the goal of ensuring that "globalisation serves humankind".
Responding for the Commission, Enterprise and Industry Commissioner Günter Verheugen told the House that the purpose of his institution's paper had been to "get people thinking" not to plan everything for the next three years. The reactions to the paper would be incorporated into the plans to be proposed to the December summit.
There must, he argued, be a greater focus on the links between different policy areas such as competitiveness, energy and environment, to ensure an integrated approach. He singled out a number of issues: the need for fair competition with non-EU countries; the social dimension, which he stressed must not be seen as a form of charity; the shortage of skilled or qualified staff; and the turbulence on the financial markets, which he argued was due to inbuilt structural defects in the financial system.
He also stressed that it was sometimes hard to reach agreement on what the "European interest" was with regard to globalisation: was it lower prices in one country or higher employment levels in another, for example?
In conclusion, he returned to the timetable for decision-making. The Commission would now make proposals to the Lisbon summit in December, with a view to their adoption by the spring European Council in March, thereby "allowing Parliament sufficient opportunities to express its views before the final decisions next year".
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Transport
Clear skies ahead: MEPs vote to curb airline emissions by including them in European trading scheme
2007-11-16 - 12:46
In adopting a first-reading report, MEPs backed the Commission's plan to include the aviation sector in the EU emissions trading scheme(ETS). While the Commission had proposed capping ETS allowances for CO2 emissions at 100 percent of aircraft operators' average annual emissions during 2004-2006, the EP went even further, reducing the number of ETS-authorised emissions for aviation to 90 percent. The House also voted to exclude all military flights from the scope of the directive. In 2004, greenhouse gas emissions from the EU's share of international aviation increased by 7.5 percent compared with 2003. Cumulative growth of CO2 emissions, meanwhile, is at 87 percent since 1990, in stark contrast to the EU's overall 8% greenhouse gas reduction target under the Kyoto Protocol.
It is with this in mind (and in line with its overall strategy to tackle climate change) that the European Parliament approved, by a large majority, the European Commission's plan to include the aviation sector in the EU Emission Trading Scheme (ETS). In 2004, greenhouse gas emissions from the EU's share of international aviation increased by 7.5 percent compared with 2003. Cumulative growth of CO2 emissions, meanwhile, is at 87 percent since 1990, in stark contrast to the EU's overall 8% greenhouse gas reduction target under the Kyoto Protocol.
A 10 percent cut in airline emissions
MEPs introduced several significant changes into the draft law, however. While the Commission had proposed capping ETS allowances for CO2 emissions at 100 percent of aircraft operators' average annual emissions during 2004-2006, the EP went even further, reducing the number of ETS-authorised emissions for aviation to 90 percent. Though acknowledging the specific nature of the airline sector ("it is difficult", says the final report, "for aircraft operators to switch to alternative (renewable) energy sources". MEPs endorsed the need for even more ambitious emission targets. Depending on the EU's choice for a post-2012 target of either 30 percent or 20 percent reductions in overall CO2 emissions (as compared to 1990 levels), they decided, "the Commission shall reduce the total quantity of allowances" in further periods.
The ETS allocates a number of permits to operators, each giving them the right to emit one tonne of carbon dioxide per year. The total number of permits sets a limit, therefore, on the overall emissions from participants in the scheme. While some permits are allocated to operators free of charge, others are traded freely (auctioned) -- this, to allow emissions reductions to be made where they are most cost-effective. While the Commission proposed no concrete values for the number of permits to be auctioned, MEPs did so, deciding on an initial figure of 25 percent.
Revenues generated from the auctioning of allowances, as MEPs see it, should be used "to mitigate greenhouse gas emissions and to adapt to the impacts of climate change in the EU and third countries," to fund relevant research and development and, lastly, "to lower taxes and charges on climate-friendly transport such as rail and bus."
All flights covered by 2011
The Commission had also proposed that the ETS should cover all intra-EU flights as of 2011, but that flights between the EU and third-country airports should come under its scope only as of 2012. The Parliament disagreed, voting through amendments that would see no distinction made between EU and non-EU flights in this regard: the scheme, they decided, would cover both types of flights by 2011. As rapporteur Peter Liese (EPP-ED, DE) had earlier stated, "It is difficult to explain that a flight from the UK to Morocco is not covered by the scheme while a flight from the UK to the Canary Islands [would] be covered."
Lastly, whereas the Commission sought to exempt government flights from the scheme, MEPs -- taking the line that governments ought to be setting an example -- deleted the derogation.
What's next
It is now up to the Council of Ministers, as joint legislator with Parliament, to decide its position on the amendments adopted by MEPs. If all of Parliament's amendments are acceptable to the Council, the legislation will be adopted in its modified form. If the Council rejects any of Parliament's amendments or adds any of its own, the text will return to Parliament for a second reading.
Debate - Monday 12 November 2007
John PURVIS (EPP-ED, UK) said that, in his view, the emissions trading scheme is the most cost-efficient, demand-sensitive and objective market-based instrument available for reaching Europe's greenhouse gas emissions reduction target of at least 20% by 2020.
"There is much potential for technological innovation, to reduce the sector's CO2 emissions. Furthermore the single European sky, which the Commission mentioned, when fully implemented will reduce CO2 emissions by up to 12%, and this should be put into operation with urgency."
Caroline LUCAS (Greens/EFA, UK) said "To achieve emission reductions via trading relies crucially on scarcity of permits. Since aviation emissions have already doubled since 1990, to call for an initial allocation equivalent to average emissions over the period 2004-2006, or even 80-90% of that, is simply too generous. I therefore urge you to support my Group’s amendments for an initial allocation that is 50% of that amount. We also need 100% auctioning so that there are no windfall profits at the expense of the passenger."
Roger HELMER (NI, UK) stated that the ETS has created a complex web of politically influential vested interests and rent seekers who have lobbied to manipulate the system for their own ends. "The Commission’s plans to get tough over allocations will simply move the problem on. With lax limits on allocations bought in from outside Europe, EU funds will flow to countries like China, where regulation is minimal and records may not be accurate. So big foreign polluters will make vast profits for little effort, great damage will be done to European economies and CO2 emissions will continue unchecked. It is quite simply scandalous that we propose to bring a new industry into this failing system. I say to you that you must put your own house in order before you think of extending it."
Chris DAVIES (ALDE, UK) referred to special pleading from one industry after another. He questioned whether none none of these executives have read the United Nations report? This report, he said, says that up to 2 billion people within 20 years face severe water scarcity, partly because of climate change. "We have to do something about this. Michael O’Leary of Ryanair may be the unacceptable face of public relations for the airline industry. But he speaks a lot of truth when he says very clearly: ‘I do not give a toss for the environment so long as I can stuff my pockets and those of my company full of gold.’"
Balance has to be provided, Mr Davies said as well as ensuring and facilitating the position of our constituents who enjoy travel, as well as ensuring that concerns for the environment are properly addressed.
Eluned MORGAN (PES, UK) underlined the point that the EU has a principle that it is the polluter who should pay. Under the current ETS scheme, she said, far from the polluter paying, we have seen many polluters making windfall profits thanks to the ETS. This has to stop. It is right, therefore, that many of these carbon creators should be auctioned, especially when the wholesale reform happens.
Perhaps one of the most interesting aspects of this debate is the question of where ETS auction money should be spent. In the forthcoming ETS review, there is potentially €200 billion which could be raised if we went for full auctioning. I am sure many of us could think of countless ways to spend that kind of money, but I believe it would be sensible if we could steer this money via the EU budget, if possible, to spend on climate change initiatives which could include transfers of finance to the developing world including, for example, to pay for reforestation in developing or emerging countries.
But also there needs to be recognition that even in our own Member States we are likely to see a huge increase in terms of energy poverty. Perhaps we should think about steering the money in this direction as well. So the decisions we make tomorrow will give an indication of where we should go, in terms of the ETS reform as a whole.
Avril DOYLE (EPP-ED, IE) thanked Mr Liese for the tremendous effort he has put in to reach a position. Continuing she said: " Under the proposal convertibility of aviation allowances to Kyoto allowances free of charge is proposed. An airline may demand conversion of its aviation allowances to these Kyoto-backed allowances and the issuing Member State must comply. For us that is a huge problem in Ireland because if airlines were to convert free of charge, we would have to replace these Kyoto allowances by those that the Irish state would have to buy on the market at full market price.
The Irish registry will carry a disproportionate share of flights on our books due to the size and geographic spread of some airlines as the airlines, particularly Ryanair, are registered with the Irish Aviation Authority for all of their EU operations. The success of Ryanair means that they have 20 operational bases across the EU serving almost 130 destinations and yes, increasing. But they operate only a small proportion of those flights in Ireland. I would like the Commission specifically to say whether it will accept Amendment No. 47 which deletes those particularly difficult sentences."
Concluding, Mrs Doyle stated that the "polluter pays principle cannot be interpreted to mean that the Irish taxpayer pays for pollution in our colleague EU Member States."
Robert EVANS (PES, UK) congratulated Mr Liese for his report, and he quoted: 'we do not just inherit this planet from our ancestors, our parents, we borrow it from our children'. And, like Caroline Lucas, I appeal to groups, all the groups in this Parliament, to think about how they vote, be prepared to compromise, be sensible, be realistic, but above all, be positive, because Parliament has a chance to be at the forefront of protecting the environment for 500 million citizens and their descendants."
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Sport
Physical education should be compulsory in schools
2007-11-16 - 12:46
Physical education should be compulsory in school and children should have at least three physical education lessons a week, says an own-initiative report adopted by MEPs with 590 votes in favour 56 against and 21 abstentions. The number of children who are overweight or obese is growing by an estimated 400,000 per year, yet, according to a study for the Culture Committee, the average time that primary schools allocate to physical education has fallen from 121 to 109 minutes per week since 2002. The report calls on Member States to make physical education compulsory in primary and secondary schools, ensure that the timetable includes at least three physical education lessons a week, and ensure "a higher degree of integration" between sports and academic subjects.
MEPs underline that physical education is the only school subject that seeks to prepare children for a healthy lifestyle and focuses on their physical and mental development.
MEPs also stress the need for better sports facilities and recommends that EU structural funds be used to create school and other sports facilities in disadvantaged areas.
The rapporteur, Pál SCHMITT (EPP-ED, HU) said in the debate in Strasbourg on 12 November: "I am happy that the role of sport has not been forgotten in the Lisbon Treaty. Inactive lifestyles are becoming a serious danger to health, we can't afford to neglect an important tool as the physical education"
"As a former Olympic champion, as a sports leader and as a Member of the European Parliament, it is my obligation to see how EU can contribute to the fight against obesity and promote healthy lifestyles and sport though education. Regular exercise is important and therefore it should be obligatory to have at least three lessons of physical education a week in schools."
Child obesity and sport
The report urges the Member States to carry out information campaigns on the need to adopt a healthy lifestyle, and engage in regular physical activity and on the health risks linked to an unhealthy diet aimed at children from a very early age and their parents.
The House stresses the importance of physical exercise in curbing obesity and overcoming unhealthy life-style habits, thereby greatly benefiting individual health, expresses concern, however, that longer working hours and present-day conditions of employment in general, are preventing workers from taking regular physical exercise and becoming more involved in sport.
A study commissioned by the Parliament's Culture and Education Committee and written by a British academic (see link below) says that "in some Member States the lack of sporting facilities...and PE teachers put physical education in a difficult situation". It concluded that "PE is often sacrificed to other academic subjects".
The number of EU children affected by overweight and obesity is estimated to be rising by more than 400,000 a year, adding to the 14 million-plus of the EU population who are already overweight (including at least 3 million obese children) [COM(2005)0637, Green paper "Promoting healthy diets and physical activity: a European dimension for the prevention of overweight, obesity and chronic diseases"] across the entire EU27, overweight affects almost 1 in 4 children. Spain, Portugal and Italy report overweight and obesity levels exceeding 30% among children aged 7-11. The rates of the increase in childhood overweight and obesity vary, with England and Poland showing the steepest increases. In overall terms, children are less fit compared to the generation of the 1970s and 1980s. It is not such much a higher calorie intake that causes overweight, but physical inactivity: children do not eat more - they move less.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Culture
Interoperability of digital TV - concern over the 2012 deadline
2007-11-16 - 12:46
The House adopted an own-initiative report on the interoperability of digital TV. The report underlines the importance of the switchover from analogue to digital technology and is concerned about delays in the 2012-deadline set by the Commission. MEPs underline in the report, that the new possibilities of interaction, that digital TV provides should be for the benefit of the users, and that the new technologies should allow the broadcasting of pluralist information and quality programmes. The European Parliament points out that the switchover from analogue to digital is a great step forward and can contribute towards disseminating cultures and improving social cohesion.
UK tops the EU table for digital TV
According to the report digital television data - EU market for digital TV, (see link below), at the end of 2005 66.6 per cent of households had digital TV, compared to an EU-27 average of 23.8 per cent.
With digital TV, viewers can interact directly with the broadcasters. Interactive TV is based on different applications and software in the receivers with different standards. However, the European Parliament finds that imposing a single standard is not the right solution. MEPs share the view of the Commission that it would be better to continue promoting open standards, which are recognised by the European Standards body, and maintain that these open standards are the most appropriate ones for ensuring the technological neutrality of networks and the free movement of information.
The House regrets that interactive television in the EU has ultimately proved to be less commercially successful than expected and calls on the Commission to study the reasons for this phenomenon and to submit regular reports on the efforts made by the Commission and the Member States to develop the digital TV market and its numerous ramifications.
MEPs consider that the technical and legislative choices related to interoperability should not only be economic, but also social and cultural, and they stress attention should be paid above all to the interest of the users. Digitial television data - Report prepared for the European Commission
EN
1
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/information_society/policy/ecomm/doc/info_centre/studies_ext_consult/digital_tv_final_report_cec.pdf
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Environment
Framework for the protection of soil - flexibility for the Member States
2007-11-16 - 12:46
The European Parliament adopted its first-reading report on the first EU directive on soil protection. Among the key points adopted by MEPs is the setting up of public inventories of contaminated sites within the EU and the need for Member States to draw up remediation strategies. MEPs reinstate a list of potentially soil polluting activities. Member States will be allowed some flexibility as to how they put the directive into practice. In their first reading report, drawn up by Cristina Gutierrez-Cortines (EPP-ED, ES), MEPs aim to promote the sustainable use of soil, to prevent soil degradation due to climate change - or to mitigate and remedy its consequences. The proposed directive should end the fragmentation of EU soil policy with existing provisions currently divided between various pieces of legislation on waste, pesticides and nature protection. A vote to reject the directive did not pass with 225 votes in favour 395 against and 11 abstentions.
Agriculture and new bio-waste directive
MEP says that each Member State, in accordance with its climate, soil characteristics and agriculture, as well as its best agricultural practices, may decide upon its own agricultural policy in relation to the soil.
No later than two years after the entry into force of this Directive, MEPs say the Commission must present a proposal for a biowaste directive setting quality standards for the use of biowaste as a soil improver.
National or regional inventories of contaminated sites
The directive includes a requirement to establish national inventories of contaminated sites, which will be made public. MEPs add that these could also be on a regional basis. They should be updated at least every seven years to include new contaminated sites and exclude those which have undergone remediation.
According to MEPs, within six years from the transposition date, Member States will have to identify the location of at least the sites where soil affecting activities, such as Seveso and mining installations or landfills of waste, are taking place or have taken place in the past. These activities are included in the text of the Directive.
Potential buyers will have to be informed of the present and past activities on the site and provide any information at their disposal on the concentration levels of the dangerous substances in the soil. Member States may require a chemical analysis determining these concentration levels.
Areas in airports, land-based areas in ports and areas in former military sites where use, handling and storage of dangerous substances occur or have occurred have been included in Annex II of the Directive. Industrial dry cleaners are also among these activities. This means that Member may refer to these activities when they perform their investigations of contaminated sites.
Member States will have to designate one or more authorities to be responsible for the identification of both these potentially contaminated sites and contaminated sites and for the management of the related inventory.
The Parliament inserted a definition of a "contaminated site" as a site where there is a confirmed presence on or in the soil, caused by human activities, of dangerous substances posing a significant risk to human health or the environment.
Remediation
Seven years after transposing the directive into national legislation, the European Parliament wants to see remediation strategies drawn up and made public by Member States, "at the administrative level they consider appropriate", including at least general remediation targets, set of priorities, a timetable for implementation of remediation measures for the contaminated sites and the funding mechanism.
Member States shall ensure that the contaminated sites in their territory are remediated, in accordance with priorities to be set, or already set, by the Member States themselves.
Cost-benefit analysis of remediation
The House says if the means required for remediation are not technically available, or represent a disproportionate cost with respect to expected environmental benefits, sites may be conditioned in such a way that they do not pose any significant risk to the environment or human health, including by restricting access to them or allowing natural recovery. If Member States choose either of these options, they must monitor the risk to human health and the environment.
Priority areas
Within five years of the transposition date, Member States will have to identify the "priority areas" which need special protection against erosion, organic matter decline, soil biodiversity loss, compaction, salinisation, landslides, desertification or acidification. The list of these areas will be reviewed every ten years. MEPs propose that the choice of measures to combat these phenomena will be left to the Member States. Member States which have already national legislation in place will be exempted (Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, Austria, Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, United Kingdom)
Soil sealing
Members States will also have to take measures to limit soil sealing and minimise its effects. " As sealing is an irreversible process, Member States shall develop codes of good practice on sealing", says the report.
Agriculture and climate change
"This Directive is the first piece of Community law that recognises the positive role of agriculture on soil protection and tackles the issue of climate change", said the rapporteur. Amendments proposed by the committee reaffirm that Member States may decide upon their own agricultural policy in relation to the soil, while on climate change, MEPs in the committee want the Member States to improve their soil's capacity to capture carbon.
British and Irish speakers in the debate - Monday, 12 November 2007
Taking the point that Commissioner Dimas said that only nine Member States have legislation in place to protect soil, Neil PARISH (EPP-ED, UK) suggested that it is up to the other 18 Member States to put legislation in place to protect the soil and, he said, we should not necessarily bring forward another directive.
The Commissioner, he said, also stated that there are 300 types of soil throughout the European Union. It is, he said, very difficult to have one general directive to cover all these positions. You only have to consider agriculture in a year like this, where in some Member States there have been droughts and others have had very wet weather, very heavy rainfall. If you dig potatoes in many of the northern Member States this year, where there has been lots of rain, then of course you will cause compaction. It is necessary to do that in order to get the crop. That can be rectified the following year by subsoiling and repairing the damage to the soil.
Flexibility is needed, Mr Parish said, and he thought that the idea of having yet another directive in order to put more regulation upon our farmers and upon our industry is the wrong way to go.
While Kathy SINNOTT (IND/DEM, IE) said she could see some of the logic in EU-level legislation regulating water and air quality, she found that the logic fails with the protection of soils. Soils are much less mobile and, other than the setting of reasonable standards of protection, should be the competence of Member States and, within them, the local authorities. Before the EU takes too much control of soils maybe we need to do a bit of soul-searching.
In Ireland, she said, some of the problematic policies in terms of soil degradation have come top-down from Europe. For example, the EU sugar reform removed beet from the wheat rotation. The insertion of beet conditioned the soil and made it more suitable for cereals. Also, the EU forest grants over the years have resulted in unsuitable spruce plantations that, in growth, have made the soil more acidic and, in harvesting, have in some cases compacted the soil, rendering it infertile, whilst in others have loosened it from the hills, from which it has been washed into rivers and lakes.
Soil varies enormously but it should be living and renewing. The EU should ban soil destruction but leave its care and management to the people who understand its composition in each area, she concluded.
Jim ALLISTER (NI, UK) said that soil, as has been said in this debate, unlike air and water, does not flow from state to state. It has no cross-border dimension. Thus policy on soil is and should remain a Member State issue.
IPPC, cross-compliance obligations, the Landfill Directive and the Nitrates Directive, he said, all give us more than enough EU involvement. Hence Mr Allister had no apology for favouring total rejection of this power-hungry proposal.
But, he concluded, if the EU nonetheless decides to meddle in this national issue, then one initiative it could consider is to introduce a payment to farmers in return for providing carbon sequestration in soil management and farming practices.
This proposal for a directive on soil protection has huge credibility gaps, said Jeffrey TITFORD (IND/DEM, UK). Firstly, he said, soil contents and qualities in different parts of an individual country vary considerably. He questioned how much more variance will there be between the soils of 27 different countries with vastly differing climates? It is absurd, he said, to suggest that the EU can introduce a one-size-fits-all directive on soil from the Mediterranean to Scandinavia.
Farmers, he said, have quite rightly pointed out that they have a vested interest in protecting the soil, because it is their livelihood. They also suggest that it would place another onerous burden upon them because of the failure to give enough recognition to existing national legislation.
The second large credibility gap is provided by the EU’s short-sighted open border policy, which has encouraged mass immigration from Eastern Europe to my country. This has generated the need for a correspondingly huge programme of house building on every square inch of land available – some three million new homes by 2020, we are told. Even the green belt is under threat. Burying vast acreages under solid concrete is not my idea of the best way to protect soil.
Mairead McGUINNESS (EPP-ED, IE) favoured the Prodi strategy with some reservations. All of us, she said, want our soils protected, but she thought that those who are concerned about this directive believe that it is not necessary to do it in this way. Mr van Nistelrooij pointed out a much better way of doing it, through open coordination. The difficulty that Ms McGuinness saw in terms of soil protection is that not enough research is done on how to protect soils and a great many researchers and advisers in the agricultural area are involved in form filling – forms that are created here in the European Union and which take them from their jobs of being involved with farmers in best practice in terms of soil protection.
While accepting the work done by the rapporteur, Ms McGuinness wondered why we need this at all. Irish farmers, she said, who are in large measure now worried about the Reform Treaty, will see this as another attempt to stifle them in their everyday activities, unless they are convinced that this is not the case.
Ms McGuinness reiterated her concern that the research and advisory work is, in fact, almost being destroyed by the levels of bureaucracy that the EU has created. "Yes, we need to deal with soils that are contaminated, but we have directives that already do that; they are in place. I am not convinced, from today’s debate, that we need such a directive. I will remain open-minded until the end of this debate and see if I am thus convinced, but, so far, I am afraid not. Yes to the strategy, but no to the directive" she concluded.
Robert STURDY (EPP-ED, UK) congratulated Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines who, he said, had done a fantastic job on a report which is not needed or wanted by most of us and, Commissioner Dimas, in my opinion brings this House and the Commission into total disrepute. You are, he said, bringing out legislation which is totally and utterly unnecessary.
What is required, Mr Sturdy said, is enforcing the legislation that we have. He called on the House to totally reject this piece of legislation.
Mr Sturdy agreed with other speakers who mentioned erosion. Erosion, he said, is a big problem but not necessarily in the European Union. It is a problem, he said, where we have deforestation, and that is something that we could do something about. He agreed with Mr Allister that the Commission is failing to enforce regulations.
Concluding, Mr Sturdy said that as a farmer, "the soil is my life. I will protect it to the very best of my ability. Do not put more legislation in place. Allow me to get on with protecting the soil, which provides the food, which provides the income for the people who live in the rural communities."
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Environment
Halving greenhouse gas emissions by 2050: MEPs outline the mandate for Bali
2007-11-16 - 12:46
Binding emissions targets for all industrialised countries; a global "cap and trade" system; and a 50 percent cut in greenhouse gas emissions by the middle of this century. These, according to a resolution adopted today by the European Parliament, should be some of the EU's core targets for the upcoming UN Climate Change Conference in Bali. Commitments made under the Kyoto Protocol for reductions in greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions run to 2012. It is the EU's aim to ensure that the December 2007 UN Conference in Bali mark the first step in building a post-2012 framework on tackling climate change. The European Union, MEPs stress, must confirm its "leading role" at Bali, ensuring that Conference members begin to establish "a realistic framework for an international post-2012 climate agreement". A future climate change regime, they add, should be based on the principles and mechanisms of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the Kyoto Protocol. The Bali mandate, according to the report, drafted by Satu Hassi (Greens/EFA, FI), should centre on the long term goal of limiting average global temperature increase to below 2°C above pre-industrial levels. This, notes the text, effectively means reducing global greenhouse gas emissions "by at least 50% by 2050 compared to the 1990 level". (As the text acknowledges elsewhere, the latest evidence suggests that even the 2°C goal "might not be sufficient to avoid significant negative effects of climate change"). The mandate should also be based on the following elements: - binding targets for all industrialised countries - broader participation in reduction efforts, in particular by emerging economies through fair and proportionate targets - a global "cap and trade" system based on a fair and proportionate allocation of quotas - strengthened financial mechanisms for adaptation - effective incentives to avoid deforestation (accounting for some 20% of global greenhouse gas emissions) , including the promotion of sustainable agricultural practices - instruments, financial and other, for clean development and technology transfer and deployment (including further development of the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) - agreement by 2009 at the latest; Elsewhere, the EP also reiterates its call for aviation and maritime transport emissions to be included in global greenhouse gas reduction commitments for the post-2012 period. The adverse consequences of climate change are distributed unequally, note MEPs. In addition to being an "environmental catastrophe", they add, climate change also raises issues of human rights and global equity. It is necessary, therefore -- the text speaks, in fact, of a "moral obligation" -- for the EU and other industrialised nations to assist developing countries. More economically advanced developing nations, however, ought to "be able to begin emission or carbon intensity reductions as soon their development permits, at the latest by 2020". Industrialised countries, meanwhile, must lead by example, MEPs insist, committing themselves to reducing emissions "by at least 30% by 2020 and 60% - 80% by 2050 compared to 1990". The Parliament recalled, at the same time, that the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change recently acknowledged the role of nuclear energy as an option for reducing greenhouse gas emissions. That said, MEPs believe that," where reasonable, energy needs should be met from all available carbon-free sources or low-emission technologies, including nuclear." The resolution was adopted with 398 votes in favour, 29 against, with 63 members abstaining. The European Parliament will dispatch an official delegation to the Bali conference between 11-14 December.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Regional policy
Dealing with the regional impact of earthquakes
2007-11-16 - 12:46
MEPs adopted a reoport on a series of ways to improve the EU's ability to cope with earthquakes. The Council should agree on the new EU Solidarity Fund regulation, to help repair earthquake damage faster, the Commission should draw up a joint EU earthquake action plan and Member States should step up research into earthquake damage prevention and crisis management, says an own-initiative report by Nikolaos Vakalis (EPP-ED - EL). Earthquakes caused the deaths of 1.5 million people worldwide In the twentieth century, and cost an estimated at €75 billion in the last quarter century alone, says the report. The EU's most seismically active areas are Italy, Greece, Romania, Bulgaria, Cyprus and Slovenia, but Germany, Austria, the Czech Republic, France, Spain, Portugal and Malta are also at significant risk . Large areas of the EU are also subject to mining-related rock-mass tremors, which cause similar damage, it adds.
Take stock, plan joint action
The report calls on the European Commission to draw up a communication on earthquake hazards, damage prevention, management and repair and a technical protocol for joint action by the EU in the event of earthquake disasters, focusing on critical transport, energy, telecommunications and health infrastructures and on the roles of national, regional and local authorities.
Solidarity
The Council should decide without delay on the new Solidarity Fund regulation, as part of the co-decision procedure, so as to help repair damage fast and flexibly, including simplifying the requisite financial procedure (Parliament made its observations on time limits and eligible actions in May 2006), says the report.
Step up research, share special skills
The Commission should help formulate an earthquake research agenda, and Member States should step up research on ways to prevent damage, manage crises and reduce the impact of disasters, in tandem with the Seventh Research Framework Programme, says the report, adding that the Commission and Member States should also encourage the setting up of centres of excellence in scientific, technological and architectural innovation.
The report calls for public information campaigns on prevention and preparedness and university courses, master's and Ph.D programmes in disciplines such as earthquake-related engineering.
The Commission and Member States are also urged to promote special European training and best practice exchange programmes in the special skills required to prevent and deal with earthquake damage.
Build in earthquake resistance
The report calls on the Commission and Member States consider upgrading ancient buildings and monuments, as well as public buildings of strategic importance for civil protection and other critical infrastructure, so as enhance their earthquake resistance.
It also urges the Commission to recommend that Euro code 8 earthquake resistance provisions be included in the planning regulations of all vulnerable Member States, and calls on EU and Member State authorities to consider applying these provisions to old buildings as well as new ones.
Co-ordination and civil protection
The report calls on the Council and the Commission to take due account of earthquakes when finalising the revised legislative framework for civil protection.
It advocates co-ordinating Community, national, regional and local action, in the spirit of the Barnier report, and recommends introducing a "binding co-ordination system" for prevention, management and protection measures, including observation and early warning mechanisms, data bases and the exchange of best practices, and urges each Member State to create a single, co-ordinated, civil defence management system to this end.
Finally, the report reiterates the House's support for the establishment of a European Civil Protection Force and calls on the Commission to submit a proposal for one.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Petitions
Petitions: MEPs wish to see EU law enforced
2007-11-16 - 12:46
In 2006, the European Parliament received no fewer than 1,016 petitions from citizens alleging failures to comply with EU law in their countries or regions. MEPs are now calling on the Commission to take more systematic legal action against Member States in the event of infringements, and wish the Council to be more extensively involved in the work of the EP Petitions Committee. MEPs, in a report by Carlos José Iturgaiz Angulo (EPP-ED, ES) on the Petitions committee's deliberations in 2006, underline that petitioning is a "fundamental right" that enables European citizens to participate in monitoring the application of Community law by national, regional and local authorities. This right also contributes "significantly" to the EU's efforts to "reconnect with its citizens" and provides an insight into the expectations of the European public.
Between 1 January and 31 December 2006, the EP received 1,016 petitions, or roughly three per day, a figure comparable with 2005's (1,032). But about one-third of these were found to be inadmissible because they did not relate to the EU's spheres of competence. - which points to a need, say MEPs, to ensure that citizens are provided with adequate information on these spheres of competence. They also asked that visibility of the "Citizens Portal" on the European Parliament's web site be improved.
The most active petitioners were German, British, Spanish, Greek, French, Italian and Polish citizens. The majority of petitions illustrate difficulties involved in applying Community law in areas such as the environment, social security, the recognition of qualifications and the functioning of the internal market. MEPs regret the "widespread failure" by Member States to correctly implement environmental norms and called for "improved consistency in the monitoring" notably of respect for Community law on the protection of biodiversity and on the assessment of the impact of certain public and private projects and plans on the environment.
Equitable Life
The significant number of petitions received from United Kingdom, Germany and Ireland on major financial losses incurred following alleged mismanagement at Equitable Life resulted in the European Parliament setting up a temporary committee of inquiry to investigate "alleged contraventions or maladministration in the implementation of Community law" (Article 193 of the EC Treaty).
Take Member States to court more systematically
The report reiterates the House's growing concern about the unjustified and excessive time taken by the Commission - often several years - to conclude infringement proceedings. MEPs also criticise frequent failures by Member States to comply with Court of Justice decisions. They consider that this situation "undermines the credibility of the formulation and coherent application of EC law and that it serves to discredit the objectives of the EU".
MEPs therefore call on the Commission to avail itself of the possibility of taking Member States to court to have them ordered to pay fines and damages if they delay implementing the Court's rulings in infringement proceedings.
Involve the Council and the Member States more extensively
MEPs underline the need to involve the Council more extensively in the activities of the Petitions Committee, inter alia by sending representatives to its meetings. They also reiterate their proposal that the Council appoint a senior official responsible for petitions, given that many complaints are to do with the Member States' transposition of Community legislation into national law.
In this connection, the report refers to the "key role" of the Member States in correctly implementing Community legislation and underlines that the practical application thereof "is decisive for the purposes of increasing the relevance of the European Union for its citizens". Greater participation by representatives of the Member States and their parliaments in the debates of the Committee on Petitions is needed, say MEPs.
Close co-operation with Commission and Ombudsman
MEPs believe that cooperation between the Petitions Committee and the European Commission "remains critical" for dealing effectively with petitions, especially in relation to Community decisions or activities with a direct impact on the citizen.
Welcoming the constant dialogue between the Committee on Petitions and the European Ombudsman, MEPs point out that they had supported the special report on the transparency of Council meetings, welcomed the successful resolution regarding the way the Commission handles complaints alleging an infringement, and supported the Ombudsman's request for an increase in his budget.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Humanitarian aid
Humanitarian aid consensus needs to be clearer and more specific
2007-11-16 - 12:46
The European Parliament adopted an own-initiative report outlining the EP's position on the "European Consensus on Humanitarian Aid", aimed at rationalising the efforts and the distribution of aid between the European Commission and the Member States. The European Consensus on Humanitarian Aid is likely to be signed by the three institutions in plenary on 18 December. The report insists that the Consensus needs "to be clearer and more specific in order to enhance European humanitarian policy" and also to ensure that the EU's potential as a humanitarian donor is fully exploited". The EU, i.e. the European Commission and the Member States, collectively, is the world's leading humanitarian aid donor. In 2006 the EU contributed over €2 billion, which is over 40% of official international humanitarian assistance.
The House reaffirms that EU civil protection and military assets and capabilities must be deployed in a way which complements and supports the work of humanitarian organisations. it should be limited to those cases or areas where they can provide real added value.
The report stresses the need to clarify the relations between activities supported by the Commission via the Stability instrument for crisis prevention, management and resolution (such as disarmament, demobilisation, mine clearing, reintegration of displaced populations/refugees, etc.), and the concomitant activities carried out by DG ECHO, the Commission's humanitarian aid office.
Thierry CORNILLET (ALDE, FR), who is the European Parliament's standing rapporteur on Humanitarian Aid, presented his initial proposals to the Informal gathering of Development and Cooperation Ministers in Funchal (Madeira) from 20 to 22 September, in the run-up to the 8-9 December EU-Africa Summit.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External relations
EU-Russia relations after the Mafra Summit
2007-11-16 - 12:46
In adopting a joint resolution on the EU Russia Summit of 26 October, MEPs call on the Russian Government to create together with the European Union the necessary condition for a rapid start to the negotiations on a new Partnership and Cooperation Agreement between the EU and Russia. The House stresses the importance of unity and solidarity among the EU Member States in their relations with Russia. The European Parliament stresses once more, in this connection, that democracy and human rights must be at the core of any future agreement with the Russian Federation.
WTO
The European Parliament welcomes the progress made at the Summit as regards Russia’s accession to the WTO. The House calls on Russia to take the necessary steps to remove the remaining obstacles to the accession process.
MEPs emphasise, that the current situation in Russia gives rise to serious concern in terms of respect for human rights, democracy, freedom of expression and the rights of civil society and individuals to challenge authorities and hold them accountable for their actions. The EP is extremely worried about the lack of any substantive response by the Russian authorities to the numerous expressions of this concern. MEPs stress that the implementation of the current NGO law has had a negative impact on the work of many NGOs,
Human rights
MEPs call for a stepping-up of the EU-Russia human rights dialogue and for this process to be opened up to effective input from the European Parliament, the State Duma and civil society and human rights organisations. The House calls for the situation of minorities within Russia to be included on the agenda of the human rights dialogue. The House calls on Russia to respect fully its obligations as a member of the Council of Europe, including respecting the right of association and the right to peaceful demonstration.
Investment in Russia
The House stresses the importance of improving the climate for European investment in Russia, which can only be achieved by promoting and facilitating non-discriminatory and transparent business conditions, less bureaucracy, and two-way investment. The EP is concerned about the lack of predictability in the application of rules by the authorities.
The House emphasises that queues of trucks up to 50 km long on the EU side of the border are unacceptable and therefore calls on Russia to streamline its procedures at the borders and to implement the measures agreed with the EU to reduce these bottlenecks.
MEPs regrets the fact that Russia did not honour its commitment to phase out Siberian overflight payments, and call on Russia to sign the agreement reached on this issue at the last summit.
Parliament appeals to the Governments of Russia and the United States to intensify the discussions on defence and security issues directly or indirectly involving the Member States of the European Union. MEPs urge the Governments of both States to involve the European Union and its Member States fully in these discussions and to refrain from taking any steps or decisions which might be considered a threat to peace and stability on the European continent.
Finally, the House urges Russia to reconsider plans to suspend compliance with the Treaty on Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE) and to use the path of negotiations in order to protect its legitimate interests and avoid an erosion of the CFE Treaty, which could lead to a new arms race and new lines of confrontation.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External relations
Musharraf must put an end to de facto martial law and ensure prompt, fair and free elections, say MEPs
2007-11-16 - 12:46
The European Parliament "expresses its solidarity with the legitimate protests" by thousands of Pakistanis, "condemns the violence of the police" against them, and "demands unequivocally that an end be put to the state of emergency" in the country. In a resolution adopted today in Strasbourg, MEPs demand the restoration of judicial independence and fundamental freedoms, and call on President Musharraf to "renounce his position as head of the army." The Parliament's resolution "demands unequivocally that an end be put to the state of emergency and that the 1973 Constitution of Pakistan be re-implemented with immediate effect." It "expresses its solidarity with the legitimate protests by thousands of lawyers, civil society and human rights activists and eminent political leaders," and "condemns the violence of the police against the protesters and the large-scale arrests without charge or under terrorism charges without any factual basis." Members demands that "judicial independence be restored," "that ordinances restricting the free coverage of political events be withdrawn," and calls for "the immediate release of all representatives of the bar associations who have been arrested after peaceful street protests." They reiterate their call on President Musharraf to "respect the verdict of the Supreme Court - once it is reinstated - on the constitutionality of his election as President," calling on him to "renounce his position as head of the army before taking his oath for a new presidential term and before the parliamentary dispensation for him to wear both civilian and military hats expires on 15 November 2007. Free and fair elections The resolution calls on the Government of Pakistan "to implement the necessary conditions to guarantee the holding of free, fair and transparent elections as scheduled," which the President had announced would be completed by 9 January, 2008. The House also demands that a completely neutral caretaker government be formed to oversee the polls, and that the election commission be reconstituted. In particular, MEPs call for "leaders of all political parties to be allowed to contest these elections, including former Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif, who should be allowed to return to Pakistan and to participate actively in the election process." The Parliament stresses that the credibility of any elections process will "depend on the release of all political prisoners," and "on an end being put to the disappearances of political opponents." MEPs consider that "freedom of speech, movement, association and assembly must be fully implemented and all restrictions on law-abiding political parties be removed, " in order for any meaningful election to take place in Pakistan. The possibility of an EP observer delegation to monitor the elections "depends on the fulfilment of basic preconditions for holding free and fair elections by the Pakistani authorities," say MEPs, and call on the Commission to "carefully consider the sending of a further exploratory mission, in the event that martial law is lifted, in order to evaluate the viability of the deployment of a long-term EU-EOM [Electoral Observation Mission]"
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External relations
European Neighbourhood Policy: visa facilitation, conditionality and supporting civil society are key, say MEPs
2007-11-16 - 12:46
The European Parliament adopted a report in plenary today assessing the European Neighbourhood Policy (ENP). The House noted that although some common threads such as visa facilitation and the encouragement of civil society and people-to-people contacts existed, the Eastern, potentially candidate, countries and the Southern Mediterranean Neighbourhood countries needed to be dealt with in quite different ways. The report "expresses doubt about the meaningfulness of the ENP's geographic scope, as it involves countries which geographically are European together with Mediterranean non-European countries." For this reason, it advocates that "the unified implementation of the policy take as much account as possible of the differing identities of all the countries covered by the ENP." The report was drafted by two rapporteurs, with Charles Tannock (EPP-ED, Conservative, London, UK) dealing with Eastern European Neighbourhood, and Raimon Obiols i Germa (PES, ES) responsible for the Southern Mediterranean Neighbourhood. Speaking in the debate on 14 November in Strasbourg, Mr Tannock said: "It is self-evident that everybody needs good neighbours. In an uncertain and ever-changing world, the EU needs to develop good and enhanced relationships with countries on its periphery that are based on security, stability and mutual benefit to all. So far the European Neighbourhood Policy is proving to be a valuable tool in this process, in creating a ring of friends aimed at improved trade, travel and political cooperation, particularly against terrorism and people trafficking. But, of course, of utmost importance are the shared values and in particular reinforcing democracy, the rule of law and human rights as our main priority." Eastern European Neighbourhood On the former, the report notes that "democratic neighbours who are clearly identifiable as European countries and who respect the rule of law may in principle [...] apply for membership of the Union." It believes that the gradual integration of the EU's Eastern neighbours into the European Energy Community should be pursued, and also suggests the setting-up of an "EU-Neighbourhood-East Parliamentary Assembly (EURO-NEST)" to strengthen parliamentary cooperation. The report also underlines the need for stronger EU involvement in the resolution of so-called frozen conflicts, and condemns the continued human rights violations and the use of the death penalty in Belarus. Southern Mediterranean Neighbourhood On the latter, the committee says human rights clauses' implementation mechanisms need to be included in the next-generation accords that will be signed between the EU and countries in the region, and regrets that so far, no substantial progress has been made in terms of democracy or human rights since the beginning of the European-Mediterranean Partnership. The report also notes that any new initiatives for the region need to involve a relaunch of the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly (EMPA), with a serious look at its difficulties of the past few years. General framework of the European Neighbourhood Policy For both regions, the Parliament stresses that "conditionality can constitute an appropriate incentive for acceleration of reform processes in the ENP countries towards their convergence with the EU if conceived positively, and differentiated according to the country's specific needs and capacities." MEPs also underline that "respect for universal human rights and fundamental freedoms is the core principle of EU policy," and say that civil society and a free media must be supported everywhere, "regardless of the degree of willingness of partner countries' governments to cooperate and to share in these values." Members welcome the longer-term aim of establishing a neighbourhood-wide free trade area and advocate that visa facilitation and readmission agreements be negotiated with all ENP countries. The report emphasises the importance of people-to-people contacts, for instance, by involving ENP countries in the Erasmus Mundus student exchange programme and by encouraging the Commission to set up city and region-twinning programmes.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Free movement of persons
MEPs underline that free movement is a fundamental EU principle and call for support for Roma
2007-11-16 - 12:46
In adopting a joint resolution on the right of EU citizens and their families to move and reside freely within the territory of the EU, MEPs reaffirm the value of the free movement of persons as a fundamental principle of the European Union,. MEPs advocate the establishment of a network of organisations dealing with the social inclusion of Roma as well as the promotion of awareness-raising instruments regarding the rights and duties of the Roma community. MEPs welcome the Romanian Prime Minister's visit to Italy and the joint statement issued by Mr Romano Prodi and Mr Cặlin Tặriceanu. The House supports the appeal by the two Prime Ministers for the Union to commit itself to the social integration of the most underprivileged populations and to cooperation among the Member States as regards management of their population movements, making use of the development and social aid programmes provided for under the Structural Funds; The House reaffirms the objective of making the Union and its communities an area in which each inhabitant is guaranteed a high level of security, freedom and justice. The European Parliament underlines the value of the free movement of persons as a fundamental principle of the European Union, a constituent part of European citizenship, and a key element of the internal market. MEPs call on the Member States to cease all hesitation and move more rapidly to strengthen the means available for Europe-wide police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters so as to make for effective action to fight the transnational phenomena of organised crime and trafficking in human beings while providing a uniform framework of procedural safeguards. Rejcet principle of collective responsibility Parliament rejects the principle of collective responsibility and emphatically reaffirms the need to combat every form of racism and xenophobia and all forms of discrimination and stigmatisation based on nationality and ethnic origin, as stated in the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights. Support for Roma The House considers that protection of the rights of Roma, and the integration of that minority, pose a challenge to the Union as a whole and calls on the Commission to act without delay by pursuing an overall strategy for social inclusion of Roma and, not least, making use of the Integration Fund and the Structural Funds to support national, regional, and local authorities in their efforts to bring about the social inclusion of Roma. MEPs also advocate the establishment of a network of organisations dealing with the social inclusion of Roma as well as the promotion of awareness-raising instruments regarding the rights and duties of the Roma community, including exchange of best practices. Parliament considers that intensive and structured cooperation with the Council of Europe to be extremely important for this purpose. The request by Joseph Daul (EPP-ED, FR) to withdraw from the resolution a critical paragraph towards Commissioner Frattini was followed by a heated debate among the political groups, who finally adopted by 290 votes in favour 220 against and 21 abstentions, the paragraph stating that Parliament "believes that the recent statements to the Italian press by Mr Franco Frattini, a Commission Vice-President, in connection with the serious incidents in Rome were contrary to the spirit and the letter of Directive 2004/38/EC, a directive with which he is called upon to comply in full."
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Schengen
MEPs congratulate nine new Member States for joining the Schengen area
2007-11-16 - 12:46
In adopting a joint resolution on the enlargement of the Schengen area of free movement to the Czech Republic, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Hungary, Malta, Poland, Slovenia and Slovakia, MEPs stress the symbolic and historic importance of the event with a view to ending the former divisions in Europe. MEPs congratulate them on the tremendous efforts in order to be ready and to respect all the Schengen requirements in such a short period of time. MEPs say that the creation of the Schengen area is one of the greatest EU achievements, characterised by the removal of all controls at the common borders between all the participant states and the introduction of freedom of movement within EU territory. The resolution was adopted with 459 votes in favour, 13 against and 42 abstentions. The House reminds the new Member States of the need to maintain a high level of security and to strictly and efficiently meet the Schengen area's requirements at all times. The House also stresses the urgent need to speed up preparations for the start-up of a fully functioning SIS II. The European Parliament reminds the Member States that they should put in place as soon as possible all the necessary measures to remedy the shortcomings that still exist, but notes that, although some issues are still outstanding and require to be followed up in the future, they do not constitute an obstacle to applying the full Schengen acquis to the new Member States concerned. MEPs recall the need to proceed to a global evaluation, on the next two years, regarding the way that the system has been implemented and is working in every country participating in the Schengen area. Background Five Member States - France, Germany, Belgium, Luxembourg and the Netherlands - signed the Schengen Agreement on 14 June 1985 and the Schengen Convention on 19 June 1990 (the latter came into force in 1995). They agreed, on an intergovernmental basis, to gradually remove all the controls at their common borders and to introduce freedom of movement inside the territory, normally designated as the Schengen area. In parallel to the removal of controls at the internal borders, some compensatory measures were implemented, including: the establishment of efficient controls at the external borders, the reinforcement of the cooperation between those Member States' administrative, customs, police and judicial authorities, a common visa policy, and the creation of the Schengen Information System (SIS). The Schengen acquis (Agreement/Convention/implementing rules and related agreements), was integrated into the institutional and legal framework of the European Union in 1999, with the Treaty of Amsterdam. The initial membership of five Member States has been extended over time to all 15 old Member States: Italy joined in 1990, Spain and Portugal in 1991, Greece in 1992, Austria in 1995, and Finland, Sweden and Denmark (under a special arrangement) in 1996. Ireland and the United Kingdom are only partial participants, since their border controls have been maintained. Two non-Community countries - Iceland and Norway - also joined in 1996, but they have a limited role in terms of decision-taking. The 10 new Member States (the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Latvia, Malta, Poland, Lithuania, Slovenia, Slovakia and Cyprus) adopted the Schengen acquis on joining the EU in 2004. We are facing the biggest enlargement in Schengen's history, with the declaration by 9 of them (excluding Cyprus) of readiness to join.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External/international trade
Building stronger ties with Ukraine
2007-11-16 - 12:46
The European Parliament adopted own-initiative report by Zbigniew Zaleski (EPP-ED, PL) on trade and economic relations with Ukraine. The report reviews the areas on which MEPs believe work needs to be done, including Ukraine's accession to the WTO, the creation of a free trade area with the EU (and Ukraine's long-term prospects for integration with the EU), energy supplies and relations with Russia. MEPs want Ukraine to speed up its accession to the WTO by removing all residual legislative and technical obstacles. They look forward to the creation of an EU/Ukraine Free Trade Area. However, Ukraine must introduce EU-compatible customs legislation and improve the functioning of its customs service. The draft report makes various proposals on Ukraine's industrial policy: export diversification, improved public services, market liberalisation, creation of an effective tax system, updating of money-laundering and tax evasion regulations, elimination of distortions of competition and illegal export subsidies. Ukraine is urged to align its intellectual property legislation and law enforcement with the acquis communautaire, WTO rules and other international standards, and also to combat counterfeiting and piracy effectively. Ukraine should place more emphasis on the knowledge economy and increase the proportion of its GDP allocated to scientific research. At the same time, the EU should support education and research in Ukraine. Farming and the rural population need financial and infrastructure support, easier access to loans for small producers and a weighting system for aid that favours small and young entrepreneurs. Regulatory cooperation between the EU and Ukraine on plant health is needed. And Ukraine should develop environmental programmes (key issues include the drinking water distribution network and action to prevent the deterioration of the Black Sea). The report calls on Ukraine to develop its economic relations with the Russian Federation in a way which would not hamper closer integration into the Community's Single Market. A three-way dialogue between Ukraine, Russia and the EU should be promoted by the Commission, to foster a climate of security and peace in the region. On the crucial issue of energy supplies, the report calls for full implementation of the EU-Ukraine Memorandum of Understanding on energy cooperation and stresses the need for a safe, transparent and reliable system of energy transit between Ukraine and the EU. Lastly, the House welcomes the opening of negotiations between Ukraine and EU with a view to concluding a new Partnership and Cooperation Agreement. But MEPs are concerned about the lack of a strategic vision for development and stabilisation in Eastern Europe and they stress the need for Ukraine's integration to become a real political priority on the EU agenda. They also call on the Council to explain how will apply the Human Rights and Democracy Clause to the negotiations for a new agreement with Ukraine.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Fisheries
Bluefin tuna recovery plan: EP opposes derogations and favours compensation
2007-11-16 - 12:46
Bluefin tuna fishermen must get financial compensation during closed seasons and derogations relating to specific fishing areas and minimum size are not justified, since the Mediterranean and the Atlantic are populated by a single tuna stock, says the European Parliament in a consultative report on a multi-annual recovery plan for bluefin tuna in the Eastern Atlantic and Mediterranean. To address concern about the critical state of bluefin tuna stocks due to over-fishing, the recovery plan provides for a steady reduction in the catch quota (by 20% between 2006 and 2010), and an increase in minimum size from 10 to 30 kilogrammes, with derogations for fishing in the Gulf of Biscay and for catches in the Adriatic intended for fish farms. A derogation is already in operation for the Gulf of Biscay (6.4 kilogrammes instead of 10). Furthermore, the fishing period for long-line vessels is to be restricted from 1 June to the end of each year and for purse seine vessels from 1 July to 31 December. Control measures are to be stepped up to combat illegal fishing. "The bluefin tuna recovery plan has been criticised in a variety of ways, which illustrates the fact that scientific experts and fishermen hold differing views regarding the need for stocks to be protected", said rapporteur Iles Braghetto (EPP-DE, IT). Derogations are "unacceptable" According to the report, the derogations relating to fishing areas conflict with the views held by all scientific experts and with the opinion expressed by the majority of the Member States. They are not justified from the biological point of view, would severely distort competition and would lead to more intensive fishing in the areas concerned, including by vessels which do not traditionally operate there, MEPs said. The European Parliament is also opposes minimum size derogations for bluefin tuna. "If the situation regarding the survival of fish stocks is really so critical, the derogations regarding both minimum size and - to a lesser extent - closed seasons are unacceptable. Derogations would not be justified from a biological point of view (…) and would also make controls less effective", said Mr Braghetto. Closed season compensation for fishermen? The rapporteur questioned whether the socio-economic impact of reducing fishing activity in order to preserve the economic balance of fishing operations had been properly assessed. In the proposal for a regulation there is no reference to the recovery plans provided for in Community law, even though such a reference is essential if fishermen are to receive financial compensation from the European Fisheries Fund (EFF). In one of the amendments adopted, MEPs add that a financial compensation from the EFF shall be paid to fishermen - both crews and shipowners - during the closed season. Member States to submit a fisheries plan As the biggest problem in bluefin tuna fishing is that the EU fleet capacity exceeds the available quotas, MEPs want Member States to submit to the Commission a fisheries plan, indicating the number of vessels and traps for which fishing licences are to be requested, accompanied by information concerning the expected fishing effort. Given failures by Member States to respect the reporting requirements in 2007 and the subsequent over-runs of certain national allocations, the House proposes that if a Member State fails to provide catch data, then the national fishery should be closed.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Social policy
MEPs say poverty is still too widespread
2007-11-16 - 12:46
In an own-initiative report on Social Reality Stocktaking, the European Parliament calls on the Commission and Member States to pursue "an ambitious objective of reducing poverty, especially among working people, in Europe". The report by Elizabeth Lynne (ALDE, UK) welcomes the Commission's forthcoming proposal to make 2010 the European Year of Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion. However, it also highlights the scale of the effort needed. Over 50 million people or around 16% of the EU's workforce are disabled and their rate of unemployment is twice as high as that of the able bodied. Overall, 78 million European citizens still live in poverty, 8% of people in the EU suffer from in-work poverty and the gap between rich and poor in many Member States is increasing. The report was adopted with 345 votes in favour, 14 against and 2 abstentions. Presenting her report in Strasbourg, Liz Lynne (ALDE, West Midlands, Liberal Democrat, UK) said: "We face a huge challenge in Europe. This challenge is one of fairness. It is about lost potential, the inability to live a life free from the charity of others, a life free from discrimination, poverty and social exclusion. Our objective is clear: we want to expand opportunities so that nobody, whatever their background or circumstance, is left behind. The vision of Europe must be freedom and opportunity for all, increasing opportunities and incentives to work, whilst strengthening the safety-net for those who are unable to work." A decent minimum wage at Member State level The draft report urges Commission and Council to examine "how Europe can provide a social level playing field to eradicate unfair competition in the European internal market". It stresses that "to make work financially viable", a "decent living minimum wage" should be set at Member State level - be it by national law or in cooperation with the social partners. MEPs complain that "in many Member States the minimum wage is set very low or at below subsistence level". Member States should also end asylum seekers' dependence on benefits by allowing them to work, say MEPs. Prevent exploitation of vulnerable workers The House welcomes the Commission's draft directive on "Sanctions against employers of illegally staying third-country nationals". At the same time MEPs call on Member States to better implement existing legislation to prevent the exploitation of vulnerable workers by gangmasters. They should also sign and ratify, if they have not yet done so, the UN Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and their Families. Combat child poverty Given the number of children abandoned, on the streets or in institutions, Member States should provide adequate resources for combating child poverty, says the report. Children and their families should be supported, for example with affordable childcare and housing. Member States are urged to ensure that their citizens are literate and have "the skills and knowledge to gain useful employment". Pupils should be prevented from dropping out of school early. MEPs also note that people from less wealthy backgrounds are "seriously underrepresented" in higher education. Rehabilitation for prisoners Extreme poverty can lead to crime, points out the report. Adequate rehabilitation for prisoners is crucial to prevent them slipping further into social exclusion and unemployment. Lastly, the fact that for many people the only access to treatment for alcohol and drug abuse is through the prison system is regarded by MEPs as "unacceptable".
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Human rights
Human rights: religious persecution, Uzbekistan, Somalia
2007-11-16 - 12:46
In its three human rights resolutions adopted at the end of this week's session, Parliament highlights the persecution of religious believers, particularly Christians, in certain countries; endorses the Council's recent decision to suspend visa restrictions on the Uzbekistan authorities; and calls for an immediate ceasefire in Somalia as well as action by the international community. Threats to Christian and other religious communities around the world In a resolution on threats to Christian and other religious communities, MEPs voice serious concern at the persecution of religious believers in numerous places around the world. Parliament is especially worried about the proliferation of episodes of intolerance and repression directed against Christian communities, particularly in the countries of Africa, Asia and the Middle East. It lists many cases in detail, in countries and territories such as Iraq, Pakistan, Gaza, Egypt, Turkey, the Philippines, Sudan, China and Vietnam. The resolution "strongly condemns all acts of violence against Christian communities, wherever they happen, and urges the governments concerned to bring to justice the perpetrators of these crimes". It also condemns "all kinds of discrimination and intolerance based on religion and belief and acts of violence against all religious communities" and urges the countries concerned "to ensure that their constitutional and legislative systems provide adequate and effective guarantees of freedom of religion or belief". In particular, Parliament wants the governments of these countries "to improve the security situation of the Christian communities" and stresses that "the public authorities have a duty to protect all religious communities, including Christian communities, from discrimination and repression". EU action The resolution calls on the Commission and the Council to raise the subject of the situation of the Christian communities in the framework of the political dialogue with the countries where they are threatened, and when drafting and implementing development cooperation and aid programmes with those countries. MEPs also urge the European Union and the Member States to earmark more funds for the activities of the UNHCR and for humanitarian aid managed by that organisation. Backing for EU engagement with Uzbekistan MEPs rejected a draft resolution by the PES, ALDE, Greens/EFA and EUL/NGL groups severely criticising the Uzbekistan government and also taking the Council of the EU to task for suspending some of the visa restrictions on the regime. Instead they approved, by 39 votes to 27, a resolution by the EPP-ED and UEN groups endorsing the Council's approach. The background is that the External Relations Council, at its meeting of 15 and 16 October 2007, renewed for a 12-month period the EU arms embargo on Uzbekistan and the visa restrictions for individuals. However, the Council lifted a visa ban on Uzbek officials for six months "to encourage the Uzbek authorities to take further positive steps to improve the human rights situation". In the resolution adopted today, Parliament first of all "confirms its serious concerns about the human rights situation in Uzbekistan". It "reiterates the importance of EU-Uzbekistan relations and acknowledges Uzbekistan's crucial role in the Central Asia region but stresses that those relations must be based on mutual respect for the principles of democracy, rule of law and human rights, as is clearly laid down in the EU-Uzbekistan Partnership and Cooperation Agreement". However, it goes on to say that "the policy of targeted sanctions has not produced positive results so far" and "considers it, therefore, justifiable to encourage the Uzbek authorities by lifting the visa ban on Uzbek officials….. for six months". More broadly, the resolution "welcomes the general progress that has been made in EU-Uzbekistan relations in the course of 2007" and "especially notes the willingness of the Uzbek authorities to engage in dialogue with the EU, by having held two rounds of experts´ talks on the Andijan events as well as a first round of the human rights dialogue between the EU and Uzbekistan". Lastly, the Uzbek authorities are urged to make further progress in the area of human rights and "to fully implement their international obligations to fundamental freedom, freedom of press and media as well as rule of law". Somalia: MEPs call for immediate ceasefire and action by international community In the light of the worsening situation in Somalia, Parliament adopted a resolution urging an immediate ceasefire as well as enforcement of the longstanding UN arms embargo on the country. The African Union's member states are pressed to provide peacekeeping troops, while the international community is urged to provide financial and logistical support for those troops. At least 80 people have been killed in the recent fighting between the Union of Islamic Courts and allied Ethiopian and Transitional Federal Government (TFG) troops and at least 100,000 people have been displaced. The total number of displaced persons in Somalia is now over 850,000. About 38,000 children under the age of five among the rural population are estimated to be acutely malnourished and 10,000 are believed to be at risk of death. Calls for immediate cessation of hostilities and of all foreign military intervention Against this background, Parliament's resolution "strongly condemns the serious violations of human rights committed by all parties to the conflict", calls for "the immediate cessation of hostilities", demands that "all warring factions refrain from indiscriminate attacks on civilians" and calls for "an independent panel to investigate war crimes and human rights violations". Parliament also warns that there is a clear risk of the Somalia conflict growing into a regional war affecting the entire Horn of Africa. It calls on the international community "to step up and sustain diplomatic efforts to end the violence" and propose a mechanism to negotiate and monitor an immediate ceasefire. It also calls for "the cessation of all foreign military intervention in Somalia". African states urged to provide full contingent of AU peacekeeping troops While welcoming the efforts by the African Union to assemble a peacekeeping force, MEPs deplore the fact that so far only 1,600 soldiers out of the 8,000 promised have actually been deployed. The AU is asked to call on its member states to honour their commitments, while the EU is urged to provide political, financial and logistical support. More generally, the international community, particularly the EU, is asked "to increase the provision of humanitarian assistance to internally displaced persons and people in need". Enforce the UN arms embargo MEPs also urge "strict and renewed application and monitoring of the arms embargo against Somalia imposed by the UN in 1992, for which scant respect is paid" and call for "the violators of the Somalia arms embargo to start being held accountable". In addition, they highlight the urgent need for journalists to be protected and condemn the Somali Government's systematic harassment of journalists. Lastly, says Parliament, the EU-Africa Summit in Lisbon on 8 and 9 December 2007 should "give urgent consideration to the grave situation prevailing in Somalia".
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Draft agenda for the Brussels plenary session 28 - 29 November 2007 and adopted texts from Strasbourg plenary 12-15 November 2007
2007-11-16 - 12:46
Draft agenda for the Brussels plenary session 28 - 29 November 2007. (See link below) Adopted texts from Strasbourg plenary 12-15 November 2007. (See link below) Brussels plenary session Wednesday, 28 November 2007 - Thursday, 29 November 2007 Adopted texts from Strasbourg plenary 12-15 November 2007
EN
1
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?reference=2007-11&language=EN
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-FULL DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-FULL DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071109BRI12778 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
