Latvian film director turned MEP Rihards Pīks on film and politics
Culture
2007-11-08 - 08:59
Singing, Directing, Debating; Rihards Pīks MEP
Rihards Pīks grew up in Latvia - then part of the Soviet Union. In his family the spirit of pre-war Independent Latvia was kept firmly alive. In the late 1980's he and others like him seized their freedom from Moscow in the "Singing Revolution". His career as a film producer, cameraman and director took him into politics. This led him from the Latvian Cultural Ministry to the Foreign Ministry and then from 2004 to the European Parliament. We spoke to him about politics and film.
Q. When and how did you enter politics?
Since my childhood I have been living in an environment where memories about pre-war independent Latvia and hope of regaining the independence were kept alive. My uncle was active underground until the mid 1950s. When I was young my family listened secretly to radio channels like Voice of America and the BBC, to hear about the other side of the "Iron curtain". I was involved in the 1980s independence movement and the "singing revolution".
During the time of "Atmoda" ("The Third Awakening" - an independence movement) and "Tautas Fronte " ("The Popular Front of Latvia" - a 1980's independence organisation) I was actively involved in the "Singing revolution".
My professional field - cinema - was transformed by democratic principles and market forces. I founded the National Cinematography Centre and worked on intellectual property law. In 1996 I was invited to be a member of the Latvian government as the Minister of Culture. That is how my political work began.
Q. How does your experience of the Cinema help with your work as an MEP?
Similar abilities and knowledge are needed in politics and cinema - drama, psychology, acting and rhetoric. While preparing political speeches certain principles must be respected. You have to adapt yourself to the public and choose the right form and manner of communication. You also have to structure the speech, exactly the same way as when introducing the actors into the process of creating a film.
As I have also studied in Moscow, I have the additional advantage of understanding the Russian mentality and character. That helps me to build relationship with the MPs of the Russian Parliament at the level of Inter-parliamentary delegations.
I have applied my experience as film director and cameraman by doing a video aimed at representing my voter's interests better in the European Parliament. Last year I made a 20 minute documentary called “Europe in coffee-grounds” which I distributed in Latvia and among the information offices of the European Parliament in different countries. I received good feedback and the video research had helped other Europeans to better understand Latvians and their attitude to their country and Europe.
Q. How do you see the future of the European cinema, especially in States that joined in 2004?
Cinematography is an integral part of the culture of every country and must be supported and stimulated. Unfortunately, the European film industry loses to America. Since the first half of the last century American cinema has been made for broad, mass consumption, respecting the demand of the market.
The European tradition is to foster and support individual visions of the artists but European films often remain in a narrow circle of the interested and don’t reach wider public. There is already support for European cinema, including EU financing, but in my opinion the latter is not enough to help European cinema to a better position in the world.
Q. Do you think cinema could help to bring Europe closer to the citizens?
To bring nations together more co-production films should be made. European films should be made for a broader range of spectators not only for the representatives of one nation. I think it would be useful to establish a television channel for European documentaries and educational programs which would recount the history of EU countries, people, geography and habits in an interesting and professional way. Such a TV channel would certainly bring European nations closer and would help European citizens know each other better.
20071107STO12741 Rihards Pīks
EN
1
PHOTO
20071107PHT12753.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/members/public/geoSearch/view.do?country=LV&partNumber=1&language=EN&id=23848
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
