More time needed for deal on economic partnership agreements, says ACP-EU assembly in Kigali
Development and cooperation
2007-11-22 - 14:48
African, Caribbean and Pacific countries need more time to negotiate a deal on the ACP-EU economic partnership agreements says a “Kigali Declaration” adopted by the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly in Kigali, Rwanda, on 22 November. The World Trade Organisation waiver for existing trade agreements expires at the end of 2007.
The Kigali Declaration on Economic Partnership Agreements (EPAs), “urges the European Commission to acknowledge that more time is needed for ACP states to assess the implications of the agreements proposed, given that negotiations have only taken place in earnest for the past two years”. This declaration follows up the Cape Town Declaration of 2002, at the start of the EPA negotiating process.
The declaration notes that ACP states declare that they “have been put under pressure by the European Commission to sign an EPA and that this is against the spirit of the ACP-EU partnership.”
It also states that all agreements reached, whether interim arrangements or full EPAs, must ensure that no country is left worse off after the expiry of the negotiation deadline.
Commenting on the need for a new deal, ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly Co-President Glenys Kinnock (PES, UK) said: “Attempts to frame such agreements have proven difficult, largely because the Commission negotiators have approached the talks on EPAs as if they were conventional free trade negotiations focused on market opening, rather than as tools for development.
The ACP regions, on the other hand, have been concerned that the measures proposed by the Commission will not have their intended outcomes and could well jeopardise their development efforts, and hamper efforts to eradicate poverty.”
Resolution on the Democratic Republic of Congo In a resolution adopted on Thursday, the Assembly expresses grave concern for refugees and persons displaced internally by conflict and violence in the Kivu region, in the east of the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), which has obliged around 375,000 civilians to leave their homes since December 2006. It calls on the DRC and host countries to do everything in their power to facilitate the safe return of the Congolese refugees, in particular by cooperating with the UN World Food Programme and the UN High Commission for Refugees.
In this part of the DRC, on the Uganda/Rwanda border, the rebel general Laurent N’Kunda is fighting Congolese government forces.
The Assembly urges the DRC government to launch military operations to dismantle the ex-FAR/Interahamwe, which constitute a “genocidal military organisation”, and to bring the alleged perpetrators to justice.
Investment, healthcare and elections
The Assembly also adopted three reports on: - the Impact of foreign direct investment in the African, Caribbean and Pacific States - Astrid Lulling (EPP-ED, LU) et Timothy Harris (St Kitts & Nevis); - Access to healthcare and medicines, with a particular focus on neglected diseases - John Bowis (EPP-ED, UK) and Martin Magga (Solomon Islands; - Elections and electoral processes in ACP and EU countries - Miguel Angel Martinez Martinez (PES, ES) et Betty Amongi (Uganda) The ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly, which brings together 78 MEPs and 78 parliamentarians from the African, Caribbean and Pacific states, is meeting in Kigali (Rwanda) from 19 to 22 November.
The 15th session of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly will be held in Ljubljana (Slovenia) from 15 to 20 March 2008.
20071119IPR13360 Full details on the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly
EN
1
LINK
/intcoop/acp/10_01/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
