The Week Ahead 26 November to 2 December 2007
Institutions
2007-11-23 - 08:58
Plenary session and committee meetings – Brussels
Plenary session
Future of Europe. Spanish Prime Minister José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero will set out his views on the future of Europe at the plenary session and will also have a meeting with Parliament President Hans-Gert Pöttering (Wednesday).
Charter of Fundamental Rights. MEPs will debate and vote on a report giving Parliament's support to the Charter of Fundamental Rights, ahead of the proclamation of the charter in December (Wednesday).
Court of Auditors. The President of the Court of Auditors will present the court's annual report. The House will vote on the appointment of seven members of the court. (Thursday)
Other topics on the plenary agenda include a co-decision report (first reading) on the control of the acquisition and possession of weapons, the television broadcasting directive (formerly Television without Frontiers), railway interoperability and economic partnership agreements .
In committee
Fuel. The Environment Committee will vote on a co-decision report (first reading) on the review of the directive on fuel quality. With oil prices and global warming in the news, MEPs are calling for more ambitious targets (Tuesday).
A green EP. At the same committee, President Pöttering and Secretary-General Harald Rømer will sign on behalf of the EP the Eco-Management and Audit Scheme (EMAS) charter, which seeks to promote good environmental practice (Tuesday).
Human rights in China. The Subcommittee on Human Rights is holding a hearing on human rights in China in the run-up to the 2008 Olympics (Monday).
Terrorism. The Civil Liberties Committee votes on a resolution on the fight against terrorism (Thursday). The committee is also hosting a meeting on justice and home affairs issues with national parliaments (Monday and Tuesday).
Council of Europe. Also this week, President Pöttering and his counterpart from the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, René van der Linden, will sign a cooperation agreement between the EP and CoE (Wednesday, followed by a press point).
20071122IPR13469 For full details of all the week's events, see The Agenda
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20074800AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
