EU Charter of Fundamental Rights - proclamation at Parliament in Strasbourg 12 December 2007
Human rights
2007-11-29 - 17:33
On 12 December, Hans-Gert Pöttering, European Parliament President, José Manuel Barroso, Commission President, and José Sócrates, Portuguese Prime Minister and President-in-office of the Council, will sign the Charter of Fundamental Rights in a formal ceremony at the European Parliament in Strasbourg.
This event will both raise the public profile of the Charter and provide a legal basis for the article which refers to the Charter in the EU Reform Treaty (the Lisbon Treaty). The proclamation will take place the day before the EU Heads of State or Government meet in the Portuguese capital to sign the new institutional framework.
This background note provides information on the Charter, its development and the proclamation ceremony.
20071127BKG13869
Solemn proclamation sought by Parliament
The June 2007 European Council decided not to include the text of the EU Charter of fundamental rights in the new "Reform Treaty". In the Council's mandate for the Intergovernmental Conference (IGC), it was proposed that the Charter should simply be attached to the Treaty as a declaration.
Although this decision has no effect on the legal status given of the Charter, Parliament wanted a different approach, both for symbolic and formal reasons. At the initiative of the EP representatives in the IGC, the Charter will now be solemnly proclaimed at a plenary session of Parliament by the Presidents of the Parliament, the Council and the Commission on 12 December. It will then be published in the Official Journal.
Parliament's view is that the proclamation will reflect the Charter's specific nature and increase its public profile. Moreover, the Treaty article giving the Charter its legally binding character will now refer to this act and the proposed declaration will disappear from the new Treaties.
Legal status of the Charter
The issue of the Charter's legal status - i.e. whether to make it legally binding on the EU institutions, and on the Member States when they are implementing EU legislation, by incorporating it into the Treaties - was raised for the first time already at the Cologne European Council in 1999, when the Charter initiative was originally launched.
The Heads of State or Government, meeting in Brussels in June 2007, agreed in the mandate for the Intergovernmental Conference (IGC) to give the Charter legally binding force. If the new Treaty is ratified by all Member States, the Charter will finally have the same legal status as the Treaties.
The European Parliament has supported this approach ever since the Charter was signed for the first time during the European Council meeting in Nice in 2000.
In the resolution approved on 29 November 2007 by 534 votes in favour to 85 against and 21 abstentions, MEPs formally gave their approval to the legally binding status of the Charter, as confirmed in the Reform Treaty, as they did when giving their positive opinion on convening of the 2007 IGC.
Parliament has already approved the modifications made to the Charter since it was first signed in 2000, mainly concerning social provisions. The revised text was approved both in Parliament's assessment of the work of the Convention on the Future of Europe in September 2003, and when approving the Constitutional Treaty in January 2005.
Concerns about the exceptions on the Charter
A Protocol annexed to the Lisbon Treaty introduces specific measures for the United Kingdom and Poland establishing exceptions with regard to the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice and national courts for the protection of the rights recognised by the Charter.
In its resolution of 29 November, the European Parliament urged Poland and the United Kingdom to make every effort to arrive, after all, at a consensus on the unrestricted applicability of the Charter.
Content of the Charter
The European Union Charter of Fundamental Rights sets out in a single text the whole range of civil, political, economic and social rights of European citizens and all persons resident in the EU, defined as the EU's common values. The purpose of this Charter is to make those principles more visible in order to strengthen the protection of fundamental rights in the light of changes in society, social progress and scientific developments.
These provisions apply to the EU institutions and bodies and to the Member States only when they are implementing Union law. The Charter does not establish any new power for the Union.
The European Court of Justice would be, if the Lisbon Treaty is ratified by all Member States, in charge of ensuring the respect of the Charter in all acts of the European Union.
These rights are divided into six sections:
1) Dignity: human dignity, the right to life, right to the integrity of the person, prohibition of torture and inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment, prohibition of slavery and forced labour;
2) Freedoms: right to liberty and security, respect for private and family life, protection of personal data, right to marry and right to found a family, freedom of thought, conscience and religion, freedom of expression and information, freedom of assembly and of association, freedom of the arts and sciences, right to education, freedom to choose an occupation and right to engage in work, freedom to conduct a business, right to property, right to asylum, protection in the event of removal, expulsion or extradition;
3) Equality: equality before the law, non-discrimination, cultural, religious and linguistic diversity, equality between men and women, the rights of the child, the rights of the elderly, integration of persons with disabilities;
4) Solidarity: workers' rights to information and consultation within the undertaking, right of collective bargaining and action, right of access to placement services, protection in the event of unjustified dismissal, fair and just working conditions, prohibition of child labour and protection of young people at work, family and professional life, social security and social assistance, health care, access to services of general interest, environmental protection, consumer protection;
5) Citizens' Rights: right to vote and to stand as a candidate at elections to the European Parliament, right to vote and to stand as a candidate at municipal elections, right to good administration, right of access to documents, Ombudsman, right to petition, freedom movement and of residence, diplomatic and consular protection;
6) Justice : right to an effective remedy and to a fair trial, presumption of innocence and right of defence, principles of legality and proportionality of criminal offences and penalties, right not to be tried or punished twice in criminal proceedings for the same criminal offence
These rights are based on the fundamental rights and freedoms already recognised by the European Convention on Human Rights, the constitutional traditions of the EU Member States, the Council of Europe's Social Charter, the Community Charter of Fundamental Social Rights of Workers and other international conventions to which the European Union or its Member States are parties.
Historical background and links
This Charter is the end-result of an unprecedented process for the European Union. It can be summarised as follows:
the Cologne European Council (3-4 June 1999) entrusted the task of drafting the Charter to an ad hoc Convention,
the Convention held its constituent meeting in December 1999 and adopted the draft on 2 October 2000,
the Biarritz European Council (13-14 October 2000) unanimously approved the draft and forwarded it to the European Parliament and the Commission,
the European Parliament gave its agreement on 14 November 2000 and the Commission on 6 December 2000,
the Presidents of the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission signed and proclaimed the Charter on behalf of their institutions on 7 December 2000 in Nice,
the European Council in Laeken (December 2001) convened the Convention on the Future of Europe, which also discussed the Charter,
the Convention forwarded the draft Constitution to the Thessaloniki European Council on 20 June 2003; this draft incorporated the Charter as the second part of the Constitutional Treaty. This Treaty, however, was not ratified, following negative votes in referendums in France and the Netherlands,
the Brussels June 2007 European Council agreed, in the mandate for the Intergovernmental Conference on the Future of Europe, to give the Charter a legally binding status,
The 2007 IGC concluded its works in October. New article 6 of the draft Reform Treaty reads as follows:
"The Union recognises the rights, freedoms and principles set out in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union of 7 December 2000, as adopted at Strasbourg on12 December 2007, which shall have the same legal value as the Treaties". Read the full text of the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights Interview with Jo Leinen (PES, DE) rapporteur and chair of the Constitutional Affairs Committee Press release on EP resolution of 29 November, approving proclamation of Charter
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0573 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071126STO13630 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071128IPR14000 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
