Conciliation: no agreement on civil aviation security
Transport
2007-11-21 - 14:11
Parliament remains at odds with Council on civil aviation security: last night the delegations of EP and Council to the Conciliation Committee failed to reach an agreement on a regulation laying down basic principles for measures to safeguard civil aviation against acts of unlawful interference.
Among the key points of difference which remain are the arrangement for financing security measures, implementation measures and comitology, the deployment of 'sky marshals' as well as the screening of passengers ('one-stop security').
Early today, EP rapporteur Paolo Costa (ALDE, IT) and co-negotiators Georg Jarzembowski (EPP-ED, DE) and Said El Khadraoui (PES, BE) expressed dismay at Council's lack of flexibility and announced that the EP delegations will now expect initiatives from the Portuguese presidency to try to solve the dispute. Mr Costa said: "Parliament will continue to defend the interests of millions of air passengers, who should not pay the bill for the extra costs of security measures".
Financing security measures
The EP delegation unanimously agreed to revert to the position it had adopted at second reading on the financing of security measures. Parliament had called on the Member States to contribute to the cost of the basic security measures and to pay all of the costs of any stricter measures they choose to impose. The cost of security measures should also clearly be indicated on air tickets, MEPs say.
Sky marshals
Parliament expects the Council to come forward with a new proposal on the armed in-flight security officers known as 'sky marshals'. At second reading, the EP had called for stricter rules governing the deployment of sky marshals, and their selection and training in accordance with national laws.
One-stop security
On one-stop security, the two sides continue to disagree. Parliament wishes to make life easier for passengers by avoiding re-screening of passengers and their luggage if they arrive on flights from non-EU countries with security standards equivalent to those in the EU.
Comitology
Finally, no agreement could be found on implementing measures and comitology. The proposed act to replace Regulation 2320/2002/EC is framework legislation which means that detailed implementing measures will be adopted under comitology procedures. MEPs are keen to ensure that their rights under the new regulatory procedure with scrutiny (which gives Parliament the power to veto individual implementing measures) are fully respected.
Next steps
This conciliation procedure was formally opened last night. Parliament and Council have eight weeks, until 16 January 2008, to reach an agreement. Negotiations are expected to resume in December 2007.
Procedure: Conciliation
2007-11-20
EP Delegation to the Conciliation Committee
In the chair: EP Vice-President Rodi Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou (EPP-ED, GR)
20071121IPR13443
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
