MEPs weigh the role of innovation in climate change
Environment
2007-11-20 - 12:54
If it is serious about achieving the sort of climate change objectives it has set out for itself at this spring's European Council, the EU must hammer out concrete policy options and binding targets -- not least concerning renewable energies -- as soon as possible. This was the key message of Monday's hearing on "Innovation and Technology for Climate Protection", attended by experts, MEPs and industry representatives.
"Problems of scientific and technological development are paramount", noted Philippe Busquin (PES, BE) at the outset of the meeting, organised by the EP's Temporary Committee on Climate Change. The EU, he then added -- addressing Industry Commissioner Günter Verheugen -- "needs to think about how to give industry incentives to invest in new forms of energy".
The dichotomy between economy and ecology, said Mr. Verheugen, “is not insurmountable.” That said, “climate protection will have to be achieved with industry, not against industry”. Europe’s competitiveness, he argued, “will rely on our innovation and new technologies.” Industry and policymakers must work in sync, therefore, building up “a critical mass for environmentally-friendly products and services”. The EU, he concluded, must assume “the role of front-runner and pioneer”, ensuring that “the European product of the future… is the product that is the safest, the most environmentally-friendly, and the most energy-efficient”.
Solar energy
Man-made carbon emissions, said former Nobel Prize winner Carlo Rubbia (Physics, 1984), affect the climate of the earth "for hundreds of thousands of years". And yet, he noted, this idea "has not reached general public awareness". Reluctant to endorse technologies such as carbon capture and storage (CCS) -- where he saw "several drawbacks" -- Mr. Rubbia enthusiastically made the case for what he called "a new solar option". A desert area of only about 40,000 sq. km (0.1% of all desert land on earth), he noted, receives the same amount of solar energy as the entire planet's annual energy consumption. High efficiency conversion of concentrated solar power (CSP) into heat, he argued, would allow us to achieve "the great transformation from fossil fuels to solar". The solution, he claimed, "is there and ready to be used".
Several MEPs prodded Mr. Rubbia on the issue. “Is there a political will to make sufficient investments in solar energy?” asked Nikolaos Vakalis (EPP-ED, GR). If solar energy is technically possible, added Riitta Myller (PES, FI), then "what are the possible obstacles for this not happening?” Why not “a solar Mediterranean union rather than a nuclear Mediterranean union?” asked Claude Turmes (Greens/EFA, LU), referring to what he termed a “one nuclear reactor per visit of president Sarkozy” item in the EU-Africa summit agenda.
Mr. Rubbia -- in the way of an explanation -- cited the example of Spain, where solar energy “has benefited from a legal framework”. Of course, he explained, solar energy would only be viable in the case of Mediterranean countries, whose regions can benefit from direct sunlight to generate energy. “The Sahara, however, is not very far away,” he noted, highlighting the possibility of transporting “up to 30 % of the energy" generated by sunlight across the Mediterranean. If we use the sun and the Sahara, he added, we're also giving Africa a significant economic incentive.
Other renewable energy options
“I’m not convinced”, said Mr. Verheugen “that we should concentrate on a strategy based on one single energy source”. The Commission, he later added, “is not going to select a monolithic approach by favoring only one source of energy". Rather, it will take into account various factors, not least the availability of particular energy sources in different areas of Europe.
A host of renowned experts and industry representatives highlighted various ways in which technologies such as nuclear power, wind power, chemical industry innovation or carbon capture can benefit the climate protection agenda. Despite differences in opinion and approach, all seemed to agree with Graeme Sweeney, of Shell, who emphasized that what is indispensable is "a clear policy framework", which would allow industry "to focus on resources that can be delivered within the constraints of the future". Voluntary action, he added, "will not deliver the changes needed".
Referring to the recent publication of the latest IPCC report, Committee rapporteur Karl-Heinz Florenz (EPP-ED, DE) said that "more people than ever now realize that we have to act." Europe, added Mr. Busquin, has "considerable technical potential; [...] my only regret is that we don't have sufficient support for research and development".
Thematic session: "Innovation and Technology for Climate Protection"
2007-11-19 Temporary Committee on Climate Change Chair: Guido Sacconi PES IT
20071119IPR13327 Temporary Committee on Climate Change Thematic sessions
EN
1
LINK
/comparl/tempcom/clim/default_en.htm
EN
2
LINK
/comparl/tempcom/clim/sessions/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
