Opening of the Brussels plenary session
Institutions
2007-11-28 - 16:21
The Brussels plenary session was opened by Rodi KRATSA-TSAGAROPOULOU , Vice-President of Parliament, who announced a number of changes to the agenda that had already been agreed by the political groups:
On Wednesday :
- the joint debate on Community railways will be taken before the report by Ruth HIERONYMI (EPP-ED, DE) on television broadcasting;
- the vote on the report by Josu ORTUONDO LARREA (ALDE, ES) on the interoperability of the Community rail system will take place in December in Strasbourg (10-13 December) (the other two reports in the rail package will be put to the vote tomorrow 29 November).
On Thursday:
- the report by Jo LEINEN (PES, DE) on an amendment to the Financial Regulation (A6-0465/2007) has been adopted under Rule 43(1) and will therefore be included in Thursday's votes;
- the report by Johannes BLOKLAND (IND/DEM, NL) on export and import of dangerous chemicals is postponed to January, in order to reach a first-reading agreement;
- no motion for a resolution has been tabled on the cross-border collective management of copyright, so this item is removed from Thursday's votes.
A debate with the Commission takes place this afternoon (Wednesday) on Economic Partnership Agreements with ACP countries but the House voted to postpone to December the vote on a resolution on this subject, to enable the groups to seek a compromise.
The House also decided against voting on a motion for a resolution on the referendum in Venezuela to wind up the debate on this topic taking place tonight (Wednesday).
Welcome for parliamentary delegation from Afghanistan
The Vice-President welcomed a visiting delegation from the parliament of Afghanistan (the Wolesi Jirga) and expressed her condolences for the terrorist attack of 6 November 2007, where 6 Afghan MPs and around 100 other Afghans lost their lives. She added "The purpose of this visit is the beginning of a regular dialogue, which gives us the opportunity to achieve a better understanding of the political and social situation in Afghanistan and to discuss the assistance needed by your country".
Highlights of the Brussels plenary session include
Wednesday 28 November 2007
At 5.00 pm on Wednesday 28 November, Spanish Prime Minister, José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero , will set out his vision to MEPs on the future of Europe. The debate - which follows those already held with the prime ministers of Belgium, Ireland, Italy and the Netherlands - takes place just ahead of the signing of the new EU Treaty of Lisbon on 13 December.
The session starts at 3pm with a debate on the approval by the European Parliament of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union. The UK has a special protocol on its application which makes clear that the Charter will not extend the powers of any court –UK or European – to strike down UK legislation. On Wednesday 12 December in Strasbourg, the European Parliament will hold a ceremony on the proclamation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights.
MEPs will debate a second-reading agreement on new rules on TV advertising and product placement. New EU rules could be adopted before Christmas, as the Council common position on these rules was already negotiated with Parliament. If Parliament backs the common position, then the new Audiovisual Media Services Directive could be announced in the EU Official Journal before the end of the 2007. One innovation is the rules on "product placement", whereby a specific product is placed in TV-programmes for commercial purposes. This would be allowed only in a limited range of programmes, and then only under strict rules.
Freight trains should soon run from Antwerp to Athens or Lisbon to Liverpool without stopping at borders or changing locomotives or train crews. So say three co-decision reports, being put forward by the Transport Committee, on measures to revitalise the railways by removing obstacles to the free circulation of trains throughout the European network.
The House will also debate the control of the acquisition and possession of weapons. MEPs call for new measures to update a 1991 directive on firearms to bring it into line with a UN Protocol on firearms and to generally update the text. The new directive, which will amend the current text passed in 1991, will tackle the criminal use of firearms without inconveniencing legal users of weapons. The text proposed by the EP is a result of 18 months of work which has led to a first reading compromise with the Council.
Thursday 29 November 2007
Thursday starts with a debate on the Court of Auditors Annual report for 2006 with Mr Hubert Weber , President of the Court of Auditors. For the thirteenth consecutive year, the Court of Auditors has not delivered a positive "declaration of assurance" (DAS) for the EU budget. 2006 was marred by errors in the legality and the regularity of underlying transactions. The progress made remains insufficient to enable the Court to present a satisfactory report. MEPs will also vote on the approval of seven Members of the Court of Auditors including David Bostock from the UK.
The House also votes on a report from the Constitutional Affairs Committee on political parties at the European level and the rules regarding their funding. If approved, the new legislation would improve the financial stability of European parties, and thus facilitate long-term planning. It would also permit the creation of European political foundations. A total of €7 million is foreseen in the EU 2008 budget for the new political foundations. European political parties receive total EU funding of about €10 million per year.
MEPs will vote on a report from the Development Committee on agricultural development in Africa which expresses great regret at the prospect of the attendance of international outcast Robert Mugabe at the Lisbon EU-Africa Summit 8-9 December, whose presence will do much to discredit the good work of the Summit on democratic governance.
The House also votes on two resolutions after debates held in Strasbourg (12-15 November 2007) on the situation in Georgia and the proclamation of consensus on humanitarian aid.
20071128IPR13999 Briefing - Brussels Plenary - 28-29 November 2007 Agenda of Brussels Plenary - 28-29 November 2007 Audio, 22:48
EN
2
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?language=EN&reference=2007-11
EN
3
MULTIMEDIA
20071126MLT13778.asf
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071108BRI12759 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
