Climate change: MEPs call for more ambition at Bali
Environment
2007-12-11 - 14:42
The European Parliament delegation in Bali for the UN Climate Change conference has warned against any attempt to reduce ambition for the plans under discussion. Delegation chair Alejo Vidal-Quadras says the final text should make plain that commitments should be binding.
“We have seen some actors try to reduce expectations and ambitions for the Bali conference from the very outset”, said Mr Vidal-Quadras (EPP-ED, ES), who is also a Vice-President of the European Parliament. “It is our conviction, however, that a clear, ambitious commitment must be reached at Bali: not so much as an international treaty, but a clear plan for achieving a final agreement by 2009.” To that end, “what we need – more than simply a mandate – is a range of emission-reduction goals for all industrialised countries”.
Mr Vidal-Quadras continued: “A roadmap without details, landmarks, as well as a clear destination is no roadmap at all.” The final text, therefore, “should be clear about the aims that the Bali process wants to achieve and to make plain that commitments should be binding. Ministers should not walk out of this conference without anything short of this.”
More balance needed on demands made of developing world
Following a meeting with Achim Steiner (Executive Director of the UN Environment Program), Mr Vidal-Quadras also noted that “what has hampered the Bali negotiations from the beginning is the developing countries’ suspicion that behind the industrialised world’s climate change rhetoric lies a hidden protectionist agenda.” This, he said, should come as no surprise. “The industrialised world, at this point, must take a more balanced approach when it comes to making demands on developing countries; we must take the steps necessary to earn their trust.” Furthermore, “it is time to better acknowledge the steps taken by China, India and other emerging economies.” The developed and developing world, he added, “share a common responsibility in the campaign to fight climate change”.
Encouraging signals from across the Atlantic
After an earlier meeting with US Senator John Kerry, Mr Vidal-Quadras said that the former presidential candidate’s remarks were “extremely encouraging”. He added: “Although we cannot expect much movement on climate change from the current US administration, the attitude on climate change in America – among the public, but also in Congress and at state level – is evolving in a very positive direction. By next year, I hope, the US and Europe can reach a transatlantic consensus on binding climate change targets for the post-2012 framework.”
20071210IPR14689 Full details on the European Parliament's delegation in Bali in "The Agenda"
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20075000AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
