Design rapporteur Lehne pushing for open market on car parts
Industry
2007-12-12 - 19:11
Design rapporteur Klaus-Heiner Lehne MEP
You’re parking your car at the supermarket and accidentally reverse into a wall. If you take it to a garage of the same make as your car you may discover car ownership can be costly. However, the light you smashed could possibly be bought cheaper if made by another company. Car-makers earn 30% of their income from selling car parts. A plan to liberalise design laws could lead to lower prices. We asked Parliament’s rapporteur Klaus-Heiner Lehne (EPP-ED) to explain the issues.
Q. How will customers benefit from this new legislation?
Customers will have more choice. When purchasing spare car parts they will no longer be dependent on car companies who own the design protection rights. Let's take a bumper as an example - today it is protected, in the future customers will be able to buy it from any trader that produces and distributes spare car parts. The choice will be much bigger.
Q. Will spare car parts be cheaper?
There is such an assumption. However we have no empirical data that proves prices will be lower. There are also other important factors. For example in the UK where the spare car parts market is liberalised spare car parts are considerably more expensive than in Germany, which does not have a liberalised market for car parts.
Q. Which parts of the car will be affected by the new legislation?
This will not affect all the invisible parts, i.e. all parts that are under the engine bonnet (electric generator, water pump). In fact they were never protected. These parts could always be duplicated by other companies.
Until now, in about a third of EU countries the visible parts are not protected if design protection was requested. For example the BMW "kidney" logo or the mudguard of the Renault "Twingo" as well as other parts with special designs. However, in two thirds of EU States, these visible parts are protected.
Q. Could new legislation influence the quality and safety of spare car parts?
In theory it could. However, we considered this problem with special attention. The EP commissioned an impact assessment. This issue was scientifically examined. The results showed that this should not be the case, because rules about type proof acceptance were introduced recently. This means that before being put on the market each spare part will have to be proved to be safe. So we should not assume that the new legislation will lead to a decline in safety.
Q. About 30% of the car industry's income is from spare parts. Will this legislation impact heavily on the industry in Europe and lead to job losses?
This is also an issue. It could happen although it doesn't have to. Firstly, the automobile industry already allows many spare parts to be produced externally. So, the car companies don't produce them alone. Secondly, new jobs will be created elsewhere.
And finally the car industry will still have a number of possibilities to protect car parts. One of them is patent protection. For example innovative and intelligent bonnets or maybe exterior mirrors that may be developed in the future could be protected by patents or through trademark rights. One could simply put a trademark emblem on particular car parts. So the car industry will have many ways to come to terms with the cessation of design protection.
How things stand in Europe at present
Fifteen Member States have protected markets: Austria, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Portugal, Sweden, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Estonia, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Slovakia and Slovenia. A further 9 (Belgium, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Spain, UK, Hungary, Latvia) have liberalised markets. Greece has a partially opened market.
MEPs will hold a first reading vote on the proposals regarding the legal protection of designs on Wednesday.
20071212STO14960 Procedure file Press service: Ending design protection for car parts: 6 December 07 Klaus-Heiner Lehne MEP Intellectual property: MEPs back criminal sanctions against counterfeiters: 4 May 2007 Report on the proposal of Directive on the legal protection of designs
EN
1
PHOTO
20071211PHT14948.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5201742
EN
4
LINK
/members/public/yourMep/view.do?name=Lehne&partNumber=1&language=EN&id=2224
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071129BRI14111 ITEM-018-EN NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070504STO06277 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A6-2007-0453 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
