Citizens' Forum in Exeter: EurOpinions
Future of Europe/European integration
2007-12-12 - 19:11
Citizens' forum in Exeter
Some 150 young people took part in EurOpinions, a Citizens Forum held on 7 December in Exeter, in the centre of the English South-West electoral area. Three South West MEPs took part, Graham Watson, Chairman of the Group of Liberals and Democrats, Neil Parish, chairman of Parliament's Agriculture Committee and Roger Knapman, former chairman of UKIP.
The participants, aged between 17 and 25, included a group of trainee teachers of Citizenship who animated some of the morning working groups, a squad of Royal Marines in training, undergraduates from Bristol University and lots of school-leavers. Many of these will be first-time voters in the EP elections of 2009.
After a Euro-rap delivered by the famous Kenneth During and a keynote speech, the group used an electronic voting system to test their knowledge of the EU, their attitudes to it and to stimulate participation and debate. This was followed by presentations on migration in Europe, and on Europe, the environment and sustainability. Following a sandwich lunch four working groups tackled migration, democracy in the EU, sovereignty, and the environment, in preparation for a debate with a panel of MEPs and young people.
The day ended with another session of electronic voting to test whether their attitudes and level of knowledge had changed during the day.
The group's main recommendations were for the EU to get closer to European citizens, with more information about policies; to do more about protecting the environment; and to maintain peace and security. Others were for MEPs to provide information to young people in more accessible form such as podcasts; that there should be a quicker route into parliament so that young people can get involved and get significant responsibility sooner; more opportunity for exchange programmes - not just for high achieving learners; and more events for young people.
And what did they enjoy about the day?
Listening to everyone’s view and what everyone had to say. It made me learn a lot and gained my attention (Training provider)
I really enjoyed the interactive quiz. (Learner, school)
Having a say and not worrying (Learner school)
I now know information is key to my studies. (Learner, school)
The ability to scrutinize real MEPs ( Learner, school)
People treated me like an adult capable of having my own informed opinion. (Learner, school)
The "who’s the boss" workshop (Royal Marine)
Brilliant use of technology in the voting. (Beginner teacher)
The prize for the best suggestion, voted by the participants, was awarded to Rachael Levitan of Ashton Sixth Form College, for her idea that the EU should get closer to European citizens by providing more information about policies. The runners-up were Tom Penny from the University of Exeter and Will Dutton of Weston College.
This was the second such event organised for the UK Office by the Learning and Skills Network.
20071212STO15130 European Parliament Office in London Citizens' Forum in Norwich Saturday 24 November
EN
1
PHOTO
20071211PHT14946.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.europarl.org.uk/index.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071127STO13921 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
