Railway interoperability: non-stop freight trains from Lisbon to Liverpool
Transport
2007-12-11 - 12:22
Freight trains should soon run from Antwerp to Bratislava or Lisbon to Liverpool without stopping at borders or changing locomotives or train crews. So say three co-decision reports, debated by the House at its Brussels session on 28 November, on measures to revitalise the railways by removing obstacles to the free circulation of trains throughout the European network. Two were adopted in Brussels on 29 November and one on interoperability today - 11 December in Strasbourg.
MEPs adopted by a large majority a legislative report by Josu Ortuondo Larrea (ALDE, ES) on interoperability of the European railways. MEPs adopted one compromise amendment, tabled by the ALDE, EPP-ED, PES, UEN, Greens/EFA, GUE/NGL and IND/DEM. In this amendment, MEPs set out the lines for issues such as TSIs (Technical Specifications for Interoperability), the principle of mutual recognition of railway stock, automatic authorisation procedures and national and European vehicle registers". The two other legislative reports were voted on in Brussels on 29 November.
MEPs stress that much needs to be done to improve the interoperability of the European railways. National procedures for the approval of locomotives are seen as the main barrier to creating an EU-wide railway system. So mutual acceptance of both existing and new railway stock specifications needs to be facilitated, says rapporteur Mr Ortuondo Larrea . His report deals with a Commission proposal which merges and recasts the two previous directives regarding interoperability of the railway system, covering both the conventional and high speed rail.
TSIs: Technical Specifications for Interoperability
In addition to the Commission proposals, the Transport Committee adopted a range of technical compromise amendments that restructure a proposal for authorising the placing in service of railway vehicles that comply with Technical Specifications for Interoperability (TSIs) based on international standards and national rules.
Principle of mutual recognition
On 13 November, delegations of the Transport Committee and Council reached an agreement on outstanding points on this very technical issue, in order to achieve a first reading agreement in co-decision. The Committee proposed the principle of mutual recognition and the technical harmonisation of railway stock. It also sets clear time limits and criteria for granting authorisation, whilst for any refusal, a substantial safety risk had to be demonstrated by the national safety authority.
Towards an automatic authorisation procedure
The key point of agreement reached between the two institutions is the so-called automatic authorisation procedure. According to this procedure, railway vehicles will be automatically authorised to be placed in one Member State in the absence of a decision by a competent national safety authority within the prescribed time limits. The compromise proposal includes additional three months to the prescribed time limits. It takes into account the request of MEPs that there be a clear time limit for the authorisation of these vehicles. On the other hand, Council's concerns on safety implications with regard to the time needed by the national safety authorities were addressed as well.
Cross-community acceptance of rolling stock
This provision along with the others dealing with cross-community acceptance of rolling stock or vehicles streamlines the procedures of authorisations in the EU, thus promoting competitiveness of railways in Europe. Authorisations will now be accelerated while the administrative burden for the operators as well as for the Member States will be reduced. It has been agreed that the rules will be applied on the basis of two separate criteria: whether the vehicle is conform or not to the above-mentioned TSI or whether it concerns a first or an additional authorisation for placing the vehicle on EU tracks.
National and European vehicle registers
Other elements where Parliament and Council demonstrated a common approach are the provisions related to types of vehicles, the national and European vehicle registers and the register of infrastructure. Both parties have asked the European Railway Agency to prepare a reference document in which the classification of vehicles will be introduced according to three categories A, B and C.
The reports on Safety on the Community's railways and on the European Railway Agency
Reports adopted 29 November 2007
Directly linked with the interoperability reports are two reports drawn up by Transport Committee Chair Paolo Costa (ALDE, IT) on the revision of the Railway Safety Directive (RSD) and on the European Railway Agency (ERA). This issue is part of the so-called "cross-acceptance package" composed by these three reports. These reports were adopted by the 28-29 November plenary session in Brussels. (Link hereunder to adopted text).
Responsibility in the case of accidents
Ensuring the safety of railways in Europe but without hindering the cross-acceptance and the interoperability of railway rolling stock was the main concern of MEPs when debating in the November II plenary session the report on the revision of the Railway Safety Directive.
On the thorny issue of maintenance of vehicles, MEPs confirmed by a large majority in their vote that while a keeper for each vehicle should be designated of the maintenance, the responsibility for the operating safety of the keeper should be attributed to the railway undertaking, which was crucial for the responsibility in case of accidents. Members are in favour of a mandatory, instead of a voluntary as proposed by the Commission maintenance certification system for keepers of vehicles to be placed by 2010.
They also asked for a cost -benefit analysis before the drafting of Common safety targets. The advisory role of the ERA by delivering technical opinions for negative decisions taken by the authority on safety certificates was proposed as a first step towards a "court of appeal" in the rail sector.
The role of the European Railway Agency
Amending the regulation of the European Railway Agency was the second Costa report approved almost unanimously at the November II plenary session. Eight amendments were approved aiming at extending the Agency's competences and tasks on the cross-acceptance of railway vehicles.
A more European role is envisaged for the Agency, as the House voted that as from 2015 "the Agency shall be entrusted with the task of granting the authorisations" for railway vehicles conforming to TSIs, thus replacing Member States or the national railway agencies in their task of granting authorisations. MEPs also requested that the Agency shall draft a mandatory system of certification of vehicle keepers.
20071210IPR14641 Rail transport: interoperability of the Community rail system (recast and merge Dir. 96/48/EC, 2001/16/EC). Codification Text, as adopted by the EP on 11 December, will shortly be available here
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5424842
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
