Agreement on Marine Strategy Framework directive
Environment
2007-12-11 - 12:22
Member States have to take the necessary measures to achieve or maintain good environmental status in the marine environment by the year 2020, since the plenary confirmed the second reading agreement reached with the Council. Marine strategies will have to be developed in order to protect and preserve the marine environment, prevent its deterioration, restore marine ecosystems and prevent and reduce inputs in the marine environment.
The directive sets up for the first time an overall, integrated policy for the protection of the marine environment which is faced with a number of threats including loss or degradation of biodiversity and changes in its structure, loss of habitats, contamination by dangerous substances and nutrients and the impact of climate change. Up to the present date, measures to protect the marine environment have been developed in a sector by sector approach resulting in a patchwork of policies, legislation, programmes and actions plans at national, regional, EU and international level which do not deliver a high level of protection of the marine environment.
Binding directive/ stronger definition of good environmental status
Parliament's rapporteur, Marie-Noëlle LIENEMANN (PSE, FR), welcomes the fact that thanks to Parliament the objectives and the results of the directive are binding: Member States are obliged to take the necessary measures to achieve or maintain good environmental status in the marine environment by the year 2020 at the latest. She also welcomes that the definition of the good environmental status has been made stricter so that the reconstitution of this good status won't stay a pious hope.
European Marine Regions
European Marine Regions and Sub-Regions as management units for implementation will be established by the directive. For their marine waters within each Marine Region, Member States will be required to develop Marine Strategies on the basis of the completion of a number of steps. By 2015 at the latest a programme of measures designed to achieve or maintain good environmental status shall be developed and entered into operation by 2016 at the latest. Member States sharing a Marine Region or Sub-Region, shall cooperate to ensure that the different elements of the Marine Strategy are coherent and coordinated.
Pilot Projects
The directive foresees a provision on the possibility to speed up implementation in so-called pilot project regions to be identified by Member States concerned. Thanks to the European Parliament, stricter protective measures are possible in these regions, provided that this does not harm another Marine Region or Sub-Region.
Exceptions
In order to take into account of the particular contexts of certain Marine waters, the Directive foresees special situations and areas where the environmental targets or good environmental status cannot be achieved in every aspect through measures taken by that Member State. Furthermore, when there is no significant risk to the marine environment, or where the costs would be disproportionate, no specific action is required by the Member State. But following a request by the EP, the Member State has to prove that there is no further deterioration of the marine environment and has to avoid that the achievement of a good environmental status is permanently compromised.
Background
Two-thirds of the planet is covered by sea water. The marine environment is home to vital resources and its ecosystem provides essential services, for instance by regulating the climate, recycling nutrients, absorbing waste and producing oxygen. Marine ecosystems also account for 80% of life on our planet, making the marine environment crucial to our social and economic prosperity as well as our health.
Europe is surrounded by four seas and two oceans. From the (closed) Black Sea to the (open) northeast Atlantic Ocean, the waters are home to diverse ecosystems and cover several biogeographical regions. The European coastline is 100 000 km long and the Community's marine territory is larger than its land territory. At least 16% of European citizens live on the coast and for many of them the sea is their livelihood, while for others it is a place for relaxation and sport, and a source of food and of inspiration.
The deterioration of the marine environment has become evident all over the world and European waters are no exception. The threats are often cross-border and essentially come from overfishing, destructive fishing techniques, the disposal at sea of waste and pollutants from the coast, noise pollution caused by vessels, maritime transport infrastructures, degassing and underwater acoustic activity, but also from invasive species, the impact of climate change, gravel extraction, drilling for oil and coastal urbanisation. In the case of closed or partially closed seas, such as the Black Sea, the Baltic Sea and the Mediterranean, the risk of pollution is particularly high.
20071210IPR14643 Protection and conservation of the marine environment: framework for Community action, Marine Strategy Directive Text, as adopted by the EP on 11 December, will shortly be available here
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5283632
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
