Ending design protection for car parts
Industry
2007-12-12 - 14:09
The European Parliament adopted a legislative report backing a Commission proposal to end design protection for spare car parts and other machinery components. Members of the committee propose a five year transitional period before full liberalisation of the market takes effect.
In the first-reading report by Klaus-Heiner Lehne (EPP-ED, DE), the European Parliament agrees to open up to competition the secondary market in spare parts intended to restore the original appearance of complex products, e.g. cars and industrial machinery. If adopted, the directive will allow suppliers to produce motor vehicle components which are identical to the original parts without infringing design protection.
Most EU Member States currently have a design protection regime for spare parts. Under the draft directive, design protection would remain for spare parts purchased for decorative reasons, i.e. to change the original appearance.
Five year transition period agreed
MEPs amended the Commission's proposal, to grant Member States a five year transition period before implementing full liberalisation. This provision followed an agreement between all political groups to guarantee a smooth transition to the new regime.
Consumers to be informed
The House also proposes an amendment requiring consumers to be informed about the origin of the components by means of trade names or other appropriate forms. This would allow the public to make an informed choice between the available products.
Differences in national legislations
According to the Commission, Austria, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia and Sweden still have design protection for spare parts.
In Belgium, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Spain and the United Kingdom, spare parts for repair or replacement are allowed in the after-sales market. Greece protects designs for 5 years.
Speaking in the debate on Tuesday 11 December in Strasbourg: Malcolm Harbour (EPP-ED, UK, West Midlands, Conservative) said: "I think this is a historic day, as we are finally going to deal with this vexed question and this anomaly in the internal market. I think we should remember briefly how we come to be here.
In a number of countries, particularly in the United Kingdom, where this movement started, it was quite clear to the Monopolies Commission at the time that the car manufacturers were abusing that monopoly, and that is why it was removed. Now, that does not in any way undermine the importance of intellectual property protection. I just want to make that clear to a number of colleagues who have made that point.
The second point I want to make is to draw the attention of colleagues to an important measure that the Internal Market Committee introduced a few months ago – and I was privileged to be rapporteur – on motor vehicle type approval. For the first time, we now have a regime in which independently manufactured parts that are a critical part of the safety and environmental systems of vehicles have to be tested independently to the same standards as the vehicle manufacturer’s own parts."
20071211IPR14794 Industrial property: legal protection of designs (amend. Directive 98/71/EC) Debate - 11 December 2007 Text, as adopted by the EP on 12 December, will shortly be available here
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5201742
EN
2
LINK
/activities/expert/cre/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
3
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
