MEPs adopt resolution on Commission Work Programme for 2008
Institutions
2007-12-12 - 19:11
In adopting a resolution on the Commission’s Legislative and Work Programme for 2008, MEPs support the crucial importance accorded in the 2008 annual programme to growth and jobs, sustainable development, climate change, energy and migration, and the emphasis on better regulation, correct implementation and reinforcing the role of Europe as a world partner.
The House asks the Commission, nevertheless, to be more ambitious in its initiatives aimed at securing fundamental rights, freedom, justice and social inclusion.
MEPs welcome the Commission’s commitment to supporting the ratification of the Reform Treaty. The House believes that the objectives and reforms enshrined in this treaty are essential for the sound functioning and future development of the Union and will render the EU more democratic and bring it closer to the citizen.
Growth and jobs
MEPs call on the Commission to place particular emphasis on the timely and coherent implementation of the Services Directive, and in particular to implement effective Points of Single Contact to promote access to the Single Market. MEPs urge improvement in the effectiveness of rules on public procurement.
The European Parliament strongly welcomes the Commission’s announcement of a legislative proposal on the European Private Company and asks for this proposal to be presented early in 2008 in order to support SMEs. The House regrets that the Commission does not intend to proceed with the legislative proposal regarding the Fourteenth Company Law Directive (transfer of registered office), while stressing that this long-awaited directive would fill a gap in the internal market for companies.
MEPs underline the need for an adequate level of protection of intellectual property rights and supports the initiative towards an affordable, secure and efficient patent system which would give incentives for investment and research efforts. MEPs urge all three institutions to work together towards a political consensus on a real improvement of the patent system.
The House regrets that the Commission is not intending to propose an initiative regarding the creation of a Common Consolidated Corporate Tax Base, which would complete the achievements of an internal market with fair competition in leading to greater transparency by enabling companies to operate according to the same rules abroad as at home, and increasing cross-border trade, as well as competition, between Member States as far as attracting investment is concerned. MEPs at the same time underline Member States’ responsibility for setting corporate tax rates.
The House regards the revision of the ‘telecoms package’ as a key priority in the coming year. MEPs welcome the Commission’s commitment to the creation of a liberalised and integrated internal market in energy. The House considers also that a distinction should be made between the evolution of the electric energy market and the gas market.
A sustainable Europe
MEPs call for a comprehensive and overall legislative framework for the promotion and the use of renewable energy in the European Union, including binding targets, that will provide the business community with the long-term stability it needs in order to make rational investment decisions in the renewable energy sector so as to put the European Union on track towards a cleaner, more secure and more competitive energy future.
The House welcomes the Commission’s initiatives in the area of public health, in particular the envisaged legislative proposal on quality and safety of organ donation and transplantation, as well as the proposed Council recommendation on healthcare-associated infections included in the ‘Health package’, aimed at ensuring the highest possible levels of patient safety and quality of care. Parliament asks the Commission to contribute to the reinforcement of patient safety, patient information, patients’ rights and patient safeguarding and to tackle the determinants of rare diseases.
An integrated approach to immigration
The House believes that a common migration, visa and asylum policy and effective economic, social and political integration of immigrants on the basis of common principles are two sides of the same coin and represent key challenges, while fully respecting, in particular with regard to integration, the division of responsibilities between Member States and the EU.
Putting citizens first
Parliament considers that the Commission should continue to focus the attention of citizens on the importance of cultural diversity and therefore of dialogue between cultures in an enlarged Union. MEPs also consider that the intercultural dialogue should also be reinforced outside Europe’s borders and become a bridge able to favour mutual comprehension and therefore help the prevention or resolution of social and human conflicts.
Parliament underlines the necessity to strengthen the rights of passengers, in particular long-distance coach passengers.
The House looks forward to the Commission’s proposal to put forward a significant directive implementing the principle of equal treatment outside employment, thereby completing the non-discrimination legal framework whilst underlining that Member States’ competences in this area must be respected.
Europe as a world partner
MEPs note the Commission’s intention of paying particular attention to the future of Kosovo and expects it to present further evaluations and proposals on EU assistance to Kosovo as the situation evolves.
With regard to the Middle East, takes the view that – apart from providing funds for economic survival and reconstruction, notably in Lebanon and Palestine – the EU should continue to develop political initiatives to increase further its active diplomatic role in the region.
The House believes that further steps towards a common external energy policy should be taken in order to ensure access to sustainable, secure and competitive energy for all Member States, and asks the Commission to take a clear and constructive approach in the dialogue with Russia.
MEPs ask the Commission to strengthen the bi-regional strategic partnership between the European Union and Latin America and the Caribbean, and welcome the inclusion of the EU-Africa strategy as a priority for the Commission, while stressing the need for involvement of parliaments and civil society.
Horizontal issues
The House welcomes the Commission’s determination to reach the goal of a 25% reduction of administrative burdens on businesses originating at EU and Member State level by 2012. MEPs regard this as a key priority, in particular for SMEs, for the coming months and as an essential contribution to reaching the Lisbon targets.
In order to achieve a Positive Statement of Assurance by the European Court of Auditors, the Commission should say MEPs, undertake the technical preparations and urge the Member States to issue national declarations as suggested in Parliament’s 2003, 2004 and 2005 Discharge resolutions.
Communicating Europe
Finally, MEPs urge the Commission to put the citizen at the centre of the European project, which it will only succeed in by listening to the concerns of Europeans, and to intensify its efforts to develop a more effective communication policy in order to achieve a better understanding by citizens of EU action and its contribution to addressing their concerns with a view to preparing the way for ratification of the Reform Treaty and the European elections in 2009.
20071211IPR14798 Commission legislative and work programme for 2008 Debate 13 November 2007 Text, as adopted by the EP on 12 December, will shortly be available here
EN
3
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//TEXT MOTION P6-RC-2007-0500 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT CRE 20071113 ITEM-004 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
