Post-Briefing - 10-13 December 2007 - Strasbourg plenary session
2007-12-17 - 17:00
Pöttering condemns ETA terrorism / welcomes 35 new Romanian MEPs
Opening the final Strasbourg plenary of 2007, President Pöttering made two statements: firstly, he condemned the murder of Spanish policemen by ETA terrorists and secondly, he welcomed the new 35 Romanian MEPs who were elected on 25 November. President Pöttering also announced the re-examination by the Agriculture Committee of the large number of amendments proposed to the report on wine reform (pursuant to Rule 156) which was debated in plenary on Tuesday 11 December with the vote on Wednesday, 12 December.
MEPs adopt resolution on Commission Work Programme for 2008
In adopting a resolution on the Commission’s Legislative and Work Programme for 2008, MEPs support the crucial importance accorded in the 2008 annual programme to growth and jobs, sustainable development, climate change, energy and migration, and the emphasis on better regulation, correct implementation and reinforcing the role of Europe as a world partner.
MEPs debate the Lisbon Treaty and European Council
MEPs debated the Lisbon Treaty and the forthcoming European Council, just one day prior to signing of the Treaty. MEPs also debated the work of the Portuguese presidency and the preparations for the European Council which will focus on the Lisbon strategy, the fight against terrorism, the Schengen extension, migration from Africa, progress on the Lisbon Strategy, the outcome of the Bali summit on climate change, maritime policy, Kosovo, the outcome of the EU-Africa summit and Galileo and the EIT.
Proclamation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights by the three European Institutions
The President of the European Parliament Hans-Gert Pöttering underlined in his speech the importance of the Charter for citizens. "Today's formal proclamation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights gives us both an opportunity and an obligation to make clear to the inhabitants of the European Union, to its almost 500 million citizens and the generations of tomorrow, just what European unification signifies. The Treaty of Lisbon now signed by the Heads of State and Government confers on the Charter the same legally binding character as the Treaties themselves.
Sakharov Prize 2007 awarded to Salih Mahmoud Osman, who calls for world to intervene in Darfur
The European Parliament's Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought was awarded to this year's winner, Sudanese human rights lawyer Salih Mahmoud Osman, by EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering. Addressing a packed Strasbourg plenary Chamber, Mr Osman spoke of the horrors taking place in Darfur and of the need for the international community to intervene, even against the wishes of the Sudanese government.
EU-China: Beijing summit and human rights dialogue
In a resolution on relations with China, Parliament welcomes closer ties but highlights remaining differences over trade, Tibet and human rights, notably with a view to the 2008 Olympic Games in Beijing.
Human rights: Chad, women's rights in Saudi Arabia, Japan's wartime sex slaves
In its three human rights resolutions adopted at the end of the Strasbourg plenary session, the European Parliament calls for swift deployment of troops in eastern Chad, a vast improvement in women's rights in Saudi Arabia and recognition by the Japanese authorities of the fate of the sex slaves or 'comfort women' used by its armed forces in the Second World War.
King Abdullah II of Jordan addresses the European Parliament
In an address to a formal sitting of the House on 12 December, King Abdullah II of Jordan focused on the prospects for peace in the Middle East and relations between that region and the European Union. Introducing the King, EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering reminded the House that this was his third visit to the European Parliament. King Abdullah's address today, said Mr Pöttering, was "a clear indication of our common future in the Mediterranean region".
Economic Partnership Agreements : MEPs concerned about slow pace of negotiations
MEPs are concerned about the slow pace of the negotiations, says a resolution adopted by the House. This might result in not having agreements signed with any of the ACP regional groups by 31 December 2007 (WTO waiver deadline). EPAs are to be signed between the EU and 79 African, Caribbean and Pacific States in order to replace the current system of aid and cooperation not compatible with the WTO rules.
Intensified trade and economic relations with South Korea
MEPs adopted a report by David MARTIN (PES, UK) calling for the conclusion of a Free Trade Agreement (FTA) with South Korea that covers trade in goods and services, makes scientific and technical cooperation and intellectual property an essential element of bilateral agreements. This FTA, with the EU’s fourth largest trading partner outside Europe in 2006, is also expected to tackle energy policy and climate change.
Final EU 2008 Budget: €120.3bn, 5.7 % increase in 2007, go ahead for Galileo and the European Institute of Technology
The European Parliament adopted its second reading of the 2008 EU budget. The EU general budget for 2008 will be €120 346 758 612 in payment appropriations, nearly 0.96% of the total GNI of the Member States. The 2008 budget is it is an increase of 5.7% on the 2007 figure. The European Parliament's second reading concludes the annual budgetary procedure and it will be officially signed in the EP in Brussels on 18 December at 3pm.
Black sea pollution: MEPs call for concrete action to reduce ecological impact
MEPs call on the Council and the Commission to monitor closely the situation in the Black Sea and to take concrete action to help to reduce the ecological impact of the disaster. MEPs express their solidarity and reiterate their support for the victims of this disaster.
Air quality: MEPs set maximum concentration of microparticles
The European Parliament adopted a second-reading legislative report which provides for maximum concentration levels for the atmospheric microparticles or dust most hazardous to human health, the PM2.5, which were not regulated until now. The report is the basis of an agreement with the Council on the directive on air quality.
Agreement on Marine Strategy Framework directive
Member States have to take the necessary measures to achieve or maintain good environmental status in the marine environment by the year 2020, since the plenary confirmed the second reading agreement reached with the Council. Marine strategies will have to be developed in order to protect and preserve the marine environment, prevent its deterioration, restore marine ecosystems and prevent and reduce inputs in the marine environment.
Call for greater flexibility on lower rates of VAT
While the report adopted by 582 votes in favour to 9 against and 25 abstentions supports the extension of some temporary measures allowing specific Member States to impose lower than standard rates of VAT on certain goods and services, it argues that all Member States should be able to use lower rates, if they wish, for locally supplied services and for basic goods and services where there is a clear social, economic or environmental benefit from doing so.
European Parliament calls for a far reaching revision of the COM in fisheries products
"It is necessary, as a matter of urgency, to carry out a far-reaching revision of the common organisation of the market in fisheries products in order to boost its contribution to guaranteeing incomes in the sector, ensuring market stability, improving the marketing of fisheries products and increasing the value added generated", says a report adopted by 379 votes in favour to 30 against and 227 abstentions.
Wine: Parliament sets out its position on reform plans
Parliament adopted a non-binding report, under the consultation procedure, on the Commission's plans to overhaul the rules governing the wine sector. The aim of the reform is to bring the EU wine sector more into line with market trends such as shifting consumption patterns, enabling European wines to become more competitive on internal and world markets.
European Aviation Safety Agency will be able to impose fines
The European Parliament adopted a second reading report on common rules in the field of civil aviation and establishing a European Aviation Safety Agency. There is now an agreement between the European Parliament and the Council. The European Aviation Safety Agency is the centrepiece of the European Union’s strategy for aviation safety.
Cross-compliance of CAP aid: a more flexible, efficient system
Parliament adopted a consultation report on farm support which states that the system by which EU farm aid payments are tied to certain conditions should be made simpler and more flexible so that farmers can support it more easily. The European Parliament backs the European Commission's proposals but calls for greater tolerance for minor infractions, the abolition of needless constraints and advance warning of certain inspections.
Ending design protection for car parts
The European Parliament adopted a legislative report backing a Commission proposal to end design protection for spare car parts and other machinery components. Members of the committee propose a five year transitional period before full liberalisation of the market takes effect.
MEPs concerned about textile sector and call for better access conditions
In adopting a joint resolution on the future of the textile sector after 2007, MEPs express their concern with high tariff and non tariff barriers in many third countries. The House stresses that the Commission, in its bilateral, regional and multilateral agreements with third countries, should secure better market access conditions in such countries, as this is vital for the future of the Europe-based textile and clothing industry, especially for SMEs.
MEPs call for withdrawing of public funds from extremist political groups
The European Parliament adopted a resolution requesting all Member States to at least provide for the possibility - after a court ruling - of withdrawing public funding from political parties that do not condemn violence and terrorism and do not respect human rights and fundamental freedoms, democracy and the rule of law as set out in the ECHR and the Charter of Fundamental Rights.
Fighting terrorism can never be an excuse to violate human rights, say MEPs
Governments and EU institutions have often responded to terrorist attacks by adopting laws that have not been sufficiently discussed and some times in violation of basic human rights such as right to privacy or to a fair trial, say MEPs in a resolution which analyses EU counter-terrorism policy, adopted by 359 in favour to 293 against and 38 abstentions. Members call for further scrutiny of intelligence operations and for more proportionate and evidence-based legislation in the future.
Railway interoperability: non-stop freight trains from Lisbon to Liverpool
MEPs adopted by a large majority a legislative report by Josu Ortuondo Larrea (ALDE, ES) on interoperability of the European railways. MEPs adopted one compromise amendment, tabled by the ALDE, EPP-ED, PES, UEN, Greens/EFA, GUE/NGL and IND/DEM. In this amendment, MEPs set out the lines for issues such as TSIs (Technical Specifications for Interoperability), the principle of mutual recognition of railway stock, automatic authorisation procedures and national and European vehicle registers". The two other legislative reports were voted on in Brussels on 29 November. 20071210BRI14639
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Opening the December plenary session: Pöttering condemns ETA terrorism / welcomes 35 new Romanian MEPs
2007-12-17 - 17:00
Opening the final Strasbourg plenary of the year, President Pöttering made two statements: first, on condemning the murder of Spanish policemen by ETA terrorists and second, welcoming the new 35 Romanian MEPs who were elected on 25 November. President Pöttering also announced the re-examination by the Agriculture Committee of the large number of amendments proposed to the report on wine reform (pursuant to Rule 156) which was debated in plenary on Tuesday 11 December. Pöttering condemns ETA terrorist murders
Speaking in Strasbourg at the opening of the EP plenary session, President Pöttering said: "On 1st December, two members of the Spanish security forcers were shot by terrorist organisation ETA in Capbreton, France. A young civil guard of 24 years old, Raúl Centeno, was murdered and another one, Fernando Trapero, aged 23 was seriously injured and died last Wednesday.
I wish to express my deep sadness and profound sympathy to the families and friends of the victims. I want also to express my solidarity with the Spanish people, their authorities and democratic institutions and in particular with their security forces.
The European Parliament unequivocally condemns the use of violence as a means to achieve any aim. Terrorism is an attack on freedom and democracy and it can only be defeated by using all means available under the rule of law and strong democratic institutions. There can be no justification for terrorism, and in fight it, we can allow ourselves no weakness. That's why the terrorist threat will never be able to bring democracy to its knees."
Pöttering welcomes first ever directly elected 35 new Romanian MEPs
President Pöttering also congratulated the 35 Romanians directly elected to the EP on 25 November 2007. "It is a great joy to us all to welcome the 35 MEPs from Romania which are the first directly elected members of the EP from this country. This was an important day for Romania. Romania's integration into the European family is now fully recovered - and thereby a continent is reunited after the fall of communism and return of freedom and democracy. The 35 Romanians will be the voice of their people." Mr Pöttering wished the new colleagues every success in the remaining year and a half of their mandate.
"I also would like to thank the Members of the Romanian Parliament who since 2006 had been acting as observers and since January as members, for their hard work and commitment. Thirteen of the first original delegation members have been re-elected and I hope that they will now be able to help their colleagues to quickly integrate into the EP for the common good for their constituents."
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
MEPs adopt resolution on Commission Work Programme for 2008
2007-12-17 - 17:00
In adopting a resolution on the Commission’s Legislative and Work Programme for 2008, MEPs support the crucial importance accorded in the 2008 annual programme to growth and jobs, sustainable development, climate change, energy and migration, and the emphasis on better regulation, correct implementation and reinforcing the role of Europe as a world partner. The House asks the Commission, nevertheless, to be more ambitious in its initiatives aimed at securing fundamental rights, freedom, justice and social inclusion.
MEPs welcome the Commission’s commitment to supporting the ratification of the Reform Treaty. The House believes that the objectives and reforms enshrined in this treaty are essential for the sound functioning and future development of the Union and will render the EU more democratic and bring it closer to the citizen.
Growth and jobs
MEPs call on the Commission to place particular emphasis on the timely and coherent implementation of the Services Directive, and in particular to implement effective Points of Single Contact to promote access to the Single Market. MEPs urge improvement in the effectiveness of rules on public procurement.
The European Parliament strongly welcomes the Commission’s announcement of a legislative proposal on the European Private Company and asks for this proposal to be presented early in 2008 in order to support SMEs. The House regrets that the Commission does not intend to proceed with the legislative proposal regarding the Fourteenth Company Law Directive (transfer of registered office), while stressing that this long-awaited directive would fill a gap in the internal market for companies.
MEPs underline the need for an adequate level of protection of intellectual property rights and supports the initiative towards an affordable, secure and efficient patent system which would give incentives for investment and research efforts. MEPs urge all three institutions to work together towards a political consensus on a real improvement of the patent system.
The House regrets that the Commission is not intending to propose an initiative regarding the creation of a Common Consolidated Corporate Tax Base, which would complete the achievements of an internal market with fair competition in leading to greater transparency by enabling companies to operate according to the same rules abroad as at home, and increasing cross-border trade, as well as competition, between Member States as far as attracting investment is concerned. MEPs at the same time underline Member States’ responsibility for setting corporate tax rates.
The House regards the revision of the ‘telecoms package’ as a key priority in the coming year. MEPs welcome the Commission’s commitment to the creation of a liberalised and integrated internal market in energy. The House considers also that a distinction should be made between the evolution of the electric energy market and the gas market.
A sustainable Europe
MEPs call for a comprehensive and overall legislative framework for the promotion and the use of renewable energy in the European Union, including binding targets, that will provide the business community with the long-term stability it needs in order to make rational investment decisions in the renewable energy sector so as to put the European Union on track towards a cleaner, more secure and more competitive energy future.
The House welcomes the Commission’s initiatives in the area of public health, in particular the envisaged legislative proposal on quality and safety of organ donation and transplantation, as well as the proposed Council recommendation on healthcare-associated infections included in the ‘Health package’, aimed at ensuring the highest possible levels of patient safety and quality of care. Parliament asks the Commission to contribute to the reinforcement of patient safety, patient information, patients’ rights and patient safeguarding and to tackle the determinants of rare diseases.
An integrated approach to immigration
The House believes that a common migration, visa and asylum policy and effective economic, social and political integration of immigrants on the basis of common principles are two sides of the same coin and represent key challenges, while fully respecting, in particular with regard to integration, the division of responsibilities between Member States and the EU.
Putting citizens first
Parliament considers that the Commission should continue to focus the attention of citizens on the importance of cultural diversity and therefore of dialogue between cultures in an enlarged Union. MEPs also consider that the intercultural dialogue should also be reinforced outside Europe’s borders and become a bridge able to favour mutual comprehension and therefore help the prevention or resolution of social and human conflicts.
Parliament underlines the necessity to strengthen the rights of passengers, in particular long-distance coach passengers.
The House looks forward to the Commission’s proposal to put forward a significant directive implementing the principle of equal treatment outside employment, thereby completing the non-discrimination legal framework whilst underlining that Member States’ competences in this area must be respected.
Europe as a world partner
MEPs note the Commission’s intention of paying particular attention to the future of Kosovo and expects it to present further evaluations and proposals on EU assistance to Kosovo as the situation evolves.
With regard to the Middle East, takes the view that – apart from providing funds for economic survival and reconstruction, notably in Lebanon and Palestine – the EU should continue to develop political initiatives to increase further its active diplomatic role in the region.
The House believes that further steps towards a common external energy policy should be taken in order to ensure access to sustainable, secure and competitive energy for all Member States, and asks the Commission to take a clear and constructive approach in the dialogue with Russia.
MEPs ask the Commission to strengthen the bi-regional strategic partnership between the European Union and Latin America and the Caribbean, and welcome the inclusion of the EU-Africa strategy as a priority for the Commission, while stressing the need for involvement of parliaments and civil society.
Horizontal issues
The House welcomes the Commission’s determination to reach the goal of a 25% reduction of administrative burdens on businesses originating at EU and Member State level by 2012. MEPs regard this as a key priority, in particular for SMEs, for the coming months and as an essential contribution to reaching the Lisbon targets.
In order to achieve a Positive Statement of Assurance by the European Court of Auditors, the Commission should say MEPs, undertake the technical preparations and urge the Member States to issue national declarations as suggested in Parliament’s 2003, 2004 and 2005 Discharge resolutions.
Communicating Europe
Finally, MEPs urge the Commission to put the citizen at the centre of the European project, which it will only succeed in by listening to the concerns of Europeans, and to intensify its efforts to develop a more effective communication policy in order to achieve a better understanding by citizens of EU action and its contribution to addressing their concerns with a view to preparing the way for ratification of the Reform Treaty and the European elections in 2009. Text adopted by Parliament 12 December 2007
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0613 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
MEPs express solidarity with ushers
2007-12-17 - 17:00
Members of the European Parliament on Thursday voiced overwhelming support for the ushers of the House with a loud round of applause just ahead of voting time. Political group leaders took the floor to complain about the insults and violent attacks on some ushers yesterday by some of the MEPs who were protesting against the signing of the Charter of Fundamental Rights. During the signing ceremony of the Charter, the President of Parliament asked the ushers to request the demonstrating MEPs to stop their action and put down the banners they were holding. While the ushers were carrying out their duty, some MEPs insulted them aggressively. Group leaders this morning stressed that this conduct was inexcusable and demanded apologies or that sanctions be imposed on the MEPs concerned.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
European Council
MEPs debate the Lisbon Treaty and European Council
2007-12-17 - 17:00
MEPs debated the Lisbon Treaty and the forthcoming European Council, just one day before the Treaty is to be signed. MEPsdebated the work of the Portuguese presidency and the preparations for the European Council which will focus on the Lisbon strategy, the fight against terrorism, the Schengen extension, migration from Africa, progress on the Lisbon Strategy, the outcome of the Bali summit on climate change, maritime policy, Kosovo, the outcome of the EU-Africa summit and Galileo and the EIT. Council - Mr Lobo Antunes
Opening the debate on behalf of the Council, the Portuguese minister for European Affairs, Mr Lobo Antunes, said the summit would welcome the proclamation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights and witness the signing of the new EU Treaty. He hoped the treaty, which would give the EU a stable framework enabling it to face future challenges such as climate change and globalisation, would be quickly ratified so it could enter into force by 11 January 2009.
The summit will also adopt a declaration on globalisation, which Mr Lobo Antunes stressed should be seen as "a source of opportunity, not a threat". In addition it will set up a reflexion group to examine how the EU can best face up to the issues of the next 30 years.
Further topics on the summit agenda will include a review of the area of freedom, security and justice, as well as controls on the borders of the new Member States. Migration policy, he emphasised, requires a common approach. Terrorism will also be on the agenda.
On the economic front, Mr Lobo Antunes said the summit would discuss the next phase of the Lisbon strategy, including common principles for flexicurity. Energy policy, as agreed at the spring summit, is another subject on the agenda, as is a renewed strategy for sustainable development. In external relations, the EU's crucial role in the negotiations in Kosovo will be addressed.
Reviewing his country's presidency of the EU, the minister alluded to the successes of the various summits held, including those with Brazil and Africa, and concluded by saying that the European Council would reflect the fact that the Portuguese presidency's main objectives for the past six months had been accomplished.
European Commission President José Manuel Barroso
European Commission President said that the signing of the Treaty of Lisbon represented an end to the difficulties that the EU had been facing since 2005. Europe, he said, had to respond to globalisation and the Commission would be producing its strategy for shaping globalisation 2008-2010.
"We have now the best figures since the 1980s in terms of job creation. The Lisbon Strategy is helping to position Europe and European citizens to succeed in the age of globalisation. The Lisbon Strategy has given Europe a common, pragmatic economic agenda, fully respecting national defences. "
Two weeks ago, together with the President of the European Council, I was in China and India for the summits between the European Union and these two emerging powers. It was fascinating to see the pace of economic development in that part of the world. We need to be attentive to what is going on in Asia. It is true that economic development has helped to take millions of human beings out of poverty. I have no doubts their progress will have a direct impact on future generations of Europeans.
So the world is changing and I believe this is also making the need to adapt our common European project to the new challenges more obvious. That is why today there are conditions to accept the declaration on globalisation that European Union leaders will adopt this week. It is more obvious than ever that even the greatest powers of Europe cannot alone tackle the challenges of globalisation. It is obvious that more than ever we need a strong European Union.
I believe that the rise of the powers of Asia on one hand and the awareness about the climate change challenge on the other are, in fact, two very important driving forces for the European Union, because they show that there is a challenge called globalisation and there is also an opportunity to grasp.
Therefore I think that this week’s European Council will have a very important meaning and a great significance. Some years ago it would have been impossible for European leaders to agree on the declaration on globalisation they are about to support. Now it is quite clear that the goals of the European Union are not just internal: the goals of the European Union are also global. We need to promote our interests and to promote our values in the new global order that is emerging. That is why I think we can take very important decisions this week. We should do that with full confidence in our capacities, above all trusting the ability of European societies to rise to the circumstances.
In particular, we should not forget that in Europe we have impressive human skills, great traditions of knowledge and critical knowledge, the capacity to adapt, we have sophisticated scientific and technological knowledge. More importantly, we have free societies organised under the rule of law and this gives us a great advantage in a world that is changing and changing fast.
This is the European way of life. To preserve it and to improve it is our best investment. With the right policy agenda, we can face globalisation with confidence. Globalisation poses specific challenges: One of them is mass migration, which is, to some extent, a new phenomenon in Europe – at least with the dimension it has taken recently.
Last week the Commission adopted a communication on migration, which will be discussed in the European Council. It stresses the need to see the issue in an overall perspective. It is, of course, central to our border controls and security, but it has also huge economic and social implications, and demands to be a central theme in our relations with partners worldwide. Migration is close to the concerns and interests of citizens. It cannot be tackled by any individual Member State on its own. As I have said several times, also in this House, it is completely absurd in a European Union of 27 Member States, where we have freedom of circulation of people, to have 27 policies of immigration. We need to have a common approach to immigration, we need to recognise that the problems some of our Member States are facing should also be considered as European problems.
We need an integrated policy, one which makes sense to European citizens, to immigrants and to international partners. The goal of our document presented to this Council is to spark debate, first at the European Council, but also in European societies, including, of course, this Parliament, and launch a process leading to a comprehensive policy. By addressing an issue that is a central concern of European citizens, just a day after the signature of the Lisbon Treaty, the Union continues its approach, one which is based on concrete results to Europe and concrete results for our citizens. This is the right way to move forward and I think this week’s European summit can take us a step further in our wish and our will to shape globalisation and shape it with our values.
Political group speakers
On behalf of the EPP-ED group, Joseph DAUL (FR) said the Lisbon treaty would mark "the return of a results-oriented Europe", which would "bring two years of uncertainty to an end" by giving the EU a new working method from January 2009.
He described the Charter of Fundamental Rights as "the main innovation", covering two issues, namely "who are we?" and "what are we going to do together?" The key concepts were "shared values" and "unity in diversity".
Mr Daul saw the treaty as crucial for democracy, since it gives "more power to the European Parliament and national parliaments, a better voting system in Council and a right of legislative initiative for citizens". The EP, he believed, "must now adopt a higher profile" and his group would be glad to initiate ideas for legislation.
The summit would also decide another important issue: "the broadening of the Schengen area to include the Member States who joined the EU in 2004". Lastly, Mr Daul hailed the extension of police and judicial cooperation as a way "to combat the scourges of illegal immigration and trafficking in human beings".
For the Socialists, Martin SCHULZ (DE), also referred to the issue of mass immigration into Europe and the fact that the EU now had external but not internal frontiers. In connection with Schengen, he said the mistake had been made of speaking about national sovereignty rather than effectiveness. He criticised the fact that some Member States had blocked much-needed legislation, when it was other Member States (in the south) that faced the problems of immigration.
Mr Schulz looked forward to deeper integration as a result of the new treaty and welcomed today's formal signing of the Charter of Fundamental Rights, which would anchor a number of worker's rights. Hoping that the need for a referendum in Ireland would not block ratification, he described the treaty both as "a lasting covenant" and as "an interim step".
The Socialist leader concluded by saying that "without a stable institutional framework the EU will have no way of coping with the challenges ahead".
According to the ALDE group speaker, Andrew DUFF (UK), "this is a week of celebration". The treaty would be signed, including "protection of the citizens through the Charter". He envisaged a "dramatic improvement in the quality of democracy". He was "glad that Prime Minister Brown has decided to show up" to sign the treaty, albeit late, but he cautioned the summit leaders to "be careful that Mr Brown signs in pen, rather than pencil".
Turning to future problems, Mr Duff spoke first of Kosovo, where "the EU is about to supervise the independence of a country without the approval of the UN Security Council". He hoped those who feared the precedent this might set would simply express their reservations through "constructive abstention".
He also believed "the EU should reiterate its refusal to sign a Stabilisation and Association Agreement with Serbia before it delivers the war criminals to the International Criminal Court". Lastly, he suggested that the Sarkozy-inspired "groupe des sages" might come up with useful proposals for the future of the Balkans.
Brian CROWLEY (IE) for the UEN group said that the only country to hold a referendum on the Lisbon Treaty. "I believe if we have a high profile professional campaign the result will be positive."
Yes, the citizens of Europe want more Europe. But more Europe to them does not mean what a lot of us inside this room might think. It does not mean new regulations, new laws, new restrictions as they would see it. Secondly, the whole issue of migration was touched on by many members. It is putting enormous pressure on resources, not just in financial terms as regards the cost to countries, especially those in the southern Mediterranean who are forced to expand huge amounts of money towards tackling this problem, but on the social cohesion within those countries as well. Thirdly, and most importantly of all, the whole issue with regard to the kind of development of a European vision that we want to see around the world as is now being played out in Bali at the climate change conference, as will be played out in the future at some other conferences in New York in the next months, and most importantly that we have to tell our citizens and inform our citizens properly of what comes before them.
Finally could I say to President Barroso and to President Wallström, as we are having a referendum in Ireland, no tax, no tax, no tax. The treaties do not give you the power to come up with tax proposals. The Commission has to stay away from it.
Daniel COHN-BENDIT (Greens/EFA, DE) group said that the Portuguese Presidency had worked well. On the UK and Gordon Brown's attendance in Lisbon, he said "The UK is surreal. Mr Brown has to face 'little committees in the UK' and only turn up for lunch. Britain is surreal, but that is your problem not my problem". On Kosovo, Mr Cohn Bendit said that EU must show that it had real teeth for European issues. The EU should offer 'more Europe' to the Balkans including a 'Trans Balkan network'. On Iran, Mr Cohn Bendit stressed the danger of selling nuclear power stations, as he said that if nuclear power is used for civil purposes, there is the risk it would be used for military purposes.
Francis WURTZ (FR) for the GUE/NGL group said that the EU had to be particularly lucent on Africa after the recent EU / Africa summit.
On the Treaty, he said: "I think the Union will be committing a big mistake on diagnosis if it considers that the agreement at the summit marks the overcoming of the crisis of confidence between the total breakdown of our society and the actual economic and social direction of the Union. This problem remains, and it would be better to recognise it and respond to it."
On the Middle East, Mr Wurtz questioned how the EU could accept the outcome of Anapolis when Israel was ignoring the Roadmap with the affair of East Jerusalem.
Jens-Peter BONDE (DK) on behalf of the IND/DEM Group said: "Tomorrow at a 11.30 a.m. the Prime Ministers will sign a final treaty none of them have read. They sign a bundle of amendments they cannot even understand. Yesterday the Danish Parliament refused a referendum on a treaty they have not read. They breached the Danish Constitution and may be brought to court to have a referendum.
First they undo two referendums rejecting the Constitution. Then they negotiate in secret and keep the content under a new name. I still offer a good bottle of wine for just one example of a law which can be approved under the constitution and not under the Lisbon Treaty. Even the most experienced legal expert in the Danish Foreign Office has admitted there is not one. The Lisbon Treaty will dissolve the existing EU. Establish a new state with joint citizenship, legal personality, and all the tools of nation states. Most laws will be adopted by civil servants in secret. The democratic deficit will grow. My group proposes to cancel the signature until you have finally read the final text."
Jim ALLISTER (NI, UK) said "The 2005 referenda showed Europe to be out of touch, but the lesson learned was not to abandon what the people did not want, but to circumvent their opposition by determining this time not to ask them. Hence the scandal that across this continent national powers will be stripped away, super-state structures will be established, a new EU citizenship will be created, legal personality will be bestowed in the EU and only a handful of citizens will ever be asked.
Why? Because in most States, my own included, the leaders fear the verdict of their people adding cowardice to their arrogance. So on a day when there is much talk of human rights, I say give the people of Europe the basic political and human right to say ‘yes’ or ‘no’ to this Constitution, the right to say ‘yes’ or ‘no’ in a referendum."
British speaker
Regarding the forthcoming European Council, Giles CHICHESTER (EPP-ED, UK) looked forward to hearing about improving Europe’s competitiveness, about progress towards Europe’s ambitious goals for tackling climate change and about Europe’s commitment to working with the developing nations to alleviate poverty. Yet the focus this week, he said, will inevitably be on the signing of the Reform Treaty in Lisbon.
"As we British Conservatives have consistently said, there was no substantive requirement for this far-reaching Treaty and, just this week, one of Europe’s leading academic experts published a report on the effects of enlargement of the EU. She has stated clearly what we have been saying for some time, namely that the EU has been operating perfectly well without this Reform Treaty. She says, and I quote, ‘The evidence of practice since May 2004 suggests that the EU’s institutional processes and practice have stood up rather robustly to the impact of enlargement’.
This is important bearing in mind all we have been told – that the EU could not cope with enlargement without institutional upheaval or even log-jam. All of this reinforces our view that this Treaty is all about political symbolism rather than any objective assessment of what Europe needs.
In addition to challenging the rationale for this Treaty, we have also been very critical of the process that brought us to this stage. It beggars belief to claim that this Treaty is not in substance the selfsame European Constitution that was so emphatically rejected when it was put to the vote in France and the Netherlands. Alone among his fellow leaders, the British Prime Minister persists in perpetuating this myth that the Treaty and the Constitution are different. The British people do not believe him and the vast majority have repeatedly expressed their view that there should be a referendum. Mr Brown has ignored their wishes and this has done much to undermine his Government and the European Union more generally."
Council and Commission responses
In his reply to the debate for the Council, Mr Lobo Antunes focused on MEPs' concerns about Kosovo. He stressed the crucial role of the troika (EU, USA and Russia) in seeking solutions, the need to look more carefully at some points of the Ahtisaari plan and the importance of a commitment on both sides not to resort to violence.
The Kosovo issue would go back to the UN Security Council but if this body could not find a solution, "the international community, especially the EU, will have to take decisions", said the minister. He emphasised that the EU Member States must maintain "a united front" on Kosovo and that the EU "must play a leading role since Kosovo is a European problem". However, "all possible consensuses" must be explored and, last but not least, the EU must hold out the prospect of "a European future" to the Balkans, including Serbia.
Commissioner Wallström responded first to MEPs comments on the treaty and the charter. She said that, whatever ratification strategy was chosen by each Member State, "we all have a duty in the area of communication". She highlighted the fact that, with the exception of the special arrangements for two Member States [the UK and Poland], "the charter will be legally binding".
Turning to the Reflexion Group, she pointed out that this would not deal with institutional matters but with "the policy challenges of the future" and she expressed the hope that the group's composition would "reflect the diversity of Europe today".
On migration, the Commissioner argued that an "integrated approach" between national and European policies was essential. On economic matters, she said "the Lisbon Strategy is delivering" but believed further attention must be devoted to flexicurity, social inclusion and climate change.
Lastly, on Kosovo, Mrs Wallström believed the European Council must reaffirm Europe's willingness to playing a leading role in seeking a solution. Like Mr Lobo Antunes, she saw "a European perspective for the whole region" as crucial to any settlement. Text of Draft Reform Treaty
EN
1
LINK
http://www.consilium.europa.eu/cms3_applications/Applications/igc2007/doc_register.asp?lang=EN&cmsid=1300
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Fundamental rights
Proclamation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights by the three European Institutions
2007-12-17 - 17:00
This event provides a legal basis for the article which refers to the Charter in the EU Reform Treaty (the Lisbon Treaty). The proclamation took place one day before the EU Heads of State or Government meet in the Portuguese capital to sign the new Lisbon Treaty. The President of the European Parliament Hans-Gert Pöttering underlined in his speech the importance of the Charter for citizens. "Today's formal proclamation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights gives us both an opportunity and an obligation to make clear to the inhabitants of the European Union, to its almost 500 million citizens and the generations of tomorrow, just what European unification signifies. The Treaty of Lisbon which will be signed by the Heads of State and Government tomorrow confers on the Charter the same legally binding character as the Treaties themselves.
In the European Union not everything revolves around economic calculations of costs and benefits. Such calculations are important and will continue to have a bearing on our lives in the EU. First and foremost, however, we are a community of values; we put solidarity, freedom and equal rights into practice every day. These shared values, at whose heart the respect for the inviolable dignity of the individual enshrined in Article 1 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights lies, are the foundations of the European unification process.
Without this clear set of fundamental values, one which we must keep in mind at all times, the European Union has no future. We would also have no right to invoke human rights in other parts of the world if we were to fail in the task of recognising our own values as an integral part of European Union law."
Th Portuguese Prime Minister and President in office of the Council José Sócrates, started his speech by saying: "Today represents a fundamental date in the history of Europe".
PM Sócrates expressed all his satisfaction for today's ceremony. He said: "This ceremony is probably the most important one I participated in my political career". He added: "I am honoured we are proclaiming it during Portuguese Presidency."
He explained that the long process that brought to the Charter started in 2000 under Portuguese Presidency. He said: "It is an honour for my country to be associated to such an import stage of European history".
The Charter, as said by the Portuguese Prime Minister: "includes values that are part of our traditions and derive from international instruments such as the Convention on human rights". Therefore, "from today, fundamental rights become a heritage of the EU", he affirmed.
The Charter will represent a "guideline" for EU actions, according to PM Sócrates. It will guide EU foreign policy as well, "in order to ensure that all these rights are universally guaranteed", he added.
Today's ceremony shows, Mr Sócrates concluded, that "the European Union is a project of peace and democracy" and the Charter represents "our moral authority: this is the sense behind this proclamation."
Commission President José Manuel Barroso said: "Today's ceremony reaffirms the commitment we took in December 2000", when the Charter was firstly proclaimed. Anyway, he stressed that today's proclamation represents "a crucial step forward: in 2000, the Charter was not legally binding as the treaties". In fact, if the Lisbon Treaty is ratified, the Charter will have the same legal status.
Barroso then explained that the Charter brings "concrete progress for European citizens". He stressed that while, so far, these rights were recognised by the EU Court of justice on a case by case basis, the new text will provide a proper legal framework for ensuring their respect.
The Commission President also said that the Charter includes at the same time economic and social rights. Moreover, it includes what Barroso called "21st century rights", particularly the right to personal data protection and to good administration. The Union is bound to respect all these rights in any of its policies, added the Commission President, such as immigration and the fight against terrorism.
The proclamation ceremony was interrupted on several occasions by a minority of MEPs sitting towards the back of the Chamber. The minority was shouted down by the applause of the majority of MEPs. (Most MEPs stood up also during the applause).
Debate that followed the proclamation of the Charter of Fundamental Rights
Martin SCHULZ (PES, DE) said: "When I was a pupil, we were taught in school, that in the Reichstag back in the Weimar Republic, it was a common strategy to hoot down the political opponents. The parliamentary party who had implemented this kind of behaviour, was the party of Adolf Hitler. Today's occurrences have reminded me of that." He also said that the only group leader to want to go to Lisbon for the signing ceremony of the new Treaty was Jens-Peter Bonde.
Joseph DAUL (EPP-ED, FR) said in a democratic place such as the European Parliament, this type of barracking had no place. Everyone has the right to speak. This sort of behaviour is undignified.
Francis WURTZ (GUE/NGL, FR) said that he totally condemns the actions of the minority. He said his group was in favour of a referendum but this had nothing to do with the behaviour of the minority shouting in the Parliament.
Graham WATSON (ALDE, UK) said: "I wish to make a formal request to safeguard the dignity of our House. The behaviour of certain Members of this House in shouting down representatives of Parliament, the Commission and the Council during the signing ceremony was intolerable and must not be tolerated. It brings the worst of the football stadium into Europe’s highest Chamber and recalls the actions of the Communists in the Russian Diet and the National Socialists in the German Reichstag."
"My formal request, Madam President, is this: my group demands that in future the Presidency use the powers granted to it under our Rules of Procedure to evict from the Chamber Members behaving in that fashion."
Daniel COHN-BENDIT (Greens/EFA, DE) said that the House was shocked by the behaviour of the minority, but "we should not over dramatise the situation. If there were 50 idiots in the House shouting there were 700 rational people. " Eviction was going too far, Parliaments had to deal with unruly minorities.
Brian CROWLEY (UEN, IE) said: "Whilst we all welcome the opportunity of a robust engagement, which should be allowed within any parliamentary assembly, what happened this morning went beyond what should be allowed to take place in any democratic institution."
Jens-Peter BONDE (IND/DEM, DK) said that he was not anti-democratic, and "came from a different tradition". All I did was wear a t-shirt asking for a referendum in a peaceful protest. He complained that there was no consolidated version of the Treaties and therefore no one could have read it.
Diana Wallis (ALDE, UK) Vice-President chairing the sitting recalled that on 29 November the European Parliament adopted a report giving its assent to the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union with 534 votes in favour 85 against and 21 abstentions.
Concerns about the exceptions on the Charter
A Protocol annexed to the Lisbon Treaty introduces specific measures for the United Kingdom and Poland establishing exceptions with regard to the jurisdiction of the European Court of Justice and national courts for the protection of the rights recognised by the Charter.
In its resolution of 29 November, the European Parliament urged Poland and the United Kingdom to make every effort to arrive, after all, at a consensus on the unrestricted applicability of the Charter.
Content of the Charter
The European Union Charter of Fundamental Rights sets out in a single text the whole range of civil, political, economic and social rights of European citizens and all persons resident in the EU, defined as the EU's common values. The purpose of this Charter is to make those principles more visible in order to strengthen the protection of fundamental rights in the light of changes in society, social progress and scientific developments.
These provisions apply to the EU institutions and bodies and to the Member States only when they are implementing Union law. The Charter does not establish any new power for the Union.
The European Court of Justice would be, if the Lisbon Treaty is ratified by all Member States, in charge of ensuring the respect of the Charter in all acts of the European Union. Charter of Fundamental Rights
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0573 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Human rights
Sakharov Prize 2007 awarded to Salih Mahmoud Osman, who calls for world to intervene in Darfur
2007-12-17 - 17:00
The European Parliament's Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought was awarded on Tuesday to this year's winner, Sudanese human rights lawyer Salih Mahmoud Osman, by EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering. Addressing a packed Strasbourg plenary chamber, Mr Osman spoke of the horrors taking place in Darfur and of the need for the international community to intervene, even against the wishes of the Sudanese government. He told the House "I am from Darfur, I was born In Darfur. I have been a victim of detention and torture because of my work. Members of my own family have been tortured and displaced by the militia in Darfur". Describing his work in detail, he said: "For many years, in my work, I have represented thousands of people who needed my help in front of the courts. I have seen thousands of people who have been tortured; I have seen hundreds of women and young girls who have been victims of sexual abuse; I have seen the four million who have been forcibly displaced from their homes".
No peace without protection: time for world to act, in particular Europe
The UN Security Council has adopted several resolutions on Darfur. Unfortunately none has been implemented effectively. "The victims feel disappointed", said Mr Osman. "They are waiting to hear from you; from the people of Europe. Your leaders have been talking tough about the policies of the Sudanese Government in Darfur. But so far we haven’t seen any concrete steps".
"The people of Darfur need the European Union to show a strong, united position regarding the protection of innocent civilians", went on Mr Osman. He insisted that protection was possible "through the deployment of the UN-AU hybrid forces", adding that "the involvement of the international, and especially European forces, is imperative even though the Government of Sudan may be unwilling to accept that at the present moment". "In Darfur, and in Sudan, there will be no peace without justice and without protection".
No peace without justice: human rights violators still outside the law
A further problem is that, despite serious violations of human rights and international humanitarian law, "none of the perpetrators has been brought to justice", said Mr Osman. "All perpetrators are beyond the reach of domestic justice. This conflict is one which is marked by a culture of total impunity". The International Criminal Court has been partly successful in promoting accountability and "the people of Darfur ask you to support the work of the ICC", said Mr Osman, adding "As a lawyer, and a native of Darfur, I know there can never be a lasting peace in the region without justice".
In conclusion, the laureate said he was proud to accept the honour "on behalf of so many Sudanese who believe - as I do - in human dignity and in the pursuit of justice".
EP President: "Parliament confirms solidarity with people of Darfur"
In his introductory address, EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering stressed that Mr Osman was the unanimous choice of Parliament's Conference of Presidents for the 2007 Sakharov Prize. By this decision, he said, "Parliament confirms its solidarity with the people of Darfur and restates its belief that any lasting solution for this region will require justice, democracy and human rights".
Mr Pöttering reminded the House of the shocking figures of 400,000 dead and over 2.5 million displaced persons and refugees in Darfur. Mr Osman has courageously chosen to fight back. "For many years, he has defended the rights of victims of the Darfur conflict" and as a result he "puts his life in peril every day for the cause of human dignity and justice".
He is "actively committed to the defence of women's rights", in particular of victims of sexual violence. He also "fights daily to make those guilty of war crimes face up to their responsibilities, at national and international level". Mr Osman does not work only to provide legal aid to victims, emphasised Mr Pöttering. He has also decided to shoulder a political role and has been an opposition member of the Sudanese parliament since 2005.
In his closing words, Mr Pöttering said: "Mr Osman, we congratulate you on your tireless work" and "we hope that the recognition conferred by this prize gives you strength and protection, year after year, as long as your struggle lasts".
Mr Osman's name is now added to the list of past African winners of the Sakharov Prize: Nelson Mandela (1988), Salima Ghezali (1997), Dom Zacarias Kamwenho (2001) and Hauwa Ibrahim (2005).
The Sakharov Prize comes with a cheque for €50 000. The session ended with the playing of the European Hymn in honour of Mr Osman.
Osman also honoured at a joint meeting of three EP committees
On Monday evening Mr Osman addressed a joint meeting of the three EP committees involved in the process of choosing candidates for this year's Sakharov Prize.
In his address and his replies to MEPs' questions, Mr Osman spoke of his own periods of imprisonment and stressed time and again the world's duty to intervene in his country to prevent further deaths. "You have a moral duty to act now, not to say sorry tomorrow", he said.
Josep Borrell (PES, ES), chair of the Development Committee, praised Mr Osman's courage but also took the opportunity to draw attention to the disastrous situation in other parts of the region, including Somalia and Eritrea.
Jacek Saryusz-Wolski (EPP-ED, PL), chair of the Foreign Affairs Committee, stressed that "human rights are universal, indivisible and a fundamental prerequisite for democracy and that even a little progress, in whatever part of the globe, contributes to peace and democracy throughout the world".
Hélène Flautre (Greens/EFA, FR) chair of the Human Rights Subcommittee, highlighted Mr Osman's work in documenting acts of violence, thereby helping bring people to justice, such as the two individuals who had been indicted by the ICC.
Previous winners of the Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought
1988 Nelson Mandela and Anatoli Marchenko (posthumously)
1989 Alexander Dubcek
1990 Aung San Suu Kyi
1991 Adem Demaçi
1992 Las Madres de la Plaza de Mayo
1993 Oslobodjenje
1994 Taslima Nasreen
1995 Leyla Zana
1996 Wei Jinsheng
1997 Salima Ghezali
1998 Ibrahim Rugova
1999 Xanana Gusmão
2000 ¡Basta Ya!
2001 Izzat Ghazzawi, Nurit Peled-Elhanan and Dom Zacarias Kamwenho
2002 Oswaldo José Payá Sardiñas
2003 UN Secretary General Kofi Annan and all the UN staff
2004 Belarusian Association of Journalists
2005 Ladies in White, Hauwa Ibrahim, Reporters without Frontiers
2006 Alexander Milinkevich Article 11.12.2007 with related links and audio interviews
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071211IPR14773 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Human rights
EU-China: Beijing summit and human rights dialogue
2007-12-17 - 17:00
In a resolution on relations with China, Parliament welcomes closer ties but highlights remaining differences over trade, Tibet and human rights, notably with a view to the 2008 Olympic Games in Beijing. EU-China summit: trade, counterfeiting and human rights
While welcoming the Joint Statement of the 10th EU-China Summit of 28 November 2007, in which both sides speak of developing a comprehensive strategic partnership to meet global challenges, Parliament's resolution calls for "a more balanced trade and economic partnership which should lead to sustainable growth and social development, in particular in the areas of climate change, environment and energy".
It also notes that "the pirating and counterfeiting of European products and brands by Chinese industries constitutes a serious violation of international trade rules" and urges the Chinese authorities to take action.
In addition, Parliament regrets that "once again the Council and Commission have failed to raise in a firm manner human rights issues" and that "the EU did not take the opportunity of the approach of the Olympics to address serious human rights concerns in China". It calls on the Council "to make a comprehensive evaluation of the human rights situation before finalizing any new Partnership and Cooperation Framework Agreement" and stresses that any such agreement will require the EP's formal assent. MEPs also insist that the EU arms embargo on China following the Tiananmen events "must remain intact until substantial progress is made on human rights issues".
Human rights dialogue: Tibet, Olympic Games, Myanmar and Darfur
In addition, the resolution refers to the recent rounds of the EU-China Dialogue on Human Rights. It stresses that "China's human rights record remains a matter of serious concern" and stresses the need to improve the EU-China human rights dialogue. MEPs highlight key issues that must continue to be raised in the dialogue: ratification of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, reform of the criminal justice system, freedom of expression, particularly on the Internet, freedom of the press, freedom of access to information, freedom of conscience, thought and religion, the situation of minorities in Tibet, the release of Tiananmen detainees and workers' rights.
On Tibet, MEPs regret that "the sixth Sino-Tibetan round of talks has brought about no results". They call on the Chinese government "to engage in substantive negotiations taking into due consideration the demands of the Dalai Lama for autonomy for Tibet". China is also urged to refrain from exerting pressure on states that have friendly relations with the Dalai Lama. Reports of "continuing human rights violations in Tibet and other provinces inhabited by Tibetan people" are noted with concern and MEPs call on China to allow an independent body to have access to the Panchen Lama.
Turning to the 2008 Olympic Games, Parliament argues "that human rights concerns should receive much more focus in the build-up to the Beijing Olympic Games" and points in this connection to Articles 1 and 2 of the Olympic Charter. It also requests the International Olympic Committee "to publish its own assessment of China's compliance with the undertakings given in 2001 before the Games were awarded to Beijing".
The resolution highlights political persecution related to the Olympics, of human rights defenders, journalists and others. The repression of ethnic groups such as the Uighurs and religious groups such as the Falun Gong is also condemned, as is the surveillance and censorship of information on the internet. In addition, Parliament wants the Chinese authorities "to establish a moratorium on executions during the Olympic Games in 2008, and to withdraw the list of 42 banned categories of people".
Lastly, among other demands, the resolution calls on China "to implement the recommendations of the UN special rapporteur on torture" and "to stop its ongoing support for the regimes in Myanmar and Darfur". Text adopted by the EP on 13 December 07.
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0622 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Human rights
Human rights: Chad, women's rights in Saudi Arabia, Japan's wartime sex slaves
2007-12-17 - 17:00
In its three human rights resolutions adopted at the end of the Strasbourg plenary session, the European Parliament calls for swift deployment of troops in eastern Chad, a vast improvement in women's rights in Saudi Arabia and recognition by the Japanese authorities of the fate of the sex slaves or 'comfort women' used by its armed forces in the Second World War. Conflict in eastern Chad
Concerned about the escalating conflict in eastern Chad, MEPs call for rapid deployment of EU and other troops as approved under a UN Security Council resolution, as well as negotiations as part of a comprehensive peace process.
An armed struggle between the Chadian army and two rebel groups has resumed after a fragile peace deal which unravelled at the end of November. About 238,000 refugees from Sudan, 44,600 refugees from the Central African Republic and 170,000 internally displaced persons are hosted in twelve camps along Chad's eastern border with Sudan. Food distribution and other humanitarian aid efforts are being hampered.
The international community has responded to the crisis. A UN Security Council resolution of 25 September 2007 provides for the deployment of a multidimensional international presence in eastern Chad and the north-eastern Central African Republic (CAR), including an EU mission known as EUFOR TCHAD/RCA. On 15 October the EU Council adopted a joint action on this mission but the timetable for deploying the troops has been put back.
Swift troop deployment needed
In its resolution Parliament emphasises that "the recent violence and unrest in Chad underscore the urgent need for the deployment of EUFOR TCHAD/RCA without further delay". It stresses that "these forces must have and use all means necessary, in full compliance with international human rights and humanitarian law, to protect civilians at risk".
Parliament regrets, however, that the mission still lacks vital equipment "such as helicopters and medical supplies" and "calls on the EU and its Member States to honour the political decision made and to provide this mission with more troops and appropriate financial, logistic and air support". However, MEPs welcome the Commission funding of over €50 million for this mission and observe that "this is evidence of a coherent interinstitutional EU approach to European security and defence policy".
Referring to the Darfur crisis taking place next door to Chad, Parliament stresses "the urgent need to address the destabilising impact of the crisis on the humanitarian and security situation in neighbouring countries".
It also highlights the issue of sexual exploitation in this conflict region and urges that outside forces be made aware of this problem and be trained in a gender-sensitive approach.
A longer term solution
MEPs urge the EU "to press for a comprehensive peace process, using pressure and incentives to encourage all parties to return to the negotiating table". They also call for "talks to address all levels of conflict currently taking place within Chad, including government/rebel tensions and interethnic conflict". Chad itself, in cooperation with Sudan and Libya, is pressed "to create the necessary conditions for a lasting political solution in implementation of the Sirte peace accord". Indeed, the EP argues that no peacekeeping mission in the eastern part of Chad and the northern part of the CAR can be successful without a genuine political reconciliation process.
Women's rights in Saudi Arabia
In a resolution on women's rights in Saudi Arabia, Parliament calls for the Saudi government to improve the lot of women in the kingdom, who it says "continue to face many forms of discrimination in private and in public life, are frequently victims of sexual violence and often face enormous obstacles in the criminal justice system" - even though Saudi Arabia has signed up to a range of international human rights conventions.
Among the demands made in today's resolution, Parliament "insists that the Saudi Arabian Government take further steps aimed at lifting restrictions on women's rights, including women's free movement, on the driving prohibition, on their employment opportunities, on their legal personality and on their representation in judicial processes, eliminate all forms of discrimination against women in private and public life and promote their participation in the economic, social and political spheres".
Concern over fate of 'Qatif girl'
The resolution states that in October 2006 a 19-year-old woman, known as 'the Qatif Girl', was sentenced to 100 lashes following an incident in which she was alone in a car talking with a man who was not a close relative when she was attacked and gang-raped. Parliament "deplores the decision taken by the General Court of Qatif to punish the rape victim" and "calls on the Saudi Arabian authorities to quash the sentence and drop all charges against the victim of the rape".
Domestic violence
Parliament notes that "on 3 October 2007, King Abdullah announced a judicial reform, promising the setting-up of new specialised courts and improved training for judges and lawyers" and "recalls that, in May 2007, it was reported that King Abdullah had ordered that a new court be established which would specialise in hearing domestic violence cases".
Nevertheless, MEPs believe that "a campaign to promote awareness regarding violence against women in Saudi Arabia, especially domestic violence, would be a most welcome initiative, which should be introduced as a matter of urgency".
Lastly the resolution calls on the Council and Commission "to raise these issues at the next Joint Council and Ministerial Meeting between the EU and the Gulf Cooperation Council".
Use of sex slaves by Japanese forces in World War II
A resolution on the 'comfort women' (sex slaves) used by Japan in World War II calls for a change of official attitudes in modern-day Japan, a right for survivors or families to apply for compensation and measures to educate people about these historical events.
The resolution states that the government of Japan, during its colonial and wartime occupation of Asia and the Pacific Islands from the 1930s until the end of World War II, officially commissioned the acquisition of young women, who became known to the world as ianfu or ‘comfort women’, for the sole purpose of sexual servitude to its Imperial Armed Forces. The system "included gang rape, forced abortions, humiliation, and sexual violence resulting in mutilation, death or eventual suicide, in one of the largest cases of human trafficking in the 20th century".
The survivors are still waiting for justice to be done. The dozens of ‘comfort women’ cases brought before Japanese courts have all ended in the dismissal of plaintiffs’ claims for compensation, despite court judgements acknowledging the Imperial Armed Forces’ direct and indirect involvement, and the state’s responsibility.
Call for formal acknowledgment of responsibility by government
The EP refers to the acknowledgements of these abuses made by Japanese politicians and officials, although "some Japanese officials have recently expressed a regrettable desire to dilute or rescind those statements". At all events, the EP believes more needs to be done.
The resolution calls on the Japanese government "formally to acknowledge, apologize, and accept historical and legal responsibility, in a clear and unequivocal manner, for its Imperial Armed Force’s coercion of young women into sexual slavery, known to the world as ‘comfort women’, during its colonial and wartime occupation of Asia and the Pacific Islands from the 1930s until the end of World War II".
Legal obstacles to compensation must be removed
It also calls on the Japanese government "to implement effective administrative mechanisms to provide reparations to all surviving victims of the ‘comfort women’ system and the families of its deceased victims".
The Japanese National Assembly is urged "to take legal measures to remove existing obstacles to obtaining reparations before Japanese courts". In particular, say MEPs, "the right of individuals to claim reparations against the government should be expressly recognized in national law, and cases for reparations for the survivors of sexual slavery, as a crime under international law, should be prioritized, taking into account the age of the survivors".
Education about the past
MEPs also want the government of Japan "to refute publicly any claims that the subjugation and enslavement of ‘comfort women’ never occurred".
Lastly, the resolution "encourages the Japanese people and government to take further steps to recognize the full history of their nation, as is the moral duty of all countries, and to foster awareness in Japan of its actions in the 1930s and 1940s, including in relation to ‘comfort women’" and "calls on the government of Japan to educate current and future generations about those events". Text adopted by the EP on 13.12.2007 on 'comfort women'. Text adopted by the EP on 13.12.2007 on Women's rights in Saudi Arabia Text adopted by the EP on 13.12.2007 on Eastern Chad
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0632 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0631 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0630 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External relations
King Abdullah II of Jordan addresses the European Parliament
2007-12-17 - 17:00
In an address to a formal sitting of the House on Wednesday, King Abdullah II of Jordan focused on the prospects for peace in the Middle East and relations between that region and the European Union. Introducing the King, EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering reminded the House that this was his third visit to the European Parliament. King Abdullah's address today, said Mr Pöttering, was "a clear indication of our common future in the Mediterranean region". New horizons for Middle East
Opening his speech, the King told MEPs "A changing Europe and a changing Middle East are here today". He spoke of "A Europe of expanding membership and a visionary mission: for cooperation across borders and growth without barriers" and "A Middle East of new horizons and growing hope: for peace among neighbours, opportunities for its people and a future for our youth".
Annapolis talks give real hope for peace
Turning to the Israeli-Palestinian talks at Annapolis, he said "a critical opportunity is before us". "For the first time in years, we see movement toward a permanent settlement and an independent, sovereign, viable Palestinian state". "Second chances are rare", said King Abdullah, "but I believe we have come to one". He added "Annapolis has created a new spark of hope. We can and must fan that spark into a blaze of confidence, action and tangible results".
He continued "As our near neighbour, Europe shares our interest in solving this, the central crisis of our age. All sides respect Europe’s neutral role and model of regional progress and peace. For years you have been our partner in the search for solutions". He added "I have come here today to urge your active engagement, to seek your specific, practical skills and investment in the future, and to offer Jordan’s own commitment in the days of work that lie ahead".
Security the first priority
The king then mentioned a number of areas "where action must begin now". The first was "to support the negotiations and their goal: a final settlement, creating an end to conflict, security for both Palestine and Israel, and at long last, a sovereign, independent and viable Palestinian state". The international community must be engaged in the process. "This includes creating a security framework that can offer assurance to both sides. European peacekeeping forces have played a constructive role in Lebanon. Your commitment can help bring great trust to a Palestinian-Israeli settlement".
Apart from a security framework, added the king, "there is a need not only for resources but for partnership – to boost economic opportunities, create confidence that the political process works, and help create the conditions that will sustain peace".
Economic benefits should follow
A second imperative is "to understand and articulate the potential of peace. We must begin now to re-envision the future: a region where conflict has given way to cooperation, where a regional economy brings together the capabilities and resources of 22 countries – more than 300 million people, from the Atlantic to the Indian Ocean". This, said the king, "will unleash a new scope for partnership with our European neighbours, in science, technology and trade".
Referring to last spring's widely supported Arab Peace Initiative, King Abdullah told the House that achieving such a peace "will create new strategic space, allowing the resolution of other serious issues, from poverty to proliferation". To applause from the House, he said "Aggressive forces will no longer be able to exploit the Palestinian cause to serve their own ambitions and interests".
"We in Jordan are ready to meet that future", stressed the king, pointing out that his country had pressed forward with its reform program, achieving significant economic progress as well as improvements in education. He went on: "Europe has been an important partner, through private-sector investments, as well as official assistance. Allow me to say, we deeply appreciate the support and friendship of this Parliament and the European Union".
Concluding this point, the king told the House "Today, we can think of a larger neighbourhood, one that stretches from north of the Baltic Sea to south of the Mediterranean, one that is shared by Europe and the Middle East. It is the basis of the Euro-Med Partnership, our region-to-region platform for cooperation and development."
Europe as a model for conflict resolution
Seeing Europe's resolution of its past conflicts as a sign of hope for his own region, King Abdullah said "Today, young Europeans are coming to adulthood who never knew a divided Europe. Their young counterparts, Palestinian and Israeli, have no such positive experience; they have grown up in a world of division and conflict. Now, together, we have an opportunity to remove the barriers to their future, and leave the past behind."
Winding up his speech, the king said "In the arena of the Middle East, a new olive branch has just been planted. Now the real work must begin. It is in our hands to create the process and structures that will give peace roots, help it grow, and sustain it into the future. I urge you to share in this effort. Our partnership can create an historic transformation, and a rich harvest – years of peace and prosperity, that will benefit our peoples and our world." Audio, 16:08
EN
1
MULTIMEDIA
20071212MLT15120.asf
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External/international trade
Economic Partnership Agreements : MEPs concerned about slow pace of negotiations
2007-12-17 - 17:00
MEPs are concerned about the slow pace of the negotiations, says a resolution adopted by 271 votes in favour to 189 against and 10 abstentions. This might result in not having agreements signed with any of the ACP regional groups by 31 December 2007 (WTO waiver deadline). EPAs are to be signed between the EU and 79 African, Caribbean and Pacific States in order to replace the current system of aid and cooperation not compatible with the WTO rules. The House takes note of the decision by the Commission on "a two-step approach" to avoid trade disruption for non LDC ACP States. The Commission will continue negotiations beyond 31 December 2007 on EPAs.
Interim Framework Agreement with the East African Community Partner States and several states of the Southern African Development Community - guaranteeing duty-free and quota-free access for those states' goods to the EU market - have been signed recently.
According to MEPS, EPAs must be instruments of development in order to promote sustainable development, regional integration and reduction of poverty in the ACP States. An analysis of the social impact of EPAs on the groups most at risk, during the negotiations and after they have been concluded, has to be carried out by the Commission, says the House.
The Cotonou Agreement signed in 2000 sets out the parties’ agreement to conclude new WTO-compatible trading arrangements and to progressively remove barriers to trade between them. On these agreements, the EP has asked that the assent procedure applies to each of these agreements.
TRIPS
The House recalls the commitments by the Council and the Commission not to negotiate pharmaceutical-related TRIPS-plus provisions affecting public health and access to medicines, such as data exclusivity, patent extensions and limitation of grounds of compulsory licences.
ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly
On 20 November 2007 at its Kigali meeting, the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly adopted the "Kigali Declaration for development-friendly Economic Partnership Agreements (EPAs)" urging the European Commission to acknowledge that "more time is needed for ACP States to assess, in a comprehensive way, the implications of the agreements proposed" (See link below) Text adopted by the EP on Economic Partnership Agreements
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0614 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External/international trade
Intensified trade and economic relations with South Korea
2007-12-17 - 17:00
MEPs adopted a report by David MARTIN (PES, UK) calling for the conclusion of a Free Trade Agreement (FTA) with South Korea that covers trade in goods and services, makes scientific and technical cooperation and intellectual property an essential element of bilateral agreements. This FTA, with the EU’s fourth largest trading partner outside Europe in 2006, is also expected to tackle energy policy and climate change. Parliament's rapporteur David Martin (PES, UK, Labour, Scotland) said: "Korea is a significant player in the region in Asia. It is now a wealthy country, the eleventh largest economy in the world. Its per capita income is comparable to Spain. It is an economy that is growing quickly and trade between our two regions – between Korea and the European Union – reached 60 billion euros last year. So it is a deal worth doing and if we can get it right I think it is a win-win situation. Korean manufacturing industry, for example, can win through access to European services, enabling Korean manufacturing to expand and to compete more favourably. We can win through access to the Korean market for some of our key goods and services."
The report considers that the size and rapid growth of the Southern Korean economy makes it a suitable candidate for a bilateral agreement. Korea has signed Free Trade Agreements (FTAs) with the United States and a number of other leading trading partners and has further agreements under negotiation. The report reaffirms that a successful conclusion of the DDA remains a priority for MEPs.
On the scope of this FTA, the House believes that an agreement limited to tariff reductions would merely produce short term benefits. Any FTA with South Korea should take account of the four so-called Singapore Issues (foreign investment, competition, transparency in public procurement and trade facilitation).
Sectoral issues
On market access, the report considers that South Korea’s divergence from international norms and labelling requirements constitute major NTBs which present particular problems for the automotive, pharmaceutical, cosmetics and electronics industries.
On the TRIPs issue, the House supports the Commission’s objective of assisting EU exporters of pharmaceutical products and medical devices by ensuring greater transparency in the Korean healthcare system. The future Agreement should not create any legal or practical obstacles to Korean firms using the flexibilities set out in paragraphs 4 and 5 of the declaration on the TRIPs agreement and public health.
MEPs are concerned that that the EU-SouthKorea FTA could have a severe negative impact on the European automotive industry; requests therefore that the Commission considers a strategy of phasing out EU import tariffs with safeguards.
In the light of the EU's problematic experiences with the Korean shipbuilding industry, special attention should be given to this sector in the negotiations, says the report.
On intellectual property, the report attaches high priority to the effective enforcement of intellectual property rights, including through the introduction of adequate penalties for counterfeiting and piracy, especially in sound recordings.
The report recommends that the Commission seriously examines the extent to which trade relations between North and South Korea affect a FTA with the EU.
Kaesong Industrial Complex
The House welcomes the role of the Kaesong Industrial Complex in contributing to regional peace and security; nevertheless believes that the inclusion of goods from the Kaesong Industrial Complex (KIC) in an FTA raises legal and technical problems.
Parliament’s role in the negotiations
The report states that it wants Parliament closely involved in each stage of the negotiations and be given the chance to express its view on the acceptability of the negotiated text. It therefore expects the Commission and the Council to seek to present the agreement in a form that would require the assent of the Parliament. Text adopted - Economic and trade relations with Korea
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0629 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Budget
Final EU 2008 Budget: €120.3bn, 5.7 % increase in 2007, go ahead for Galileo and the European Institute of Technology
2007-12-17 - 17:00
The European Parliament adopted its second reading of the 2008 EU budget. The EU general budget for 2008 will be €120 346 758 612 in payment appropriations, nearly 0.96% of the total GNI of the Member States. The 2008 budget is it is an increase of 5.7% on the 2007 figure. The European Parliament's second reading concludes the annual budgetary procedure and it will be officially signed in the EP in Brussels on 18 December at 3pm. 1) Galileo and European Institute of Technology The financing of Galileo (the European satellite navigation system, which will be independent of the American, Russian and Chinese systems) and the European Institute of Technology (EIT): both projects, according to this vote, will be funded entirely by the Community, without jeopardising the necessary financial means of the Lisbon Agenda multiannual programmes such as Lifelong Learning and Trans-European Networks. The amount needed by 2013 (a shortfall of €2.4bn) will be found mainly from the revision of the Financial Perspectives. Globally, €3.7bn are foreseen for Galileo and EIT within the multi-annual financial framework until 2013. Details (2007-2013) - €1 600 million from a revision of the multiannual Financial Framework (reallocation of unused means in the agricultural budget for 2007) - €200 million from the use of the so-called flexibility instrument - €400 million of reprioritisation within heading 1A (growth and employment) from the transport related research activities financed under FP 7 - €200 million of redeployment within heading 1A concerning mainly administrative expenditure (€100 mio), decentralised agencies (€50 mio) and Euratom (€50 million) - €300 million from the margin - for the European Institute of Technology. In 2008
EIT
Commitments
Payments
European Institute of Technology
0
0
European Institute of Technology and Innovation
2,900,000
2,900,000
European Institute of Technology and Innovation - Governing Structure
p.m.
p.m.
European Institute of Technology and Innovation - Knowledge and Innovation Communities (KICs)
p.m.
p.m.
GALILEO
Galileo Programme
p.m. 890,000,000
100,000,000 200,000,000
Galileo Supervisory -Authority - Subsidy under Titles 1 and 2
7,059,000
7,460,000
Galileo Supervisory Authority - Subsidy under Title 3
2,933,500
3,100,000
2) CFSP, Kosovo, Palestine The additional needs for the common foreign and security policy (CFSP, including EU police mission in Kosovo) for 2008: The CFSP will receive a total of €285 million from the EU budget, an increase of €125 million over 2007. Of this figure, €70 million will be deployed through the flexibility instrument, which is designed to finance unforeseen or exceptional expenditure, under the Interinstitutional Agreement (IIA) of 17 May 2006. This exceptional funding will be used in 2008 for the CFSP actions, essentially for the EU growing obligations in Kosovo. Palestine in 2008 (essential part of expenditure planned)
Commitments
Payments
European Neighbourhood and Partnership financial assistance to Palestine, the peace process and UNRWA
300,000,000
200,000,000
Kosovo in 2008
Commitments
Payments
Macroeconomic assistance
152,000,000
112,000,000
Transition and institution-building assistance to potential candidate countries
436,700,000
98,625,400
Police missions (only a part of this amount will go to Kosovo)
60,000,000
37,000,000
The political involvement of the European Parliament in this matter deserves attention: according to a declaration agreed in conciliation, the European Commission will hold regular political dialogue three times a year with the European Parliament on democratic scrutiny and coherence of external EU relations. For the first time, growth and jobs ("Sustainable growth and employment", heading 1a & 1b) take the biggest share of the EU budget, edging ahead of farm subsidies (Agriculture part, under the heading 2: "Natural resources"). Given the urgency of immigration matters, the Parliament proposes an increase for the agency managing EU external borders, the EP decided to double the amounts allocated to Frontex (EU Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders) , the agency for the EU's external frontiers, with €30 million extra (€2.8 million will be dedicated to administrative costs) . The figure earmarked for this agency thus rises to €70 million in total. The plenary endorsed the 2nd reading budget committee vote and decided to release the reserves agreed at the first reading for Frontex. As regards the initial (at the first reading) €49 million reserve under Heading 5, devoted to the European Commission staff expenditure, MEPs decided to maintain in reserve only €5 million. Budget 2008 (2nd reading)
Heading
Parliament (1st reading)
Council (2nd reading)
Parliament (2nd reading)
Commitments
Payments
Commitments
Payments
Commitments
Payments
1a Sustainable growth and employment - Competitiveness
10.004.015.250
10.004.015.250
10.004.015.250
8.990.265.850
11.086.000.000
9.772.639.600
1b Sustainable growth and employment - Cohesion
46.877.941.445
46.877.941.445
46.877.941.445
40.124.714.507
46.877.941.445
40.551.565.026
2 Natural resources
55.722.680.496
55.722.680.496
55.002.330.496
53.136.027.053
55.041.123.496
53.177.320.053
3a Freedom, Security and Justice
686.735.780
686.735.780
717.735.780
509.147.780
728.034.000
533.196.000
3b Citizenship
583.943.000
583.943.000
583.943.000
649.943.000
614.843.000
708.253.006
4 EU as a global partner
7.129.014.000
7.129.014.000
7.216.014.000
7.737.525.400
7.311.218.000
8.112.728.400
5 Administration
7.190.244.746
7.190.244.746
7.206.908.091
7.207.468.091
7.283.860.235
7.284.420.235
6 Compensation
206.636.292
206.636.292
206.636.292
206.636.292
206.636.292
206.636.292
TOTAL
128.401.211.009
128.401.211.009
127.815.524.354
118.561.617.979
129.149.656.468
120.346.758.612
As a percentage of GNI of the Member States
1,02%
1,02%
1,02%
0,94%
1,03%
0,96%
Text adopted by the EP - Draft General Budget 2008
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0616 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Environment
Black sea pollution: MEPs call for concrete action to reduce ecological impact
2007-12-17 - 17:00
MEPs call on the Council and the Commission to monitor closely the situation in the Black Sea and to take concrete action to help to reduce the ecological impact of the disaster. MEPs express their solidarity and reiterate their support for the victims of this disaster. Ten vessels (tankers and cargo carriers) sank or ran aground in the strait and the northern Black Sea region during a severe storm, including the Volganeft-139, which was not designed to withstand severe weather. According to provisional information, six seafarers died and more than 2000 tonnes of fuel oil and sulphur were spilt into the sea, causing an environmental disaster and killing over 15 000 birds .Violent storms dispersed oil pollutants, affecting communities in the region as well as the environment, and the oil and sulphur pollution, in addition to causing human casualties, also directly affected fauna and flora, with possible long-term impacts on the ecological quality of the natural habitats affected,
MEPs call on the Member States to ensure the rigorous application of existing Community legislation, especially legislation on ship standards, for example on Port State Control.
Parliament stresses that the strictest observation of maritime navigation rules is an essential feature of maritime safety and urges the Member States and the EU's neighbouring countries to ensure that vessel crews and maritime administrations under no circumstances ignore alerts or storm warnings.
MEPs underline the fact that the Black Sea disaster should draw the attention of the EU's neighbouring countries - principally Russia, which has announced plans for a several - fold increase in its oil transhipment and export capacities on the Black Sea coast - to the issues of modernising maritime fleets and banning the use of obsolete single-hull tankers.
Parliament stresses that accidents such as occurred in the Black Sea region should speed up the Council's deliberations and calls on the Council to adopt common positions on all seven legislative proposals immediately.
The House calls on the Council and the Commission to step up cooperation with non-EU riparian states on the implementation of measures to lessen the threat of environmental pollution from shipping accidents, including through action taken in the context of the International Maritime Organisation and the Paris Memorandum of Understanding. Text adopted by the EP on Shipping disasters in the Kerch Strait in the Black Sea
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0625 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Environment
Air quality: MEPs set maximum concentration of microparticles
2007-12-17 - 17:00
The European Parliament adopted a second-reading legislative report which provides for maximum concentration levels for the atmospheric microparticles or dust most hazardous to human health, the PM2.5, which were not regulated until now. The report is the basis of an agreement with the Council on the directive on air quality. Under the second-reading deal reached in late November with the Portuguese presidency, the amount of PM2.5 and other gases in ambient air which are the suspected cause of the growth in respiratory illnesses such as asthma, bronchitis and emphysema, would be reduced.
The aim of the directive is to reduce this pollution in order to minimise its harmful effects on human health. According to the agreed text, "emissions of harmful air pollutants should be avoided, prevented or reduced and appropriate objectives set for ambient air quality". Special efforts will be made for the most sensitive population groups, particularly children.
Member States will have two years after entry into force of the directive to transpose it into national law.
Particles - Fine particles (PM2.5)
For particles with a diameter of less than 2.5 micrometres (PM2.5), which do the most damage to lungs, MEPs and the Council agreed on an initial target value of 25µg/m3 from 2010. From 2015, this figure would become a binding limit.
MEPs successfully pushed for a second limit value - an indicative one - of 20µg/m3 to be achieved by 1 January 2020, five years after the first limit. The European Commission must review this indicative figure in 2013 to confirm the value laid down (20µg/m3) or to propose that it be altered.
Parliament also managed to introduce the notion of an "exposure concentration obligation", meaning "a level fixed on the basis of the average exposure indicator with the aim of reducing harmful effects on human health, to be attained over a given period". When the Commission carries out its 2013 review of PM2.5, this exposure concentration obligation must also be reviewed.
Larger particles (PM10)
MEPs accepted the Council's common position regarding maximum concentrations of the largest microparticles (PM10). These are to be reduced to 40µg/m3 on average per year, although no precise date is set by which this level should be reached. This represents no change compared with the current directive governing PM10 (Directive 1999/30/EC), which lays down limit values for sulphur dioxide, nitrogen dioxide and oxides of nitrogen, particulate matter and lead in ambient air, and has been in force since 1 January 2005).
MEPs also agreed to the Council's position on daily limits of these same particles: a maximum of 50µg/m3 which must not be exceeded more than 35 times per year.
Derogation
The agreement allows a three-year exemption to the PM10 limit values for areas or cities which cannot meet the targets "because of site-specific dispersion characteristics, adverse climatic conditions or transboundary contributions". This exemption would be granted only if Member States submit a plan showing why the maximum figures cannot be met despite measures taken at national and local level.
Sampling points
Under the directive, Member States must set up "sampling points" in urban areas and cities (of more than 250,000 inhabitants) and also in rural areas, where a measuring station must be set up for every 100,000 km2.
In addition to particulate matter (PM10 and PM2.5), these sampling points will measure sulphur dioxide, nitrogen dioxide and oxides of nitrogen, lead, benzene and carbon monoxide.
The criteria used in the Member States for selecting sampling points will be monitored by the Commission to ensure harmonised EU-wide application of the criteria.
Binding measures for certain sources of pollution
Regarding the emissions which are the source of certain pollutants, MEPs secured the addition of a new recital stating that "The necessary Community measures to reduce emissions at source, in particular measures to improve the effectiveness of Community legislation on industrial emissions, to limit the exhaust emissions of engines installed in heavy duty vehicles, to further reduce the Member States' permitted national emissions of key pollutants and the emissions associated with refuelling of petrol cars at service stations, and to address the sulphur content of fuels including marine fuels should be duly examined as a priority to by all institutions involved".
In addition to this recital, the Commission has agreed to accompany the directive with a declaration in which it undertakes to put forward new legislative measures in 2008 to:
limit the exhaust emissions of engines installed in heavy duty vehicles;
further reduce the Member States' permitted national emissions of key pollutants and the emissions associated with refuelling of petrol cars at service stations;
address the sulphur content of fuels including marine fuels.
This declaration is a response to a request by MEPs, who asked that the Commission should submit, within two years of the directive's entry into force, binding measures to cut air pollution from motor vehicles, including boats and aircraft, as well as the application of Euro VI norms for heavy goods vehicles, new standards for domestic heating equipment and lower emissions for the latter as well as for emissions from farming. It will be published in the EU Official Journal on the same day as the directive. The Commission refused to have the list included in the text of the directive on the ground that this would impinge on its right of initiative. Text adopted by the EP on Air pollution: ambient air quality and cleaner air for Europe
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0596 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Environment
Agreement on Marine Strategy Framework directive
2007-12-17 - 17:00
Member States have to take the necessary measures to achieve or maintain good environmental status in the marine environment by the year 2020, since the plenary confirmed the second reading agreement reached with the Council. Marine strategies will have to be developed in order to protect and preserve the marine environment, prevent its deterioration, restore marine ecosystems and prevent and reduce inputs in the marine environment. The directive sets up for the first time an overall, integrated policy for the protection of the marine environment which is faced with a number of threats including loss or degradation of biodiversity and changes in its structure, loss of habitats, contamination by dangerous substances and nutrients and the impact of climate change. Up to the present date, measures to protect the marine environment have been developed in a sector by sector approach resulting in a patchwork of policies, legislation, programmes and actions plans at national, regional, EU and international level which do not deliver a high level of protection of the marine environment.
Binding directive/ stronger definition of good environmental status
Parliament's rapporteur, Marie-Noëlle LIENEMANN (PSE, FR), welcomes the fact that thanks to Parliament the objectives and the results of the directive are binding: Member States are obliged to take the necessary measures to achieve or maintain good environmental status in the marine environment by the year 2020 at the latest. She also welcomes that the definition of the good environmental status has been made stricter so that the reconstitution of this good status won't stay a pious hope.
European Marine Regions
European Marine Regions and Sub-Regions as management units for implementation will be established by the directive. For their marine waters within each Marine Region, Member States will be required to develop Marine Strategies on the basis of the completion of a number of steps. By 2015 at the latest a programme of measures designed to achieve or maintain good environmental status shall be developed and entered into operation by 2016 at the latest. Member States sharing a Marine Region or Sub-Region, shall cooperate to ensure that the different elements of the Marine Strategy are coherent and coordinated.
Pilot Projects
The directive foresees a provision on the possibility to speed up implementation in so-called pilot project regions to be identified by Member States concerned. Thanks to the European Parliament, stricter protective measures are possible in these regions, provided that this does not harm another Marine Region or Sub-Region.
Exceptions
In order to take into account of the particular contexts of certain Marine waters, the Directive foresees special situations and areas where the environmental targets or good environmental status cannot be achieved in every aspect through measures taken by that Member State. Furthermore, when there is no significant risk to the marine environment, or where the costs would be disproportionate, no specific action is required by the Member State. But following a request by the EP, the Member State has to prove that there is no further deterioration of the marine environment and has to avoid that the achievement of a good environmental status is permanently compromised.
Background
Two-thirds of the planet is covered by sea water. The marine environment is home to vital resources and its ecosystem provides essential services, for instance by regulating the climate, recycling nutrients, absorbing waste and producing oxygen. Marine ecosystems also account for 80% of life on our planet, making the marine environment crucial to our social and economic prosperity as well as our health.
Europe is surrounded by four seas and two oceans. From the (closed) Black Sea to the (open) northeast Atlantic Ocean, the waters are home to diverse ecosystems and cover several biogeographical regions. The European coastline is 100 000 km long and the Community's marine territory is larger than its land territory. At least 16% of European citizens live on the coast and for many of them the sea is their livelihood, while for others it is a place for relaxation and sport, and a source of food and of inspiration.
The deterioration of the marine environment has become evident all over the world and European waters are no exception. The threats are often cross-border and essentially come from overfishing, destructive fishing techniques, the disposal at sea of waste and pollutants from the coast, noise pollution caused by vessels, maritime transport infrastructures, degassing and underwater acoustic activity, but also from invasive species, the impact of climate change, gravel extraction, drilling for oil and coastal urbanisation. In the case of closed or partially closed seas, such as the Black Sea, the Baltic Sea and the Mediterranean, the risk of pollution is particularly high.
Text adopted by the EP on Protection and conservation of the marine environment: Marine Strategy Directive
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0595 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Economic and monetary affairs
Call for greater flexibility on lower rates of VAT
2007-12-17 - 17:00
While the report adopted in Strasbourg by 582 votes in favour to 9 against and 25 abstentions supports the extension of some temporary measures allowing specific Member States to impose lower than standard rates of VAT on certain goods and services, it argues that all Member States should be able to use lower rates, if they wish, for locally supplied services and for basic goods and services where there is a clear social, economic or environmental benefit from doing so. For many years, the EU has been aiming to introduce a common system of VAT based on taxation in the country of origin, but the Commission now accepts there is no prospect of the Council reaching unanimity on this in the foreseeable future. What were originally seen as transitional arrangements (essentially the system as was in place in 1993, with goods and locally supplied services taxed in the country of the consumer) now look likely to remain in force for some time.
Existing derogations should be extended
With the long term structure undecided, some Member States have derogations allowing them to charge lower rates of VAT on certain goods and services which apply indefinitely, while others - countries which joined the EU in 2004 - have time limited derogations which are about to expire. On an experimental basis, some Member States have also been allowed to apply lower rates on certain labour intensive services. This experiment runs to 2010, when the current minimum standard rate of 15 per cent also expires.
Pending a new assessment by the Council of the application of lower rates of VAT, due in 2010, the Commission is proposing to extend most of the existing derogations due to expire this year until 2010. In adopting by a large majority the consultative report by Ieke van den Burg (PES, NL), Parliament gave its approval to this plan. The final decision - as usual with taxation matters - is for the Council, acting unanimously.
Member States should be able to set lower rates on local services and basic goods
MEPs also supported the rapporteur's proposal to use this consultation procedure to send a message to Council and Commission on the wider issues. Given that the "country of origin" approach seems to be indefinitely stalled, they say the Council should decide whether to abandon this goal altogether. They say that, on VAT rates, the EU should not go beyond what is needed to ensure the internal market functions properly.
Member States, says Parliament, should therefore be allowed to apply reduced rates (or possibly even zero rates in particular circumstances) to basic goods and services, such as food and medication, for clearly defined social, economic and environmental reasons for the benefit of the final consumer. Given that locally supplied services, including services linked to education, welfare, social security and culture, which do not involve cross-border activities, have in principle no impact on the internal market, Member States should also be able to apply reduced rates to them. Text adopted by the EP on temporary measures concerning VAT rates
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0587 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Fisheries
European Parliament calls for a far reaching revision of the COM in fisheries products
2007-12-17 - 17:00
"It is necessary, as a matter of urgency, to carry out a far-reaching revision of the common organisation of the market in fisheries products in order to boost its contribution to guaranteeing incomes in the sector, ensuring market stability, improving the marketing of fisheries products and increasing the value added generated", says European Parliament in a report adopted with 379 votes in favour, 30 against and 227 abstentions. MEPs call on the Commission to submit, as soon as possible, a proposal for the revision of the common organisation of the market (COM) in fisheries products.
They emphasise that the contribution of the COM to the sector has fallen, especially since the 2000 revision. The reversal of this trend, notably by a significant reinforcement of financial resources, must be "one of the main objectives of a future revision of the COM in fisheries products", thus enabling it to guarantee Community funding at an adequate level for the fisheries sector's needs.
Average prices at the initial point of sale have stagnated or fallen since 2000, but this has not been reflected in a meaningful fashion in a reduction in prices for the end-consumers of fresh fish. Those prices have, rather, been constantly rising, notes the rapporteur, Pedro GUERREIRO (GUE/NGL, PT).
The existing system of initial sales of fish in lots, as practised in most Member States, tends especially to penalise the producers, "who may end up with one-tenth of the gains of the end distributors", states the report.
Production and marketing
The House calls on the Commission to determine whether the existing intervention mechanisms are the most suitable ones and whether they are sufficiently "flexible" to meet the needs of the existing structures of production/marketing in the Member States, with the aim of improving the marketing of fish and ensuring a fair income for producers.
The operational programmes should ensure - with suitable financial support - the possibility of the producers' organisations marketing their products directly, as a means of enhancing the value of their production, MEPs say.
The rapporteur supports the initiative of introducing a code of conduct for fisheries products in the EU, which would cover all participants in the sector, with the aim of defining "voluntary rules in order to ensure a fairer sharing of value added and marketing rules along the value chain."
Tuna and sardines
According to MEPs, the compensatory payment for tuna should be extended. They also call on the Commission to introduce a compensatory payment for sardines.
Labelling and ecological certification
The European Parilament stresses the importance of labelling and of accurate consumer information, with a view to boosting the quality and value added of fisheries products: "commercial designations, notably for imported products, need to be examined and checked with all care to ensure that consumers are not misled".
The Commission should accelerate the process of ecological certification of fishery products, since "this is vital if competition between economic agents within and outside the EU is to take place on a sound and equitable footing", adds the report.
Imports
MEPs highlight the "current dependence on imports for consumer needs", at a time when the Community's production is in free fall while world production continues to rise, and the existence of a "food deficit" as far as fish proteins are concerned
MEPs call on the Commission "to take a firmer line" in its evaluation of external trade relations, especially when activating the WTO safeguard mechanisms, adding that "it is vital to ensure the application to imported fisheries products sold on the internal market of the same rules and requirements as those applied to Community fisheries products", e.g. in terms of labelling, phytosanitary rules or the prohibition of fisheries products under the minimum sizes authorised for Community products.
The COM in fisheries products was the first element of the Common Fisheries Policy (CFP) to be created, in 1970, and has since become one of its four pillars, together with structural policy, the preservation of fishery resources and relations with third countries. Text adopted by the EP on common organisation of the markets in fisheries and aquaculture
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0606 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Agriculture
Wine: Parliament sets out its position on reform plans
2007-12-17 - 17:00
Parliament adopted a non-binding report, under the consultation procedure, on the Commission's plans to overhaul the rules governing the wine sector. The aim of the reform is to bring the EU wine sector more into line with market trends such as shifting consumption patterns, enabling European wines to become more competitive on internal and world markets. MEPs adopted the draft report by Giuseppe Castiglione (EPP-ED, IT), with 497 votes in favour 109 against 89 abstentions setting out a series of compromises on most of the issues considered sensitive by producers. The House voted against the automatic liberalisation of planting rights in 2014 and the transfer of funding to rural development. It also voted in favour of a grubbing up campaign limited to three years (instead of five); the retention of sugaring as well as aid for grape must; increased sales promotion and stricter rules for wine names and labelling. Main points of the report adopted by European Parliament - Planting rights. MEPs opposed the Commission's plan to fully liberalise planting rights as of 1 January 2014 for wines protected by designations of origin and geographical indications. For other wines, it believes the decision to liberalise should be taken in the light of a report, to be produced by 2012, on measures for balancing the market. However, the House wants to introduce, through the "national reserves", the free movement of rights throughout the EU so that competitive producers can respond freely to market signals. MEPs also make it clear that the possible transfer of planting rights within Member States should be allowed in the same region. Furthermore, the restrictions on planting rights should not apply, say MEPs, to Member States whose production is less than 50 000 hectolitres such as the United Kingdom. The European Commission had proposed 25 000 hectolitres. - Grubbing up. MEPs backed the rapporteur's view that the package of subsidies planned by the European Commission over five years should in fact be distributed in three years, so as to allow winegrowers wishing to stop production to do so as quickly as possible. - Sugaring and grape must. The European Parliament voted against the Commission's plans to ban sugaring (the adding of sugar to wine to increase alcohol content, as practised in northern Europe) and to abolish aid for grape must (granted to southern European producers to offset the competitive disadvantage of using must). At the same time, MEPs want to keep aid for concentrated or rectified grape must used to increase the alcoholic strengths of wine products as well as the possibility of adding sucrose in wine-growing areas where this is traditionally permitted because of adverse climate conditions. - Spirits. MEPs also want to preserve aid for distilling "potable alcohol", which could be granted via national budgetary envelopes under the guise of quality improvement. - Crisis prevention. To replace the current distillation crisis aid, which the Commission wishes to abolish, MEPs propose that, to compensate for measures designed to prevent overproduction, aid may be established in the form of a payment proportionate to the reduction in the quantities of grapes or wine produced. - By-products. For reasons of quality and environmental protection, the European Parliament wants the compulsory collection and distillation of all winemaking by-products to be kept in the regulation. Only distillers should benefit from subsidies for this service, thus allowing a considerable reduction in Community intervention pay-outs. - Designations. The House considers it essential that the production, including processing and preparation - and, where appropriate, refining and bottling - of "protected designation of origin" (PDO) wines and "protected geographical indication" (PGI) wines should take place in the geographical areas in question. - Labelling. The House does not support the proposal to allow the harvest year and wine grape variety and other traditional details to be indicated on labels for table wines, on the grounds that this option must be reserved for quality wines in order not to confuse consumers. However, MEPs believe it should be compulsory for the bottler's name and district to appear on the label of PDO and PGI quality wines. - Wine-making practices. The European Parliament suggests a positive list of authorised wine-making practices and rejects the idea of transferring the power to authorise new practices from the Council to the Commission. It is also opposed to applying the wine-making practices of the International Organisation of Vine and Wine - which are less restrictive than those of the EU - to European wines intended for export. - National budgets and promotion. The European Parliament says that national aid programmes should be used to finance promotional measures within the EU (and not only in third countries) as well as other measures such as restructuring the sector, crisis prevention, research and development and quality improvement, with producers being able to benefit from several measures in any marketing year. - Rural development. The House is against redirecting part of spending previously allocated to the wine sector to rural development. - Cross-compliance. Since the regulation on cross-compliance of aid will apply to winegrowers as soon as they are subject to the single payment system, the House is against specific rules involving reductions in restructuring and conversion aid or grubbing premiums being added to the regulation. - Implementation of the reform. The European Parliament considers that the timetable suggested by the Commission - i.e. 1 August 2008, the opening date for the next marketing year - is unachievable, in particular as Member States have to set up their national programmes beforehand. It therefore suggests that this date should be deferred until 1 August 2009. As Parliament is only being consulted on this legislation, it plenary vote is not binding on the Council, which meets on 17-19 December to discuss the outstanding issues. Background The European Union is the world’s leading producer, consumer, exporter and importer of wine. The EU wine sector is a vital economic activity, especially as regards employment and export revenue. With more than 1.5 million holdings using 3.4 million ha (2% of the EU-25 agricultural area), wine production in 2004 represented 5.4% of agricultural output. Wine production accounts for around 10% of the value of agricultural production in France, Italy, Austria, Portugal, Luxembourg and Slovenia, and a little less in Spain. Since 1996 the volume of wine imports into the EU-25 has been growing at a rate of 10% a year, reaching almost 11.8 million hl in 2005. New world wines have gained considerable market share from EU wines. The volume of wine exported from the Community has been increasing since 1996 but at a much slower rate than imports, to reach about 13.2 million hl in 2005. Overall, the EU remains a net wine exporter EU wine consumption has fallen significantly and steadily in recent decades, a trend which has particularly affected table wine, whereas consumption of quality wine is growing, so that now the two have almost equal shares. The mid-term outlook for the EU wine sector until 2010/2011, on the assumption that the common market organisation for wine is unchanged and on the basis of expected trends in production, consumption and trade dynamics, is that excess wine production will increase up to 27 million hl (15% of production), or to 15 million hl (8.4% of production), if the quantities distilled with aid to the potable alcohol sector are not considered surplus. The surplus is a particularly serious problem for table wine but the situation of quality wines has also deteriorated.
World wine production (tonnes)
2004
2005
France
5 903 101,00
19 %
5 329 449,00
18 %
Italy
5 313 517,00
17 %
5 056 648,00
17 %
Spain
5 006 230,00
16 %
3 934 140,00
14 %
United States
2 232 000,00
7 %
2 232 000,00
8 %
Argentina
1 564 000,00
5 %
1 564 000,00
5 %
China
1 300 000,00
4 %
1 300 000,00
4 %
Australia
1 381 064,00
4 %
1 274 000,00
4 %
South Africa
1 015 697,00
3 %
1 157 895,00
4 %
Germany
1 014 700,00
3 %
1 014 700,00
3 %
Chile
630 073,00
2 %
788 551,00
3 %
Portugal
720 300,00
2 %
576 500,00
2 %
Romania
616 600,00
2 %
575 000,00
2 %
Russia
512 000,00
2 %
512 000,00
2 %
Greece
454 051,00
1 %
437 178,00
2 %
Hungary
527 000,00
2 %
347 000,00
1 %
Brazil
320 000,00
1 %
320 000,00
1 %
Canada
52 220,00
50 400,00
Other countries
2 592 252,83
8 %
2 603 474,32
9 %
Total
31 102 585,83
100 %
29 022 535,32
100 %
Source: FAO
EU total wine production (1,000 Hl)
Vintage year
2004/2005
2005/2006 provisional
2006/2007 estimates
Rank 2006/2007
Belgium
2
2
2
16
Germany
10.107
9.256
8.995
4
Greece
4.282
3.997
3.909
6
Spain
43.168
35.505
37.896
3
France
57.386
51.344
51.600
2
Italy
53.135
50.462
52.036
1
Luxembourg
156
135
124
13
Austria
2.685
2.264
2.269
8
Portugal
7.481
7.254
7.532
5
United Kingdom
19
17
19
15
Czech Republic
580
439
432
10
Cyprus
278
191
185
12
Hungary
5.272
3.567
3.271
7
Malta
70
70
65
14
Slovenia
944
882
829
9
Slovakia
410
302
320
11
EU
185.975
165.687
169.484
Source: European Commission
British speaker in the debate - Tuesday 11 December 2007 Struan STEVENSON (EPP-ED, UK) speaking on behalf of Neil PARISH (EPP-ED, UK) who had to attend a meeting with Mr Michel Barnier in Paris, and on behalf of the UK wine sector, which Members know is very small – it represents 0.01% of the whole of EU wine production – but which seeks no subsidy or financial assistance from Europe at all. However, unless there is an increase in the de minimis level of production to 50 000 hl, the UK, he said, would have to impose a planting ban up until 2014. In a tiny sector like this, where there is some need for expansion, it would, he said, be deeply unfair if we were to do that. Even if the UK sector expanded fourfold by the end of the planting rights system, which is highly unlikely, it would still only represent 0.05% of total EU production, which is one 2000th of entire EU wine production. Mr Stevenson hoped that Members will be sympathetic to Mr Parish’s amendments. "I am not trying in any way to undermine the compromise. Mr Castiglione has done a wonderful job – we had 795 amendments – and, by seeking a compromise, has got the amendments down to manageable levels. I do not want to do anything to upset that, but I hope there will be sympathy for the UK position." Text adopted by the EP on Common organisation of the market in wine
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0610 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Agriculture
Cross-compliance of CAP aid: a more flexible, efficient system
2007-12-17 - 17:00
Parliament adopted a consultation report on farm support which states that the system by which EU farm aid payments are tied to certain conditions should be made simpler and more flexible so that farmers can support it more easily. The European Parliament backs the European Commission's proposals but calls for greater tolerance for minor infractions, the abolition of needless constraints and advance warning of certain inspections. Since the last major overhaul of the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) in 2003, the granting of EU agricultural aid has been tied to compliance with criteria found in around 20 different regulations. These include environmental protection, maintaining land in good agricultural condition, animal welfare and livestock identification. Farmers are recompensed for services rendered to society if they put the accent on rural development and quality rather than productivity.
This system has proved very complicated to manage for small-scale farmers and local authorities. The Commission therefore proposed a package of measures in August to make the current regime more flexible, including abolition of the “10 month rule” (the minimum period that a piece of land must be held by the farmer), the introduction of a degree of tolerance in minor cases where Community rules are not complied with, and a gradual introduction period of three years for the system in the new Member States which apply the single area payment scheme.
Minor breaches to be tolerated
Most of the infractions of the legislation concern minor cases which could easily be corrected on site. Nearly seven out of ten such infractions concern livestock labelling and registration (e.g. animals which lose an ear-tag). The Commission proposes that the Member States could decide in such cases not to apply a reduction in aid for sums less than or equal to €50 per farmer per calendar year. MEPs believe this threshold should be set at €100 in order to reduce bureaucracy sufficiently. They also envisage provisions to avoid farmers being penalised more than once (reduction of European aid and national fines) for the same infraction.
Needless constraints on farmers to be avoided
The European Parliament welcomes the plans to scrap the 10-month rule but believes the Commission's alternative solution - that pieces of land should be available to farmers on 15 June each year if they wish to be entitled to the single payments - would result in red tape. Instead the House suggests that farmers should have to prove that they held the land on the deadline set by the Member State concerned. MEPs also want farmers to be given prior notification of inspections, except where this could enable them to manipulate the results.
The European Parliament wants the Commission to carry out a progress report every two years and to bring forward proposals to resolve the “bottlenecks” in controls and to review the nitrates directive. And lastly, it wants the transition period for application of cross-compliance rules by new Member States to be extended: to 2013 for countries that joined the EU in 2004 and to 2016 for those that joined in 2007.
Irish and British speakers in the debate preceding the vote
Mairead McGUINNESS (EPP-ED, IE) felt that the level of farm inspections is excessive and very unwelcome on farms that are active and busy. She agreed with the need to radically alter the way cross-compliance checks are carried out on farms and also the need to streamline – as Mr Mulder said – the many different types of inspections, whether they are Member State or private industry, or EU-required.
Ms McGuinness stated that about 68% of cases of non-compliance are considered to be minor, but yet they lead to sanctions, and she felt that flexibility is needed around this. She said that a sanction of less than 250 euros should not be imposed and she hoped that the Commission could be persuaded by Parliament's arguments. The majority of cases, she said, are over some minor issue with no risk to human or animal health. Farmers, she said, should be given advance notice which will allow them time to plan for an inspection.
Jeffrey TITFORD (IND/DEM, UK) said that the rapporteur'ss explanatory statement is instructive in that it depicts cross-compliance as a condition for continued public support and tells us that farmers are now being paid for, and he quoted, ‘complying with Community legislations in the field of environment, public and plant health and animal welfare’. It, he said, further states that such regulations are very strict compared with standards in the rest of the world.
This neatly encapsulates everything that is wrong with the EU’s attitude to agriculture, an aggressive regulatory regime diverting farmers away from their natural ambit of producing food and turning them into guardians of the environment, or what this report calls rural development policy, all of which adds mightily to their costs and reduces output. It has also had the effect of putting farmers into direct competition for funding with establishments such as country parks and wildlife preserves which would not naturally be their competitors.
While, he said, the intention of this proposal is to simplify cross-compliance because it is openly admitted that it has created a heavy, bureaucratic burden for farmers and for Member States to enforce, Mr Titford felt that it was a bad idea in the first place and simplifying it is to merely administer a band aid rather than a cure. This report, he said, enthusiastically trumpets the view that cross-compliance is an important instrument in justifying public support for farmers. Mr Titford doubted that even one percent of the public would have heard of cross-compliance, never mind understand what it means. For real simplification, he said, let us do away with cross-compliance altogether and let farmers get on with what they do best, grow crops and rear animals.
Jim ALLISTER (NI, UK). said that cross-compliance often treats farmers unfairly, with disproportionate penalties for minor offences and no-notice inspections. We have heard that 68% of all cases of non-compliance are classified as minor, yet the sanctions imposed are too often, for the struggling farmer, almost crippling. Disparity in how cross-compliance is administered from country to country compounds the resentments which it has built up in some.
In his constituency of Northern Ireland, Mr Allister spoke of a particular problem with duplicate fields, arising from the conacre system. Instead of a pragmatic search for a solution, he said, we have had heavy-handed rigidity. Much of the blame lies with the local Department of Agriculture, but it, and Brussels, could each have done more to resolve that problem. Mr Allister said he would like to see simplification and flexibility, and a good dose of good old-fashioned common sense to replace the inflexibility of some over-zealous mandarins.
Cross compliance and how it is implemented at Member State level is crucial, stated James NICHOLSON (EPP-ED, UK). We must, he said, not allow each other and each and every Member State to make their own interpretation. There appears, he said, after listening to various speakers, to be a difference of interpretation in different Member States. We have, he said, got to get it right at Member State level and we have got to insist that each Member State implement this directive in the right and proper way in each and every Member State.
Concluding, Mr Allister stated that cross-compliance must not become a system that allows farmers to be penalised and policed. We should be there to help farmers and to offer advice on how they can do things better. Cross-compliance could be a force for good and those who do the inspection should have clear and proper training and know their responsibilities.
Seán Ó NEACHTAIN (UEN, IE) (spoke in Irish - English summary hereunder)
Mr. O'Neachtain stated that the European Union has given a promise to farmers concerning the support which would be available under the CAP from 2007-2013. This is the reason he could not agree with the Commission in their attempt to renege on that promise under the 'Health Check' which was advertised recently. The Commission, he said, are trying to cut direct payments by 13% which would be available to farmers. He believed that this is a breach of promise and that we should not agree with it. Farmers have made arrangements about the output they would have during those years and this should not be revised.
With regard to standards - and I will say this much - if standards are to be implemented, the same standards should be in place on the food we product as well as on the food we bring import into the European Union - and not carrying out inspections without sense or reason on farmers throughout Europe.
Concluding, he stated that we should look at the quality of the food we are allowing into Europe and that is the area where the Commission should act and not obstruct farmers who are doing their best throughout Europe and certainly in my country in Ireland, he concluded. Text adopted by the EP on CAP: common rules for direct support schemes and certain support schemes for farmers and support for rural development *
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0598 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Industry
Ending design protection for car parts
2007-12-17 - 17:00
The European Parliament adopted a legislative report backing a Commission proposal to end design protection for spare car parts and other machinery components. Members of the committee propose a five year transitional period before full liberalisation of the market takes effect. In the first-reading report by Klaus-Heiner Lehne (EPP-ED, DE), the European Parliament agrees to open up to competition the secondary market in spare parts intended to restore the original appearance of complex products, e.g. cars and industrial machinery. If adopted, the directive will allow suppliers to produce motor vehicle components which are identical to the original parts without infringing design protection.
Most EU Member States currently have a design protection regime for spare parts. Under the draft directive, design protection would remain for spare parts purchased for decorative reasons, i.e. to change the original appearance.
Five year transition period agreed
MEPs amended the Commission's proposal, to grant Member States a five year transition period before implementing full liberalisation. This provision followed an agreement between all political groups to guarantee a smooth transition to the new regime.
Consumers to be informed
The House also proposes an amendment requiring consumers to be informed about the origin of the components by means of trade names or other appropriate forms. This would allow the public to make an informed choice between the available products.
Differences in national legislations
According to the Commission, Austria, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Lithuania, Malta, Poland, Portugal, Slovakia, Slovenia and Sweden still have design protection for spare parts.
In Belgium, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Spain and the United Kingdom, spare parts for repair or replacement are allowed in the after-sales market. Greece protects designs for 5 years.
Speaking in the debate on Tuesday 11 December in Strasbourg: Malcolm Harbour (EPP-ED, UK, West Midlands, Conservative) said: "I think this is a historic day, as we are finally going to deal with this vexed question and this anomaly in the internal market. I think we should remember briefly how we come to be here.
In a number of countries, particularly in the United Kingdom, where this movement started, it was quite clear to the Monopolies Commission at the time that the car manufacturers were abusing that monopoly, and that is why it was removed. Now, that does not in any way undermine the importance of intellectual property protection. I just want to make that clear to a number of colleagues who have made that point.
The second point I want to make is to draw the attention of colleagues to an important measure that the Internal Market Committee introduced a few months ago – and I was privileged to be rapporteur – on motor vehicle type approval. For the first time, we now have a regime in which independently manufactured parts that are a critical part of the safety and environmental systems of vehicles have to be tested independently to the same standards as the vehicle manufacturer’s own parts." Text adopted by the EP on legal protection of designs
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0609 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Industry
MEPs concerned about textile sector and call for better access conditions
2007-12-17 - 17:00
In adopting a joint resolution on the future of the textile sector after 2007, MEPs express their concern with high tariff and non tariff barriers in many third countries. The House stresses that the Commission, in its bilateral, regional and multilateral agreements with third countries, should secure better market access conditions in such countries, as this is vital for the future of the Europe-based textile and clothing industry, especially for SMEs. The House asks the Commission to take the opportunity of the negotiation of trade agreements to promote and strengthen environmental and social standards, such as decent work, in third countries, in order to guarantee fair competition.
Parliament maintains that the double-checking surveillance system will serve no purpose unless it prevents any repetition of the situation that occurred in 2005, when imports into the EU grew at an accelerating rate. The House stresses that new safeguard measures need to be enforced, covering, among other things, categories of products to be specified by Member States, so as to enable employment in, and the business of, this sector to be safeguarded and promoted in the EU.
MEPs call on the Commission and the Member States to actively promote the modernising of the EU-based textile industry by supporting technological innovation, research and development through the 7th Framework Programme, as well as vocational training, particularly for SMEs; in this respect, MEPs call on the Commission to conduct a proper and global investigation into this serious issue.
EU textile industry and workers
Parliament call on the Commission to guarantee that the Globalisation Adjustment Fund will be used in a substantial way for the restructuring and retraining of the textile sector and, in particular, SMEs largely affected by the liberalisation of the market.
The House calls on the Commission and the Member States to assist the textile and clothing sectors' workers with social measures and plans in companies facing restructuring.
Unfair trade and counterfeiting
MEPs call on the Commission to encourage the Chinese authorities to align their currency exchange rates and to review their euro/dollar foreign exchange balance, which are now facilitating a massive flow of Chinese textile and clothing imports.
Import surveillance
MEPs stress that a double checking system cannot be implemented solely in 2008 and that an effective surveillance system should be guaranteed for a longer period of time.
Parliament calls on the Commission and the US to engage in consultations on the issue of textile imports from China.
The House calls on the Commission to set up a monitoring system and to evaluate the results before the first quarter 2008 in order to ensure that the disruptive effects of a surge in textile imports are duly and promptly taken into account, and asks the Commission to report to Parliament.
Security and consumer protection
MEPs urge the Commission to use its powers to ban unsafe products from the EU market also in the case of the textile and clothing sector.
The House calls on the Commission to guarantee that imported textile products, particularly from China, entering the EU market are subjected to security and consumer protection requirements identical to those for textile products manufactured inside the EU.
MEPs ask the Commission to conduct a proper evaluation and study on the question of the alleged pass-through of price reductions to EU consumers.
Developing countries and EU Mediterranean partners
Finally, the House calls on the Commission to support the establishment of a Euro-Mediterranean production area in the textile sector, taking advantage of the geographical proximity of the Mediterranean and European markets in order to create an internationally competitive area which can ensure that industrial output and employment can be maintained. Text adopted by the EP on textile imports
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0628 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Justice and home affairs
MEPs call for withdrawing of public funds from extremist political groups
2007-12-17 - 17:00
The European Parliament adopted a resolution requesting all Member States to at least provide for the possibility - after a court ruling - of withdrawing public funding from political parties that do not condemn violence and terrorism and do not respect human rights and fundamental freedoms, democracy and the rule of law as set out in the ECHR and the Charter of Fundamental Rights. The House also calls on those that already have this possibility to do so without delay; also calls on the Commission to ensure that no EU funding is available to media which are used as a platform to widely promote racist, xenophobic and homophobic ideas.
The text, adopted by 527 votes in favour, 15 against and 39 abstentions, calls on the Commission to support NGOs and civil society organisations devoted to promoting democratic values, human dignity, solidarity, social inclusion, inter-cultural dialogue and social awareness of the dangers of radicalisation and violent extremism, and which are devoted to fighting all forms of discrimination.
The resolution also calls on the Commission to ensure that no EU funding is available to media which are used as a platform to widely promote racist, xenophobic and homophobic idea.
Islamic fundamentalist recruitment and anti-Semitism
MEPs also say that they are "seriously alarmed at the Islamic fundamentalist recruitment and violent propaganda campaign with terrorist attacks within the European Union, based on hatred of European values and on anti-Semitism."
MEPs stress that public personalities should "refrain from statements that encourage or incite to hate or stigmatisation of groups of people on the basis of their race, ethnic origin, religion, handicap, sexual orientation or nationality" and believe that being a public personality should be considered as an aggravating circumstance when inciting to hatred. Furthermore, on an amendment adopted by 450 votes in favour, 93 against and 30 abstentions, MEPs warn, looking to the 2009 European elections, "of the possibility that extremist parties may secure representation in the European Parliament and calls on the political groups to take the appropriate measures in order to ensure that a democratic institution is not used as a platform for financing and echoing anti-democratic messages".
The resolution calls on the EU institutions to give a clear mandate to the EU Agency for Fundamental Rights to investigate on the structures of extremist groups, and for governments to give appropriate preventive responses.
MEPs urge the Commission and Council to lead the search for appropriate political and legal responses, especially at the preventive stage with reference to young people's education and public information, teaching against totalitarianism and disseminating the principles of human rights and fundamental freedoms in order to keep alive the memory of European history; calls upon the Member States to develop policies of education for democratic citizenship based on citizens' rights and responsibilities.
MEPs also express their concern on how to counteract the existence of public and easily accessible websites which incite to hatred without violating freedom of expression.
The resolution says that neo-Nazi, paramilitary and other extremisms are directing their violent attacks against a wide variety of vulnerable population groups, including migrants, Roma, homosexuals, antiracist activists and the homeless.
On 29 November, Parliament also adopted a consultation report to harden a future EU law to combat certain forms of racism and xenophobia, including the establishment of criminal sanctions -from one to three years of prison- to any public incitement to violence or hatred, even by dissemination or distribution of tracts, pictures or other material. The legislative text - first European law of this kind, which still needs to be transposed by Member States -, also includes punishment for the denial or gross trivialisation of genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes. Text adopted by the EP on Combating the rise of extremism in Europe
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0623 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Justice and home affairs
Fighting terrorism can never be an excuse to violate human rights, say MEPs
2007-12-17 - 17:00
Governments and EU institutions have often responded to terrorist attacks by adopting laws that have not been sufficiently discussed and some times in violation of basic human rights such as right to privacy or to a fair trial, say MEPs in a resolution which analyses EU counter-terrorism policy, adopted by 359 in favour to 293 against and 38 abstentions. Members call for further scrutiny of intelligence operations and for more proportionate and evidence-based legislation in the future. Analysing specific activities related to Europe's current counter-terrorism strategy - based on the goals of "prevention, protection, preparedness and response" - MEPs stress the need for the Commission to carry out "an overall evaluation" on the effectiveness of legislation adopted, the degree of transposition by Member States, "and the positive and negative effects of these laws, both in terms of security and in terms of citizen's rights". Commissioner Frattini's recent proposals regarding the use of passenger name records (PNR) in Europe for law enforcement purposes and the directive on explosives will be assessed by Parliament "on evidence based argumentation", say MEPs.
Avoid profiling
One of MEPs' major concerns is the potential misuse by authorities of the personal information contained in numerous data bases - PNR, Eurodac, Schengen and Visa information systems - "to create profiles through data-mining techniques", which is not allowed at European level. MEPs say that profiling (the use of racial, ethnic or similar characteristics in determining whether a person is considered likely to commit a particular type of crime) should be avoided altogether and raised concerns in this regard on Mr Frattini's new proposal for an EU PNR system.
Democratic control of secret services
How can we avoid serious breaches of human rights in cases like the CIA illegal renditions in Europe? Although MEPs reiterate the importance of sharing intelligence information, both at EU level and among national secret services, further rules are needed to ensure the necessary democratic scrutiny and parliamentary control over their activities, the Chamber reiterated. They call for the resettlement of Guantanamo prisoners from third states who cannot be returned to that countries of origin because they risk being persecuted or tortured.
Preventing radicalisation
Parliament believes that "cases such as the recent rejection of the US Supreme Court to deal with the Khalid Al-Masri complaint tend to reinforce the impression particularly by Muslim minorities in Europe that the anti-terror measures promulgate double standards". EU counter-terrorism policy should not only be based on police measures but should also support local actions aimed at "preventing violent radicalisation by fostering the integration of people through intercultural dialogue", say MEPs. Measures were proposed to support democracy movements in Islamic countries, including the creation of more student exchanges and funding mass media stations which spread democratic ideas.
At the same time, staff involved in borders security and counter-terrorism activities should be trained about the different cultures composing the European reality, conclude MEPs. Text adopted by the EP on the fight against terrorism
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0612 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-024-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Transport
Railway interoperability: non-stop freight trains from Lisbon to Liverpool
2007-12-17 - 17:00
Freight trains should soon run from Antwerp to Bratislava or Lisbon to Liverpool without stopping at borders or changing locomotives or train crews. So say three co-decision reports, debated by the House at its Brussels session on 28 November, on measures to revitalise the railways by removing obstacles to the free circulation of trains throughout the European network. Two were adopted in Brussels on 29 November and one on interoperability today - 11 December in Strasbourg. MEPs adopted by a large majority a legislative report by Josu Ortuondo Larrea (ALDE, ES) on interoperability of the European railways. MEPs adopted one compromise amendment, tabled by the ALDE, EPP-ED, PES, UEN, Greens/EFA, GUE/NGL and IND/DEM. In this amendment, MEPs set out the lines for issues such as TSIs (Technical Specifications for Interoperability), the principle of mutual recognition of railway stock, automatic authorisation procedures and national and European vehicle registers". The two other legislative reports were voted on in Brussels on 29 November.
MEPs stress that much needs to be done to improve the interoperability of the European railways. National procedures for the approval of locomotives are seen as the main barrier to creating an EU-wide railway system. So mutual acceptance of both existing and new railway stock specifications needs to be facilitated, says rapporteur Mr Ortuondo Larrea . His report deals with a Commission proposal which merges and recasts the two previous directives regarding interoperability of the railway system, covering both the conventional and high speed rail.
TSIs: Technical Specifications for Interoperability
In addition to the Commission proposals, the Transport Committee adopted a range of technical compromise amendments that restructure a proposal for authorising the placing in service of railway vehicles that comply with Technical Specifications for Interoperability (TSIs) based on international standards and national rules.
Principle of mutual recognition
On 13 November, delegations of the Transport Committee and Council reached an agreement on outstanding points on this very technical issue, in order to achieve a first reading agreement in co-decision. The Committee proposed the principle of mutual recognition and the technical harmonisation of railway stock. It also sets clear time limits and criteria for granting authorisation, whilst for any refusal, a substantial safety risk had to be demonstrated by the national safety authority.
Towards an automatic authorisation procedure
The key point of agreement reached between the two institutions is the so-called automatic authorisation procedure. According to this procedure, railway vehicles will be automatically authorised to be placed in one Member State in the absence of a decision by a competent national safety authority within the prescribed time limits. The compromise proposal includes additional three months to the prescribed time limits. It takes into account the request of MEPs that there be a clear time limit for the authorisation of these vehicles. On the other hand, Council's concerns on safety implications with regard to the time needed by the national safety authorities were addressed as well.
Cross-community acceptance of rolling stock
This provision along with the others dealing with cross-community acceptance of rolling stock or vehicles streamlines the procedures of authorisations in the EU, thus promoting competitiveness of railways in Europe. Authorisations will now be accelerated while the administrative burden for the operators as well as for the Member States will be reduced. It has been agreed that the rules will be applied on the basis of two separate criteria: whether the vehicle is conform or not to the above-mentioned TSI or whether it concerns a first or an additional authorisation for placing the vehicle on EU tracks.
National and European vehicle registers
Other elements where Parliament and Council demonstrated a common approach are the provisions related to types of vehicles, the national and European vehicle registers and the register of infrastructure. Both parties have asked the European Railway Agency to prepare a reference document in which the classification of vehicles will be introduced according to three categories A, B and C.
The reports on Safety on the Community's railways and on the European Railway Agency
Reports adopted 29 November 2007
Directly linked with the interoperability reports are two reports drawn up by Transport Committee Chair Paolo Costa (ALDE, IT) on the revision of the Railway Safety Directive (RSD) and on the European Railway Agency (ERA). This issue is part of the so-called "cross-acceptance package" composed by these three reports. These reports were adopted by the 28-29 November plenary session in Brussels. (Link hereunder to adopted text).
Responsibility in the case of accidents
Ensuring the safety of railways in Europe but without hindering the cross-acceptance and the interoperability of railway rolling stock was the main concern of MEPs when debating in the November II plenary session the report on the revision of the Railway Safety Directive.
On the thorny issue of maintenance of vehicles, MEPs confirmed by a large majority in their vote that while a keeper for each vehicle should be designated of the maintenance, the responsibility for the operating safety of the keeper should be attributed to the railway undertaking, which was crucial for the responsibility in case of accidents. Members are in favour of a mandatory, instead of a voluntary as proposed by the Commission maintenance certification system for keepers of vehicles to be placed by 2010.
They also asked for a cost -benefit analysis before the drafting of Common safety targets. The advisory role of the ERA by delivering technical opinions for negative decisions taken by the authority on safety certificates was proposed as a first step towards a "court of appeal" in the rail sector.
The role of the European Railway Agency
Amending the regulation of the European Railway Agency was the second Costa report approved almost unanimously at the November II plenary session. Eight amendments were approved aiming at extending the Agency's competences and tasks on the cross-acceptance of railway vehicles.
A more European role is envisaged for the Agency, as the House voted that as from 2015 "the Agency shall be entrusted with the task of granting the authorisations" for railway vehicles conforming to TSIs, thus replacing Member States or the national railway agencies in their task of granting authorisations. MEPs also requested that the Agency shall draft a mandatory system of certification of vehicle keepers. Text adopted by the EP on the interoperability of the Community rail system (recast)
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0597 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-025-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Transport
European Aviation Safety Agency will be able to impose fines
2007-12-17 - 17:00
The European Parliament adopted a second reading report on common rules in the field of civil aviation and establishing a European Aviation Safety Agency. There is now an agreement between the European Parliament and the Council. The European Aviation Safety Agency is the centrepiece of the European Union’s strategy for aviation safety. Its mission is to promote the highest common standards of safety and environmental protection in civil aviation.
The amendments adopted at second-reading which are agreed with the Council introduce fines and periodic penalty payments. The report says at the agency's request the Commission may impose fines as an alternative for the outright withdrawal of a certificate. The report states:
(a) impose on the persons and the undertakings to which the Agency has issued a certificate, fines, where, intentionally or negligently, the provisions of this Regulation and its implementing rules have been breached;
(b) impose, on the persons and undertakings to which the Agency has issued a certificate, periodic penalty payments, calculated from the date set in the decision, in order to compel those persons and undertakings to comply with the provisions of this Regulation and its implementing rules.
The proposal seeks to address a long-standing anomaly in the EU: while aircraft now enjoy complete freedom within a unified market, safety standards continue to vary between the Member States. This, in spite of rapid growth in air traffic and the phenomenal success of low-cost airlines which now account for 12% of intra-Community traffic. Currently, responsibility for regulating air traffic standards in Europe falls on a number of bodies including the European Civil Aviation Conference (ECAC) and the Joint Aviation Authority. In addition, there is the International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO). A further organisation, Eurocontrol, brings together 35 European States. It is responsible for developing, co-ordinating and planning pan-European air navigation strategies. These organisations, however, are inter-governmental in nature and the rules decided are only applied if the States concerned wish to apply them. They do not have any binding regulatory powers. The differences in standards can be considerable. Sometimes the highest standards are not applied. Text adopted by the EP on European Aviation Safety Agency
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0607 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-024-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-026-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Texts adopted during December plenary
2007-12-17 - 17:00
The texts adopted in Strasbourg plenary 11-13 December 2007 are now available and can be accessed via the link hereunder. Adopted texts Texts adopted 11-13 December 2007
EN
1
LINK
/activities/expert/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-025-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-027-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
January I plenary - Strasbourg
2007-12-17 - 17:00
The first plenary of 2008 will be held from 14-17 January 2008 and the draft agenda will be available via the link hereunder. Draft Agenda 14-17 January 2008. Draft Agenda 14-17 January 2008
EN
1
LINK
/activities/public/plenSession.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-026-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-024-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-025-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-026-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-027-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-FULL DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-FULL DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-024-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-025-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-026-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071210BRI14639 ITEM-027-EN DOC XML V0//EN
