Comitology dispute delays civil aviation security deal
Transport
2007-12-18 - 18:14
Until a solution is found on comitology, the European Parliament and Council will not be able to reach a final agreement on aviation security, said the EP conciliation committee delegation today. The EP delegation has already agreed to the Council common position on other key points, such as financing security measures, one-stop security checks and "sky marshals".
On comitology, the EP delegation is to send the Council a letter proposing a compromise text, drafted by Transport Committee chairman and rapporteur, Paolo Costa (ALDE, IT), which would ensure that MEPs' veto rights under a new regulatory procedure with scrutiny also apply to security measures that are "unforeseen today" and therefore not yet included in the regulation.
General implementing measures provided for in the regulation (which Parliament is empowered to veto individually) concern, inter alia, categories of articles that may be prohibited, access control or criteria for defining critical parts of security-restricted areas.
Members made it clear that unless the Council accommodates Parliament's position, there will be no final agreement. It is now up to the Council to respond to this letter. The final deadline for the conciliation procedure is 16 January 2008.
Financing security measures
It is agreed that each Member State should determine the shares of the cost of security measures to be borne respectively by the state, the airport entities, air carriers, other responsible agencies or users. Member States and users may also contribute to cover the costs of more stringent security measures. Additionally, the Commission will, no later than 31 December 2008, present a report which "will consider what steps need to be taken in order to ensure that security charges are used exclusively to meet security costs, and to improve the transparency of such charges".
One-stop security checks
Passengers and/or their baggage arriving on flights from third countries that have aviation security standards equivalent to the EU law need not to be re-screened. Therefore, agreements between the EU and third countries recognising that the security standards are equivalent should be encouraged.
Sky marshals
It is agreed that those Member States that decide to deploy so-called "in-flight security officers" must ensure that they are specially selected and trained. Strict rules concerning sky marshals were a crucial point for Parliament at the first and second readings.
Procedure: Conciliation
2007-12-17 In the Chair EP Vice-President, Rodi KRATSA-TSAGAROPOULOU EPP-ED EL
EP Delegation to the Conciliation Committee
20071217IPR15663
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
