Rights of the child: Civil Liberties Committee sets out its strategy
Justice and home affairs
2007-12-19 - 13:02
The proposed EU strategy on the rights of the child won the backing of the EP Civil Liberties Committee on 18 December, but also inspired many new proposals from MEPs, including tougher measures to combat paedophilia on the internet. The committee also advocated creating a single set of extraterritorial criminal laws to counter child sex tourism, and a system enabling the prosecution within Europe of suppliers of products manufactured with child labour.
The Civil Liberties Committee reiterated the European Parliament's opposition to all forms of violence against children, and called for a specific budget heading for their rights, with which to fund work required by the future strategy. Its own-initiative report was approved almost unanimously (just one abstention).
Combating paedophile pornography and violence on the internet
The committee's many proposals included devising technical measures to combat the dissemination of paedophile content via the internet. They would like to involve access suppliers, search engines and even banks, so as to block payment by would-be purchasers of illegal content.
MEPs also wish to protect children by tightening up rules on the transmission of harmful content via the internet or multimedia messaging services and the sale of violent video games. They would like a uniform classification and labelling system to be created for such games, and for all audiovisual content.
Finally, they would like children to be better informed of their rights, via a dedicated internet site to be set up for this purpose.
Enforce ban on child labour
MEPs advocate a mechanism to enable the prosecution, in Europe, of suppliers of products that have been manufactured with child labour. The European Commission is urged to check wheter production lines comply with rules prohibiting child labour.
European kidnap alert system and prosecution of sex criminals in Europe
The committee recommends establishing a European kidnap alert system, and a telephone help line for children. It also advocates devising a European strategy, and creating a single EU-wide set of extraterritorial criminal laws, to counter child sex tourism.
Community instrument on adoption
Reiterating every child's right to a family, MEPs suggest establishing a Community instrument to facilitate adoption. Finally, they urge the EU to adhere to the UN and Council of Europe conventions on the rights of the child.
The report, draft by Roberta Angelilli (UEN, IT) is scheduled for a plenary vote at the January session, in Strasbourg.
Procedure: own-initiative report -- Plenary vote: January I session, Strasbourg
2007-12-17 Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs In the chair: Jean-Marie Cavada ALDE FR
20071217IPR15664
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
