Consumer credit legislation heads for Parliamentary vote
Consumers
2008-01-14 - 11:53
Europe-wide credit: a consumers dream?
Two-thirds of Europeans use credit to buy things like TVs and washing machines. Most credit loans are easy to get and come from national companies. On Tuesday MEPs will discuss proposals to facilitate credit across EU borders, making it easier for companies to compete across the European market. The vote is on Wednesday, but the outcome is by no means clear.
The new legislation will cover loans from €200 to € 75,000. It will not cover mortgages and charge cards.
The lower limit was set to cover SMS "quick loans", which are growing in popularity - especially in places like Sweden and Estonia. Under this system you can borrow hundreds of euros within 15 minutes by sending a text.
Customers pay different rates depending where they live. For example average interest rates are 6% in Finland, 8% in Germany and 12% in Portugal.
Directive aims for EU-wide credit market
The key aims of the proposals are to:
Extend the EU's internal market.
Allow people to choose the best offer available from banks or credit companies in another European country.
Ensure transparency and comparability of total loan cost and repayment details.
Allow consumers to cancel within 14 days.
Set out the total cost of the loan and repayment details.
Set out standard information for advertising, provided to consumers before the contract is signed and when it’s concluded.
Credit companies will have to explain the benefits and drawbacks of their products.
The EU credit market is enormous. In a report commissioned by the European Parliament, figures for the Eurozone show loans of €4,553 billion in January 2007. Of this €588 billion (13%) was in the form of consumer credit.
Since the initial proposal by the Commission in 2002, the complexity of the directive and its scope has ensured intense debate. Conflicting opinion about the level of penalties for early repayments on credit loans has been a key issue.
MEPs give proposals mixed reaction
Parliament's rapporteur for the issue is German Christian Democrat Kurt Lechner. He has voiced concerns that the proposals could mean extra costs and more red tape. Reacting to fears over people getting into debt with easy credit, he said that "you cannot prevent people becoming overly indebted by law, or you would have to prohibit people from taking out credit".
However, he thinks that the approach taken by national ministers in the Council is "overly complicated and overloaded" and that "consumers will be inundated with information".
German Socialist Evelyne Gebhardt has said the rapporteur’s position has not allowed an agreement to be reached with the Council of ministers prior to the vote in plenary. She said the Socialists, Liberals and Greens will table amendments supported by the Council and Commission that would allow the adoption of the directive. These amendments call for costs incurred on the early repayment of a loan to be not more than 1% of the total left on the loan and be "proportionate and justified".
She said the legislation would "make it easier for private customers to do credit business across borders".
A long running directive
The legislation passed its first reading in the EP in 2004 and this week will see the second reading. As late as last Thursday night, agreement had not been reached between MEPs and EU Ministers over the method of calculating the compensation for the bank in the event of early repayment of credit.
Watch the credit debate live online
The debate takes place on Tuesday 15 January from the European Parliament in Strasbourg from 1000 CET . MEPs will vote Wednesday from 1200. Watch it all live here on the Parliament's website
Links
20080111STO18360 Press info on Consumer credit Internal Market Committee Watch live
EN
1
PHOTO
20071105PHT12649.jpg
EN
3
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=IMCO
EN
4
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/faces/live/live-video.jsp?language=en
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071211IPR14719 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
