Remote sensing applications developed within the CAP
Agriculture
2008-01-16 - 14:30
The European Parliament adopted a non-binding report on remote sensing applications developed within the CAP with 594 votes in favour, 23 against and 54 abstentions.
The EU’s agricultural policy takes account of the social structure of agricultural and the natural disparities between the various agricultural regions of the EU. Hence there is a need for information on land condition and crop use. Remote sensing applications help provide some of this information. Between 2003 and 2007 a pilot project on remote-sensing techniques was initiated.
In July last year the European Commission proposed to extend the draft pilot project on remote sensing which was launched in 2003 until 2013. The Commission says that the techniques used have proven their efficiency in the domain of the management of CAP notably in terms of predicting yields and the follow-up of ground and earth conditions.
The remote-sensing applications constitute a tool for the Commission to: (a) help manage agricultural markets; (b) allow for agro-economic monitoring such as crop condition in order to estimate yields; (c) promote access to information regarding agricultural land and crop yield estimations; and (d) ensure technological follow-up of the agro-meteorological system.
The European Parliament says the financial framework for the implementation of this programme for the period 2008 to 2013 is hereby set at €9.2 million. The annual appropriations should be authorised by the budgetary authority within the ceilings of the budget headings in the financial framework.
Clarifying the objectives of the regulation
Parliament says that Joint Research Centre Agriculture Unit website should making all relevant research data freely available to the public.
The Commission should create an inventory of all spatial data, remote-sensing and agro-meteorological projects and consolidation of existing spatial data infrastructure and websites.
MEPs also clarify that remote sensing alone is not sufficient to manage agriculture markets. The purpose of the remote-sensing applications is to provide digital information to improve the tools for managing and monitoring the common agricultural policy. However, farm surveys, says the House, will remain necessary and these applications thus do not suffice for the full management of agricultural markets.
The regulation should be adopted at the next Agriculture Council held under the Slovenian Presidency.
20080115IPR18584 Common agricultural policy CAP: measures to be undertaken making use of the remote-sensing applications, 2008-2013. Regulation. Text, as adopted by the EP on 16 January, will shortly be available here
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5507442
EN
2
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
