Barriers for adult learning should be lifted, say MEPs
Education
2008-01-16 - 14:30
MEPs adopted on an own-initiative report by Doris Pack (EPP-ED, DE) on adult learning saying that barriers that keep adults from participating in education should be lifted, and the quality of the adult learning should be assured. The report was adopted with 609 votes in favour, 39 against and 16 abstentions.
Millions of adults should participate in lifelong learning in the coming years if the targets set by the Lisbon Strategy in order to increase the knowledge and competitiveness of the European work force are to be reached.
The European Parliament welcomes the Commission proposal for an Action plan for Adult Learning. The Action Plan was presented by the Commission in September 2007 and aims at removing barriers to the participation in adult learning, to increase the quality and efficiency of the sector, to speed up the process of validation, recognition of qualifications and to ensure sufficient investment and monitoring of the sector.
MEPs approve the approach by the Commission. They call on Member States to establish a lifelong learning culture, focusing on education and training for adults.
4 million more adults should participate in training
MEPs stress that education and training are critical factors for achieving the Lisbon Strategy and that 4 million more adults would need to participate in lifelong learning if the participation rate of the benchmark agreed by the Member States in the framework of Education and Training 2010-process should be reached. Figures from the Commission Communication show that the goal of 12.5% participation in adult learning by 2010 is far from reached; in the 2006 there was even a slight decrease to 9.6% of participation.
According to Eurostat's latest figures, (see link below) the UK scores highly at 26.6% just behind Sweden and Denmark. Ireland's figure is 7.5%. Life-long learning refers to persons aged 25 to 64 who stated that they received education or training in the four weeks preceding the survey.
In order to improve participation in lifelong learning, the House urges that more should be done in order to motivate more people to participate, and agrees that special phone lines and websites are very successful means to promote adult education To increase the potential of the adult learning. MEPs also want to link adult learning to the European Qualification Framework, so the qualifications obtained can be recognised in other Member States.
Lifelong learning during working hours
Lifelong learning should also be compatible with family life, the House states, and points out that this calls for social, economic and tax incentives to promote the access for adults to training. MEPs also say that it is important to encourage employers to could provide company childcare facilities for parents who return to work, and assure that these parents have the possibility to continue lifelong learning during working hours. The practice of employers financing and organising of training should become widespread and supported by tax concessions, MEPs believe.
Solidarity between generations
With view to the demographic challenges ahead, MEPs underline the need to improve the transmission and exchange of knowledge between the generations, in the form of mentoring schemes to support various entrepreneurial and craft activities.
The European Parliament also emphasises the importance of more support for language courses especially those aimed for immigrants, and for encouraging the learning of foreign languages among the population as a whole.
20080115IPR18583 Adult learning: it is never too late to learn Text, as adopted by the EP on 16 January, will shortly be available here Latest Eurostat statistics
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5484642
EN
2
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
3
LINK
http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
