EUROPOL revamped
Justice and home affairs
2008-01-17 - 15:10
Parliament adopted a report with 502 votes in favour, 46 against and 41 abstentions on a draft Council decision converting Europol into an EU agency, meaning that its funding will be provided from the EU budget, its staff will become Community officials and changes to its remit will be easier, thus enabling it to respond more quickly to new crime threats.
Europol is the EU body that deals with criminal intelligence. Its purpose is to improve cooperation between Member States' authorities on intelligence in the fight against serious organised crime and terrorism, with an emphasis on targeting criminal organisations. It is politically accountable to the Justice and Home Affairs Council via the Europol Management Board. The Council controls the appointment of Europol's director as well as its budget, which is currently funded from Member State contributions, rather than the EU budget.
The intention is now for the existing Europol Convention to be replaced with a Council decision, due to be finalised by 30 June 2008. The new Europol (also known as the European Police Office) will be funded from the EU budget as from 1 January 2010.
In addition, the draft decision seeks to extend Europol's mandate to criminal activity not strictly related to organised crime. This will make it easier for Europol to support Member States in cross-border criminal investigations where the involvement of organised crime is not demonstrated from the start.
The decision also provides for Europol to receive data from private bodies and to support Member States in connection with major international events with a public order policing impact.
More safeguards needed on data protection, say MEPs
In a consultation report drafted by Agustín Díaz de Mera García Consuegra (EPP-ED, ES), MEPs adopted a number of improvements to the draft decision. They welcome the creation of an independent Ombudsman to protect Europol data but they want extra safeguards on data protection, since data obtained from private bodies may not have been obtained in the first place by safe, reliable means.
Regarding democratic scrutiny, MEPs call for Parliament to have the right to be consulted not just over any proposed dismissal but also over the appointment of Europol's director. MEPs welcome the proposals for Europol to be funded from the EU budget as this will allow Parliament greater involvement in the agency's financing.
Lastly, this Decision, say MEPs, should be revised within a period of six months following the date of entry into force of the Treaty signed at Lisbon on 13 December 2007 amending the Treaty on European Union and the Treaty establishing the European Community.
20080115IPR18587 EUROPOL: establishing the European Police Office Text adopted by the EP on 17 January 2008 Europol is the European Law Enforcement Organisation
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5429252
EN
2
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
3
LINK
http://www.europol.europa.eu/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
