The Week Ahead 21-27 January 2008
Institutions
2008-01-17 - 18:14
Plenary session and committee meetings - Brussels
Special plenary session. Commission President José Manuel Barroso will present to MEPs the eagerly-awaited proposals on energy and climate change at an extraordinary plenary session of Parliament (Wednesday 12 midday - 1.30pm).
Musharraf. Pakistan's President Pervez Musharraf will debate with MEPs in the Foreign Affairs Committee (Monday). The committee will also hear from Saïd Jalili, Secretary General of the Iranian National Security Council (Wednesday).
Lisbon Treaty. The Constitutional Affairs Committee will vote on a draft report backing the reform treaty, ahead of a plenary vote in February (Wednesday).
Google/DoubleClick. A public hearing at the Civil Liberties Committee is to examine data protection in the internet age, with a special focus on Google's acquisition of DoubleClick (Monday).
Road freight. The Transport Committee votes on two reports on a draft regulation seeking to modernise and streamline the rules on access to the sector and to the market in road transport of goods and passengers. The aim is to reduce distortions of competition and improve compliance by carriers with labour regulations and road safety rules (Tuesday).
Europe's future economic policy. The Economic Affairs Committee is holding a meeting with EU national parliaments. High-profile speakers will include Jean-Claude Trichet, Alexandre Lamfalussy and Mario Monti, Slovenian presidency representatives and Commissioner Joaquín Almunia (Tuesday and Wednesday).
2006 budget discharge. Commissioner Siim Kallas will address the Budgetary Control Committee as part of a key meeting on the 2006 discharge (Tuesday).
Slovenian presidency. Representatives of the Council presidency-in-office for the first half of 2008 will present their programmes to Parliament's committees (Monday-Thursday).
Davos. EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering will take part in the World Economic Forum in Davos (Saturday).
20080117IPR19052 For details of all the week's events, see The Agenda
EN
1
LINK
/news/expert/event_top_page/default/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
