Post-Briefing - 14-17 January 2008 - Strasbourg plenary session
2008-01-21 - 13:43
Extraordinary Plenary - Wednesday, 23 January 2008
Please note that an Extraordinary plenary will take place in Brussels on Wednesday 23 January - 12 noon - 1.30pm - to discuss a Commission statement on its proposals on energy and climate change.
Highlights of the week in Strasbourg (14-17 January 2008) include :
Slovenia takes over EU presidency: prime minister addresses European Parliament
Janez Janša, Prime Minister of Slovenia and President of the EU Council, set out the policy priorities of his country's presidency in an address on Wednesday (16 January) to MEPs. As Parliament's President Hans-Gert Pöttering pointed out, this was the first time that one of the central European former communist countries who had joined the EU in 2004 was holding the presidency.
MEPs set out new charges system for 67 EU airports
The European Parliament adopted a legislative report that sets out common principles for levying airport charges at Community airports. The directive aims to prevent any abuse of a dominant position in the market by individual airports, thus contributing to the balanced development of the EU airport sector. The report was adopted by 613 votes in favour to 33 against and 51 abstentions.
Grand Mufti of Syria: a single civilisation unites us all
In a speech to MEPs on Tuesday (15 January) on the subject of intercultural dialogue, the Grand Mufti of Syria, Ahmad Badr Al-Din Hassoun, stressed the value of culture as a unifying rather than a dividing force. Dr Hassoun was addressing a formal sitting of Parliament as the first speaker in a series of visits by eminent religious and cultural leaders in 2008, which has been designated European Year of Intercultural Dialogue.
Kenya: MEPs call for fresh presidential elections
MEPs call for "fresh presidential elections" in case a credible and fair recount of the votes in the presidential election by an independent body proves impossible, according to a resolution adopted by the European Parliament. MEPs also ask for the freezing of further budgetary support to the government of Kenya until the current crisis is resolved. The joint resolution was adopted by a large majority in a show of hands.
MEPs adopt consumer credit directive, cross-border credit easier and simpler
Two out of three Europeans use credit to buy furniture, a washing machine or a car. Yet the market in consumer credit is still largely a national one. Parliament adopted at second reading a directive aiming to stimulate the European market while still protecting consumers. The amendments adopted at second-reading should conclude the legislative procedure as they were negotiated with the Council in advance. Parliament's rapporteur for the consumer credit directive is Kurt Lechner (EPP-ED, DE).
MEPs speak out in favour of more regional cooperation in the Black Sea region and the South Caucasus
The European Parliament adopted two reports, calling for more regional cooperation in the Black Sea and South Caucasus regions. In both areas, the House stressed the importance both of democratic principles and human rights and of the necessity to improve economic and trade relations, especially regarding energy supplies.
Arrest of Chinese dissident Hu Jia
In a resolution adopted on Thursday afternoon (17 January), MEPs called on the Chinese authorities to release human rights campaigner Hu Jia and to respect human rights in the run-up to this year's Olympic Games.
Democracy and human rights in Egypt
In a resolution adopted on Egypt, MEPs call on the government of that country to take a range of measures to improve democracy and human rights, such as ending the harassment of journalists and human rights defenders, lifting the state of emergency, investigating suspected cases of torture and guaranteeing the independence of the judiciary.
Sexual violence in Congo is "the worst in the world"
Parliament unanimously adopted a resolution calling on the international community to take action against the widespread sexual violence in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), which it describes as "the worst in the world".
European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights: adoption of a Multiannual Framework for 2007-2012
MEPs adopted a non-binding report on the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights with 462 votes in favour, 60 against and 51 abstentions. The amendments extend the scope of the Agency to cover new areas of competence.
More science funding needed to meet CO2 targets for car industry
Research funding needs to be increased to meet binding CO2 targets in the car industry, says the European Parliament's report on a competitive automotive regulatory framework (CARS 21). The House adds that cars should be permitted to emit more CO2 if these emissions result from mandatory safety measures, and that intellectual property rights must be effectively protected worldwide. The report was adopted by 607 votes in favour to 76 against and 14 abstentions.
MEPs call for better protection of workers from occupational diseases and workplace accidents
In a report on the Community strategy on health and safety at work 2007-2012, the European Parliament regrets that the Commission "is silent on targets for the reduction of occupational diseases". New and emerging risks had to be identified, and asbestos needed to be phased out. MEPs also repeat their call for a better protection of healthcare workers from blood borne diseases. The report was adopted with 598 votes in favour, 20 against and 23 abstentions.
EU action needed on tax treatment of cross-border corporate losses
Targeted action at EU level to align the currently varying tax treatment of cross-border corporate losses could be of great benefit to the functioning of the internal market, according to a report adopted by Parliament with 491 votes in favour 109 against and 90 abstentions.
Rights of the child: the European Parliament set out its strategy
An EU strategy on the rights of the child won Parliament's backing with 630 votes in favour, 26 against and 62 abstentions. MEPs call for the strategy to include tougher measures to combat paedophilia on the internet as well as steps to counter child sex tourism and enable suppliers of products manufactured with child labour to be prosecuted in Europe.
EUROPOL revamped
Parliament adopted a report by 502 votes in favour to 46 against and 41 abstentions on a draft Council decision converting Europol into an EU agency, meaning that its funding will be provided from the EU budget, its staff will become Community officials and changes to its remit will be easier, thus enabling it to respond more quickly to new crime threats.
Barriers for adult learning should be lifted, say MEPs
MEPs adopted on an own-initiative report by Doris Pack (EPP-ED, DE) on adult learning saying that barriers that keep adults from participating in education should be lifted, and the quality of the adult learning should be assured. The report was adopted with 609 votes in favour, 39 against and 16 abstentions.
Remote sensing applications developed within the CAP
The European Parliament adopted a non-binding report on remote sensing applications developed within the CAP with 594 votes in favour, 23 against and 54 abstentions. 20080111BRI18238
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Opening of the January 2008 Strasbourg plenary session: protecting freedom of speech at the EP
2008-01-21 - 13:43
The first Strasbourg plenary session of 2008 was opened by the President of Parliament, Hans-Gert Pöttering, who made a number of announcements about events that had taken place over the last few weeks and about Parliament's work over the coming year. He announced that measures would be taken against MEPs who had disrupted the signing of the Charter of Fundamental Rights at the December 2007 session. The entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty remains Parliament's main priority for 2008, said Mr Pöttering. He welcomed the extension of the Schengen area on 21 December 2007 to include the countries that joined the EU in 2004, as well as the fact that Malta and Cyprus had joined the eurozone on 1 January 2008. In addition, the President highlighted the fact that in the context of European Year of Dialogue between Cultures (2008), launched in Ljubljana on 9 January, the Grand Mufti of Syria would address the House on Tuesday (15 January).
On the legislative front, key areas in 2008 would be, on the one hand, the environment and climate change, and on the other the safeguarding of Europe's competitiveness and jobs. "We must succeed together in finding a responsible balance between economy and ecology", he said.
Measures against MEPs who disrupted proceedings in December
On 12 December 2007 the presidents of the European Council, the Commission and the European Parliament signed the Charter of Fundamental Rights. "For the citizens of the European Union and also the European Parliament, this was an important event", stressed Mr Pöttering. However, a number of MEPs had protested vociferously and even attempted to prevent speakers from speaking. This was an infringement of freedom of speech and a breach of Parliament's Rules of Procedure, said Mr Pöttering. Measures provided for under the Rules would therefore be taken against those Members. The same would apply to those MEPs who had treated Parliament's ushers "in an unacceptable manner".
Invitees in Year of Intercultural Dialogue
Sophia in 't Veld (ALDE, NL) asked why the Conference of Presidents, in approving the list of individuals to address the House as part of the Year of Intercultural Dialogue, had interpreted this exclusively as being an "inter-religious monologue". Could the list not be widened to include women and non-religious representatives? She proposed Asma Jahangir, UN Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Religion or Belief, as a possible speaker. Sarah Ludford (ALDE, UK) stressed that the Grand Mufti did not represent European Muslims and urged that a European representative of Islam be invited.
In reply, President Pöttering pointed out that the list of speakers had been approved by a large majority of the Conference of Presidents but that it was not final and other proposals could indeed be made. "With goodwill, the EP will be able to produce as balanced a list as possible", he concluded.
Agenda changes
The House postponed to a subsequent plenary session the joint debate and vote on the Panayiotis DEMETRIOU (EPP-ED, CY) report on a simplified regime for the border controls with Switzerland and Liechtenstein, and the Michael CASHMAN (PES, UK) report on a simplified regime for border controls with the ten countries that joined the EU in 2004, the reason being that the Council has not yet processed this legislation and the Slovenian presidency has therefore requested more time.
A request by the ALDE group, supported by the Greens/EFA group, that the debate on the situation in Pakistan on Wednesday (16 January) be followed by the adoption of a resolution was rejected (68 votes in favour, 126 against, 12 abstentions).
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
European Council
Slovenia takes over EU presidency: prime minister addresses European Parliament
2008-01-21 - 13:43
Janez Janša, Prime Minister of Slovenia and President of the EU Council, set out the policy priorities of his country's presidency in an address on Wednesday (16 January) to MEPs. As Parliament's President Hans-Gert Pöttering pointed out, this was the first time that one of the central European former communist countries who had joined the EU in 2004 was holding the presidency. Mr Janša told the House of a time in 1988 when he was arrested for criticising the then Yugoslav regime, and how the popular protests which had ensued had "set in motion the beginnings of change". Now he stood before European Parliament as Prime Minister of Slovenia and President of the European Council. "If anyone had predicted such a possibility twenty years ago in my prison cell, I would not have believed one word of it", he said.
Turning to the priorities of his country's presidency over the coming six months, he highlighted the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty, saying "We hope that by the end of the Slovenian Presidency, the majority of the Member States will have followed in Hungary's footsteps. The Slovenian Parliament will decide on ratification before the end of this month. The goal is to have the Lisbon Treaty enter into force on 1 January 2009".
Mr Janša then highlighted economic reform and emphasised the next three-year cycle of implementation of the Lisbon Strategy. We must, he said, "continue in the same direction as we have so far, putting the investment in people, modernisation of labour markets, an increase of entrepreneurial potential, provision of affordable and reliable supplies of energy, and environmental protection at the top of the list".
"We must ensure that there will be no obstacles to the flow of ideas and knowledge", said the prime minister. "At the spring European Council, we therefore wish to add a fifth freedom ­– the free flow of knowledge – to the four existing freedoms of the EU". In addition, progress was needed on the internal market in services and innovations. He also promised "to bring about progress in liberalisation of the internal energy market".
On external policy, the presidency would continue accession negotiations with Croatia and Turkey. Mr Janša then emphasised the importance of the Western Balkans, starting with Kosovo. He said "the current status quo is unsustainable" and "the Kosovo issue demands a special solution". He promised that "the Presidency will be coordinating solutions enjoying the broadest support within the EU and at the same time guaranteeing long-term stability in the region".
Serbia, the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Albania, Montenegro and Bosnia and Herzegovina all needed assistance or special attention. In the case of Bosnia, he said, "We should not forget the refugees who have not yet returned home, or the serious crimes that have as yet gone unpunished".
Looking further afield, he wished to pursue or intensify the European Neighbourhood Policy, the Barcelona Process and Euro-Med. In addition, the Slovenian presidency would hold four summits: with the US, Russia, Japan and the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean.
Other key challenges facing the EU at global level were reform of the UN and the establishment of a new global order, combating poverty in developing countries, the fight against climate change, and intercultural dialogue.
Concluding, the prime minister said "It is our greatest wish to contribute to the increase in the number of satisfied Europeans. We wish that some day any person walking the EU streets will be able to answer without hesitation if asked whether he or she cares for the future of the EU: 'I care for Europe because I know that Europe cares for me'. "
European Commission President
Commission President José Manuel BARROSO began by addressing his first words to Slovenia, pointing out that Slovenia is a great example of success and that Slovenia and Slovenians are 'symbols of the struggle for freedom'. He stated that this enforces his 'full belief that [the 2004] enlargement is indeed one of the greatest achievements of the EU.'
The President then addressed three of the primary issues of importance for the EU during the months ahead - the Lisbon Treaty, the Energy and Climate Change Package and the Renewed Lisbon Strategy.
The President referred to the Lisbon Treaty as a 'credible and balanced Treaty' which 'leaves the Union in good shape to ensure that we can deliver on our political priorities.' He called on all EU Member States to ratify the Treaty.
Speaking about the energy and climate change packages, the President pointed out that this was a response to the call for precise and legally binding targets. The priorities in this area would focus on competitiveness, sustainability and security of supply. The President went on to say that the package would demonstrate 'our willingness to put our money where our mouth is' and that it would be 'a win-win situation.'
The President pointed out that the Lisbon strategy is working, but he gave a list of what Europe needs at this point - making the free movement of knowledge a reality, putting a Small Business Act in place to foster the growth of SMEs and developing active labour policies. The President stated that 'we need to offer priorities, not just for some ... but for all.' He went on to say that 'we must promote the entrepreneur spirit of Europeans'. The President expressed his confidence that 'our economic fundamentals are sound and solid' but concluded by stating that 'global conditions require that Europe continues its reform process.'
The President concluded by stating that with all three priorities above achieved, 'we will have in 2009 a more confident and better prepared Europe to face the future. ..[..].. a strong Europe, an open Europe, a Europe of freedom, solidarity and security.'
Political group speakers
"Your country works", and is in the "vanguard of making people feel they belong to Europe", said EPP-ED chairman Joseph DAUL (EPP-ED, FR) with feeling, as he pledged his group's support for the Presidency.
Since 2004, Slovenia has recorded "success after success", achieving in 10 years "what we could not do in 50", pursued Mr Daul, citing Slovenia's rapid transition to a strong market economy and relatively low unemployment, which had enabled it to adopt the Euro already, and its joining the Schengen group in 2007. Slovenia, the first new Member State to hold the Presidency, is also likely to be in the vanguard of countries ratifying the Lisbon Reform Treaty, introducing growth and competitiveness measures, and promoting intercultural dialogue, he predicted.
The EPP-ED group will support the Presidency's efforts inter alia to have the Treaty of Lisbon ratified quickly, so as to get Europe working before the 2009 European elections, enable it to prosper whilst protecting the environment, harness knowledge and innovation to enable it to compete worldwide, meet energy efficiency targets, support stability and co-operation in the Balkans, and foster multicultural and multi-faith dialogue, concluded Mr Daul, wishing the Presidency good luck.
"The Socialist group is willing to support the Presidency with all means at its disposal", said chairman Martin SCHULZ (PES, DE), adding that it deserves the support of all democrats, and that Slovenia's emergence from communist dictatorship had graphically demonstrated, yet again, that liberty and democracy always win in the end.
"We're already talking politics" noted Mr Schulz, approving the knowledge and expertise revealed in the Council President's statement. EU enlargement is not yet concluded, he stressed, noting that "we are still talking to Macedonia, Croatia and Turkey" and adding that he would particularly like to clarify the Presidency's view on the latter.
Mr Schulz welcomed the Presidency's view that EU institutions are strong enough to organize neighbourhood policy, despite possible rifts in the Council, and praised the demonstration of confidence in the free movement of people demonstrated by Slovenia's joining the Schengen area. He asked the Presidency to "check up" on claims that the transfer of Nokia's facility from Bochum to Romania was being "financed with EU money".
Mr Schulz concluded by noting that the EU was still far from the vision of first Commission President Walter Hallstein, whom, he said, had advocated Turkish membership.
Graham WATSON (ALDE, UK) said: "My Group comes to you with one simple message. 'Europe expects'. It expects 2008 to be a year of progress. We expect that progress to start now. And we expect your Presidency to rise to the challenge. "
Your programme speaks of the importance of internal dynamism and that Mr Schulz is the way to create jobs and to maintain jobs in this continent.
Progress in the Western Balkans is rightly one of your priorities and your experience and understanding of the area will be a bonus to our Union. Nonetheless, I suspect that maintaining as you do that the situation in Bosnia-Herzegovina is worse than that in Kosovo does not reflect majority opinion in the Union. Nor am I sure it is a good way to motivate the people of Bosnia-Herzegovina. If it is designed to appease Serbia, it will not work. Sweetening the pill of Kosovo's independence with a Stabilisation and Association Agreement may be a way forward.
But while Mr Djelic readies his pen to come to Brussels my Group reiterates – in the strongest possible terms – that there can be no Stabilisation and Association Agreement without Serbia's full cooperation with the ICTY.
Mr Serge Brammertz, the New Chief Prosecutor, has yet to see fresh evidence of cooperation. None of us Mr President-in-Office wish to see Serbia remain on Europe’s sidelines and your Presidency's courteous and constructive attitude may well bring it in from the cold and deliver Mr Radko Mladic.
But in the meantime as you say in Slovenia, ‘pray for a good harvest, but keep on hoeing’.
Commencing his speech in Gaelic, Brian CROWLEY (UEN, IE) said that Slovenia was taking on the presidency of the EU at a "challenging time". The key challenges include, he said, the ratification of the EU Reform Treaty, the spotlight is on the Balkans, a new EU energy package and renewed effort to solve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.
Continuing in English, Mr Crowley stated that "as has rightly been commented on by colleagues already, the list of what Europe needs to be doing is endless. The range of topics and decisions and the areas of interest and of conflict that have to be dealt with are enormous.
Rather than give lectures to you on what you fail to do or on what others may fail to do in the future, I shall focus briefly on three areas.
Firstly, the Reform Treaty, the Lisbon Treaty: its ratification is essential for the onward development of the European Union.
Secondly, with regard to future enlargements: we must ensure that candidate countries feel they have an opportunity and a chance to become members of the European Union in the near future.
Thirdly and, in my opinion, most importantly, Kosovo and what is happening there, and a peaceful transition from its present status to whatever future status may emerge. We have already seen tremendous success in Kosovo where joint police forces from both ethnic groups are patrolling jointly in each other’s areas, where there is no longer that idea of a single police force for a single people, but a joint police force for all the people of Kosovo.
Your experience, Mr Prime Minister, as a rebel in one sense, as an intellectual but, most importantly of all, as a democrat and as the voice of reason that could lead your country from the dark ages of Communism into the bright lights – sometimes dimmed because of energy crises – and future of the European Union, that kind of image and that kind of imagery is what is most important to the people of Bosnia, Serbia, Kosovo and, indeed, Turkey.
I look forward to working with you and with your Government. Despite the fact that you may be small as a country, not only are you big in spirit but there is also great quality there. As has already been proven by your own starting of this process, you are not afraid to stand up to the ‘big boys’ when they try to bully you around the place. But, most importantly of all, what you bring is the moral certainty of where you have come from.
What the European Union needs today is new heroes – heroes who know what it is like not to have freedom; heroes who know what it is like not to have the freedom of speech, liberty and democracy. That is the best light that we can shine in the dark corners of the European continent today."
Monica FRASSONI (Greens/EFA, IT) said that "a low carbon economy is not a nuclear economy." She criticised "wasting time in a new form of nuclear power that doesn't exist yet or is dubious, like carbon sequestration." Real sustainable energy like sun and wind-energy should be pushed and encouraged. She criticised the lack of access to documents of negotiations of partnership agreements, stating the example of China: "The European Parliament has not yet received anything to tell us how things are going, everything is happening in total secrecy. The Parliament should be informed about what is going on."
Francis WURTZ (GUE/NGL, FR) stressed the need to debate social dumping and to address the erosion of purchasing power in parallel to rising profits. On Kosovo, he asked: "How can we explain that 2 billion euros aid of the international community has failed to lead to any growth, 50% unemployment, corruption, and deep rooted mafia groups?" This would have to be answered before any decision was taken. He also addressed the issue of illegal immigrants: "At the moment the Return Directive is really a shameful directive and human rights defenders haven't hesitated to call it so."
Jens-Peter BONDE (IND/DEM, DK) criticised Mr. Janša regarding the ratification of the Reform Treaty: "You are part in a political agreement among prime ministers to avoid referendums. This agreement is a violation of the treaty, the Commission should have protested it instead of supporting the attempt to avoid the peoples of Europe." He went on to say that "the Lisbon treaty was decided as closed as possible and so far away as possible from the voters. Now, it seems that only Ireland can save our European democracy."
"When I hear that an objective of Slovenia also consists of getting all of the former Yugoslav states into the EU, I think that is important and right. We should round off in territorial terms EU enlargement", said Andreas MÖLZER (NI, AT). "I think Croatia is the country in the region most ripe for accession." Concerning Kosovo, he stressed that both the Kosovo Albanian's and Serbs' view would have to be taken into account: "We need to make sure that Serbia is not driven into the arms of the Kremlin".
British and Irish speakers
Mary Lou McDONALD (GUE/NGL, IE) wished the Slovenian Presidency well on this historic day. There was no doubt in her mind of the capacity of Slovenia, a small Member State, to preside over a successful presidency.
If we are serious about having a Europe that really cares and puts the citizen at the centre, Ms McDonald said, then this requires a radical step change in our approach and in the content of our policy in this institution and across the institutions of the European Union.
Ms McDonald shared the concerns of a previous speaker at the fact that referendums will not be held in Member States on the issue of the Lisbon Treaty noting that she herself comes from a jurisdiction in which there will be a referendum and the people will have an opportunity to assess in a real-life way how they reckon this project is advancing and developing.
Addressing the President-in-Office, Ms McDonald stated that "in Ireland you caused something of a stir: you were reported in the media as saying that it is important not to launch some discussions that might cause problems in our country. This indicates to us that you propose postponing controversial or difficult issues. We would like to know what those issues are."
Concluding, Ms McDonald said "if we are serious about democracy in the Union, if we are serious about a Union that cares, we certainly have to ensure that full information on policy initiatives and direction are given to the people."
Giles CHICHESTER (EPP-ED, UK) warmly welcomed the Prime Minister of Slovenia to Parliament and wished him well in his period as President-in-Office of the Council. Mr Chichester felt sure that Slovenia would carry out the task ahead with great competence.
Welcoming the emphasis given to the next stage in the Lisbon Strategy, Mr Chichester said that there remains much to be done to persuade Member States to reform their economies, he said, and he hoped that the Presidency will advocate greater liberalisation, reforms to labour markets and ensure European business benefits from globalisation. Europe, he said, needs to be more competitive, more focused on creating new jobs and less concerned with protecting a social model that hampers employment growth.
Mr Chichester said he wanted to see action on completing the internal market and in particular the telecoms sector. He welcomed the announcement by the Commissioner last year on further liberalising the telecoms market. We now, he said, have the opportunity to reassess the existing framework to get rid of bottlenecks and to map out a more competitive future for this crucial industry.
Mr Chichester looked forward to hearing how the Presidency intends to take matters forward and he also welcomed the commitment to pursue vigorously the energy and climate change agenda. The EU has established tough carbon emissions targets and it is now incumbent upon Member States to follow through with real action, and not just words, to ensure burden sharing does not just end up as load-shedding, he concluded.
Referring to the Prime Minister's moving account of his country and indeed his own history and his pride in Slovenia and his talk with some emotion of his experience in the prison cell, John BOWIS (EPP-ED, UK) said he hoped that those are the emotions he will bring to the Presidency – the belief in human rights and the determination that Europe shall have that pride too.
Mr Bowis highlighted two areas: environment, because alongside human rights and the Lisbon Agenda goes a clean environment, a healthy environment and indeed a healthy people. That environment, he said, needs to move on from Bali, which was a great talking shop. "We need real action, realistic action, and that must start next week with our climate change package."
Secondly, in the health field, he said, we need legal certainty on cross-border health. There is a great new opportunity for Europe’s citizens. On this, Mr Bowis asked that particular attention be paid to mental health. If there is any criticism of Slovenia he had, it is the slowness with which it has enacted its mental health laws. Now, he said, you have an opportunity to lead on mental health following the Green Paper and he hoped that the Presidency will take that up. "You are a small country, a proud country and, Mr President, the small countries of Europe are usually the best Presidents of the European Union. I wish you success in that. I have confidence that Slovenia under your leadership will meet that pride in success and achievement by the time you finish in six months’ time."
Concluding, Mr Bowis said he read with concern in the press this week that some Member States are trying to undermine the EU agreement of last year on climate change and we will pay particular attention to see that the British Government lives up to the commitments it has entered into.
Avril DOYLE (EPP-ED, IE) joined her colleagues in welcoming the Prime Minister of Slovenia. It is true, she said, that the current Balkan situation represents unfinished business and to all of us peace in the region is very important. She thanked the Prime Minister particularly for his sensitive handling of the forthcoming Irish referendum needed for the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty.
"Perhaps in your concluding remarks, I could add your words to our referendum slogan when you said: ‘I care about Europe because Europe cares about me’. What better slogan for the Irish referendum! We can take nothing for granted – it will be hard to deliver – but believe you me the Fine Gael Party, of which I am a member, our leader and all the Members of the European Parliament will leave no stone unturned to ensure a ‘yes’ outcome to the referendum of the Lisbon Treaty in Ireland". We look forward to delivering it to you during your presidency, she concluded.
Responses to the debate
Replying to the debate, prime minister Janša stressed that while ratification of the Lisbon Treaty was a priority of his country's presidency it was up to each Member State to carry out its own ratification process and the presidency would certainly not interfere in that.
He also stressed the need for a balance between environmental, economic and social issues.
"I wouldn't like to see the EU starting a big debate on legal basis for solving the Western Balkans issue after a long period of looking for solutions. Europe doesn't have to be divided. I warn that the fact that a similar question on legal basis in the 1990s caused deaths of more than 100 000 people in Bosnia. On Bosnia, I didn't say that it is a bigger problem than Kosovo regarding security, but there are big problems, for example the return of refugees, we are planning actions regarding this and this is one of the challenges," the prime minister concluded.
European Commission President José Manuel BARROSO referred first to 'the very large consensus ..[evident from the interventions by MEPs].. supporting the priorities that were presented by the Slovenian Presidency.' He then went on to discuss the reactions to the Commission priorities he had outlined in his previous speech and stated that he 'was very encouraged by the support' but that it was 'very important that we now deliver on our targets.'
In answer to a question by German MEPs about the use by Romania of EU funding for delocalisation of industry within the EU, the President responded that he could 'confirm that no ERDF funding is implicated.' He went on to say that the Commission 'would consider it unacceptable.'
In conclusion, the President called on Member States to 'have the courage to explain the benefits of enlargement.' He pointed out that it is 'very important ..[..].. that we all explain that this enlargement of the EU is not only good for the new members but that it is also an opportunity for the Union as a whole.' Slovenian Presidency of the EU 2008
EN
1
LINK
http://www.eu2008.si/en/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Consumers
MEPs adopt consumer credit directive, cross-border credit easier and simpler
2008-01-21 - 13:43
Two out of three Europeans use credit to buy furniture, a washing machine or a car. Yet the market in consumer credit is still largely a national one. Parliament adopted at second reading a directive aiming to stimulate the European market while still protecting consumers. The amendments adopted at second-reading should conclude the legislative procedure as they were negotiated with the Council in advance. Parliament's rapporteur for the consumer credit directive is Kurt Lechner (EPP-ED, DE). The new directive aims to harmonise consumer credit contracts in a number of areas, such as standard information to be included in advertising provided to consumers before contracts are signed and when they are concluded, calculations of the total cost of a loan, the right to cancel and the right to pay off a loan early.
According to the Commission, the consumer credit market across the EU the picture is varied, as markets are in different stages of development. The outstanding consumer credit per person ranges from less than €100 in some Member States like Lithuania or Slovakia to over €3000 in Member States like the UK or Ireland with the highest level of consumer credit. The consumer credit market in the EU is already worth over €800 billion, with an average annual growth rate of over 8%.
That shows the potential for big savings for consumers, if increased competition brings even a small reduction in the interest rates charged to consumers on such a significant amount.
According to ECB data the average rate charged on a consumer credit in the Euro area in 2007 varies from around 6% in the cheapest country (Finland) to over 12% in Portugal, the country with the highest interest rate. Other examples illustrate this variety of situations: 9.4% in Italy and Spain, 7.1% in France or 6.8% in Ireland. This suggests there are considerable potential benefits, for banks and consumers, in developing a cross border market in consumer credit.
The directive was proposed by the Commission in autumn 2002 and given a first reading by Parliament in April 2004. It took the Council until September this year to reach a common position on the issue. A political informal agreement has been reached with the Council just before the vote. The compromise proposed by several EP political groups, and agreeable to the Council was adopted by a large majority.
What will change?
The day the new directive will be implemented, all EU consumers will have the right to the same information for choosing the best offer in their country or another EU Member State. It will be easier to calculate the total cost of a loan offered by various banks, credit intermediaries or credit institution .Consumers will also be able to benefit from bank products that are not available in their own country.
It will be also easier for banks to offer their products to all European citizens. The new legislation should enable the European economy to take advantage of the potential of the consumer loans market which is worth some 800 billion euros annually. The way is to develop the cross-border trade in consumer credit. Removing obstacles should boost competition and prompt credit institutions to improve performance, by diversifying and enhancing their products for Europe’s consumers. In spite of earlier EU regulations (the basic directive in the matter is from 1987) only 1 percent of consumer loans are cross-border.
The directive lays down the standard information that must be mentioned in advertising containing financial information on a loan. With the aim being to enable consumers to take fully-informed decisions, lenders will be expected to provide information on the borrowing rate and on any charges included in the total cost of the credit to the consumer.
Harmonisation will go further as regards the information to accompany the signing of the contract. But MEPs chose to leave more room for manoeuvre than either the Commission or the Council proposed when it comes to the basic pre-contractual information which must be provided to the consumer using the standard European consumer Credit Information form.
Definitions will be standardised EU-wide and will be used for instance as a basis for calculating the annual percentage rate of charge (APR). Other definitions will be standardised, for example concerning overdraft facilities. But the text adopted by European Parliament is less strict than that in the Council's common position when it comes to contractual and pre-contractual information which lenders are obliged to provide to their customers in the case of overdrafts .
Avoiding taking on too much debt
One priority is to protect consumers against taking on too much debt. The information provided by the lender must enable the borrower to take a responsible decision. The lender must also assess the solvency of the consumer before concluding a contract. Databases accessible by banks should make it easier to meet this requirement. But if the banks refuses a loan on these grounds, the customer will have the right, to see, without charge, the information in that database and where necessary correct any errors. Where legislation providing for similar measures already exists in a Member State, these mechanisms will be preserved. In other cases, they will have to be set up.
Right to pay off early
The compensation cap to be paid by the client for early repayment was the biggest negotiating hurdle between the Council and the EP.
The new directive will give consumers the right to pay off loans early while also entitles the lender to ask a compensation for possible costs, fair and objectively justified, directly linked to early repayment of credit . The directive stipulates the rules by which the compensation to be paid by the client can be calculated and determines its maximal early played credit percentage ceiling.
The directive defines the situations when the compensation cannot be claimed and allows Member countries to provide that the creditor may exceptionally claim a higher compensation. This may happen if the bank can prove that the loss he suffered from early repayment exceeds the maximal basic amount defined in the directive. The harmonised method of calculating the loss is given in the text.
In the event of early repayment of credit the creditor will be entitled to fair and objectively justified compensation for possible costs directly linked to early repayment of credit provided that the early repayment falls within a period for which the borrowing rate is fixed. Such compensation may not exceed 1% of the amount of credit repaid early, if the period of time between the early repayment and the agreed termination of the credit agreement exceeds one year. If the period does not exceed one year, the compensation may not exceed 0.5% of the amount of credit repaid early.
Any compensation should not exceed the amount of interest the consumer would have paid during the period between the early repayment and the agreed date of termination of the credit agreement.
Right of withdrawal
A right of cancellation within 14 days will also apply EU-wide. But MEPs say that for linked credit agreements this period could be reduced to three days at the request of the customer.
What loans are covered by the directive?
The new legislation will cover consumer loans between €200 and €75 000 which has to be repaid within more then one month. It will only cover credit contracts, not guarantors and other aspects of credit agreement law. The directive will apply only to loan contracts on which interest is paid, and not products such as deferred payment cards (charge cards) and will not cover the mortgage credits.
Finding the right balance
The situation varies greatly from one Member State to another, both in legal terms and as regards the credit habits of households, a situation which does not make harmonisation easier. In addition, the right balances must be struck. On the one hand, easier credit must not lead to a debt burden on households. On the other, consumer protection must not generate costs that could be intolerable to the financial health of banking institutions. On the one hand, better consumer protection means strengthening customers' rights to information; on the other hand, too many bureaucratic requirements might discourage banks from offering credit on favourable terms. This balancing act explains the long delay in arriving at a second reading.
Directive does not apply to :
(a) credit agreements which are secured either by a mortgage or by another comparable security commonly used in a Member State on immovable property or secured by a right related to immovable property;
(b) credit agreements the purpose of which is to acquire or retain property rights in land or in an existing or projected building;
(c) credit agreements involving a total amount of credit less than €200 or more than €75 000.
(d) hiring or leasing agreements where an obligation to purchase the object of the agreement is not laid down either by the agreement itself or by any separate agreement; such an obligation shall be deemed to exist if it is so decided unilaterally by the creditor;
(e) credit agreements in the form of an overdraft facility and where the credit has to be repaid within one month;
(f) credit agreements where the credit is granted free of interest and without any other charges and credit agreements under the terms of which the credit has to be repaid within three months and only insignificant charges are payable;
(g) credit agreements where the credit is granted by an employer to his employees as a secondary activity free of interest or at annual percentage rates of charge lower than those prevailing on the market and which are not offered to the public generally;
(h) credit agreements which are concluded with investment firms as defined in Article 4(1) of Directive 2004/39/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 21 April 2004 on markets in financial instruments or with credit institutions as defined in Article 4 of Directive 2006/48/EC for the purposes of allowing an investor to carry out a transaction relating to one or more of the instruments listed in Section C of Annex I to Directive 2004/39/EC, where the investment firm or credit institution granting the credit is involved in such transaction;
(i) credit agreements which are the outcome of a settlement reached in court or before another statutory authority;
Next steps
The Directive adopted by the European Parliament must be now formally agreed by the Council and will enter into force on the twentieth day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union. Member States have two years from the date of the entry into force for implementing this Directive. The Commission has to undertake every five years a review of the thresholds laid down in this Directive and its annexes and the percentages used to calculate the compensation payable in the event of early repayment.
British and Irish speakers in the debate 15 January in Strasbourg
Malcolm Harbour (West Midlands, Conservative, EPP-ED, UK) said: "Consumer credit is a really important mechanism for bringing consumers into the market place. We want a thriving and innovative market; we want companies actively offering a wide range of products and services tailored to the need of consumers to buy specific articles, products or services."
Arlene McCarthy (North West, Labour, PES, UK) said: "I believe it is a vast improvement on the original proposal it focuses on the essential elements and components to begin the opening of the market and to protect the consumer and those benefits I believe are enabling the consumers to compare offers for credit obliging the lender to assess the credit worthiness of the consumer, that will be important in the fight against debt across the EU. It will oblige the lender to explain and all creditors will be responsible for providing comprehensive and standard information now as a result of our amendments in a simplified format. I welcome the 14-day withdrawal … to early repayment."
Diana Wallis (Yorkshire and the Humber, Liberal Democrat, ALDE, UK) said: "As legislators facing that global backdrop, we need to do something. We need to stimulate the EU’s market in financial services, but of course, on the other hand, we also need to ensure that our consumers make sensible and informed choices and that they have all the information and the comparators available to them to do that. Many of us in this House, and particularly in this committee, have over the last couple of years sat through an enquiry of this Parliament into the demise of the British insurer, Equitable Life. We know what the consequences are for consumers in financial services if we get the cross-border regulatory regime wrong. In this instance we need it and we need to get it right, particularly in view of the global circumstances that we face."
Eoin Ryan, (Fianna Fáil, Dublin, UEN, IE) said: "I support the need to update EU legislation in this area. The last time we had a directive on this was in 1987 and certainly the consumer credit market has changed dramatically since then.
This EU directive on consumer credit loans seeks to introduce a greater level of competition into the €800 billion consumer credit market. It will bring legal certainty to consumers, which is absolutely vital if people are to shop around and to look for the best product which suits their needs. It will also help business to compete. When you look at the differences in consumer credit rates around Europe – 6% in some countries, up to 12% in others – it surely is time that the consumer got a better choice."
Godfrey Bloom (UKIP, Yorkshire and the Humber IND/DEM, UK) said: "I see not a great deal of experience so it is a question of the blind leading the blind and I think that this place which has not managed to audit its own books for nearly 11 years commenting on this is slightly absurd. The fact that you can actually have rules for Bucharest, London and Paris and consumers in those places is absolutely ludicrous and perhaps I could warn people like the UK Government who think that by bailing out banks to the tune of 50% of their entire reserves is fundamentally wrong so let me give one tip to the consumer if I may here. Never a lender or a borrower be and to governments let me tell you this. A fool and his money are soon parted." Consumer Credit - Texts adopted by Parliament
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0011 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Transport
MEPs set out new charges system for 67 EU airports
2008-01-21 - 13:43
The European Parliament adopted a legislative report that sets out common principles for levying airport charges at Community airports. The directive aims to prevent any abuse of a dominant position in the market by individual airports, thus contributing to the balanced development of the EU airport sector. The report was adopted by 613 votes in favour to 33 against and 51 abstentions. The Commission had proposed that the new rules should apply to airports with an annual traffic of more than one million passengers, but the European Parliament is in favour of five million passengers as a threshold or which accounted annually for more than 15% of the passenger movements in the Member State where it is located. This reflects a concern that the Directive as drafted would capture smaller airports who are not in a potentially market dominant position. The European Parliament's decision means that 67 airports throughout the EU will be affected by the directive.
Under the new rules, all airports will be bound by common rules on provision of mutual information, transparency and the way airport charges may be collected. It is also planned to introduce national independent regulatory authorities to ensure that the directive is applied in full. This body, says the House, should establish procedures for resolving disagreements between the airport managing body and the airlines about changes to the level and structure of airport charges including relating to quality of service.
Pre-financing new infrastructure projects
Parliament introduces a new amendment saying: "The airport managing body may pre-finance new infrastructure projects by increasing airport charges accordingly, on condition that a) airport users are provided with transparent information on the extent and duration of airport charge increases; b) all additional revenue is used solely for the construction of the planned infrastructure; c) all official authorisations have been obtained."
Compromise amendments were adopted on the definition of airports charges, on airport networks, on the level of service quality to be provided by the airports managing body in return for the airports charge and the financing of new infrastructure projects.
The list of the 67 airports concerned is as follows:
Alicante, Amsterdam/Schiphol Athina/Eleftherios Venizelos, Barcelona, Berlin-Schoenefeld Berlin-Tegel, Birmingham, Bourgas, Bratislava, Bristol, Brussels/Brussels-National, Bucharest/Henri Coanda, Budapest/Ferihegy, Catania/Fontanarossa, Dublin, Düsseldorf, Edinburgh, Faro, Frankfurt/Main, Glasgow, Gran Canaria, Hamburg, Hannover, Helsinki/Vantaa, Iraklion/Nikos Kazantzakis, Kobenhavn/Kastrup, Köln/Bonn, Lanzarote, Larnaka/INTL, Lisboa, Ljubljana, London Gatwick, London Heathrow, London Luton, London Stansted Luxembourg, Lyon Saint-Exupery, Madrid/Barajas, Malaga, Malta/Luqa, Manchester, Marseille-Provence, Milano/Linate, Milano/Malpensa, München, Newcastle, Nice-Cote d´Azur, Pafos/INTL, Palma de Mallorca, Paris-Charles de Gaulle, Paris/Orly, Praha/Ruzyne, Riga, Rodos/Diagoras, Roma/Fiumicino, Sofia, Stockholm/Arlanda, Stuttgart, Tallinn, Tenerife Sur/Reina Sofia, Timisoara, Toulouse-Blagnac, Toulouse/CCER, Varna, Venezia/Tessera, Vilnius, Warszawa/Okecie and Wien/Schwechat.
Debate in Strasbourg plenary - 14 January 2008 - British and Irish speakers
Brian Simpson (North West, Labour, PES, UK) said: "I fully support the need for transparency in airport charges, with full consultation with the stakeholders. I fully support the need to ensure that airports in a dominant position do not abuse that situation and I fully support an open and transparent appeals procedure, provided that the rules of engagement and the remit of the arbitrator are clearly defined.
I am not against regulating airports that are in a dominant market position, but I think regulating the majority of airports to catch the big boys, based on an arbitrary passenger figure in a one-cap-fits-all regulation, is a flawed process."
Jim Allister (Non-attached, Northern Ireland, UK) said: "The Commission talks much about promoting competitiveness in industry and about cutting red tape, but its walk in these issues is often one that takes Europe in quite the opposite direction, and so it seems to me with its stance on air travel.
Having championed increased costs for air travellers through green taxes, we now have a proposed directive on airport charges which will inevitably drive up costs for the flying public. Regional airports are my particular concern. They have been a catalyst for progress in many regional economies: they have opened up markets; they have made the inaccessible accessible; they have been indispensable in economic transformation. And now, true to form, the Commission wishes, effectively, to stifle them with the heavy hand of bureaucracy, burying innovation under a mountain of reporting requirements for which the traveller will ultimately pay."
Kathy Sinnott (South IND/DEM, IE) said: "I think it is useful from time to time to remind the Commission that Ireland is an island and that we have a complete dependence on airports to be part of Europe and part of the rest of the world. The important issue for me is regional airports and that they get full support.
In many cases I keep hearing the argument that helping small airports will increase the carbon footprint but I do not think that is true. When all flights go out of Dublin, it just means that all the people who live near Cork Airport, as I do, or Shannon Airport or Waterford or Kerry, have to drive to Dublin or take a second flight – a shuttle to Dublin – and then go on. Whereas often these flights could reasonably, with support for regional airports, go from a regional area directly to where they need to go."
Jim Higgins (North West, Fine Gael, EPP-ED, IE) said: "The original European Commission proposal that this directive would apply to all airports with passenger numbers greater than one million per annum was extremely worrying, particularly from an Irish viewpoint, because if this approach had been adopted, then the directive would have applied to both Shannon and Cork airports, and possibly in due course to Ireland West Airport as it seeks to continue its expansion operations. What I have been arguing is that airports under the 5 million passenger per annum threshold are subject to much stronger market forces than larger airports, and to subject them to the terms of this directive would put an unnecessary stranglehold on regional airports."
Timothy Kirkhope (Yorkshire and the Humber Conservative, EPP-ED, UK) said: "This directive is the Commission’s attempt to bring a large number of Community airports under regulation, and it has seen fit to do this because it believes there could be an imbalance in the relationship between airports and their users, the airlines. In some cases they are right; the more sizeable airports in the EU, like London Heathrow and Paris Charles de Gaulle, should be regulated so they are not in a position to abuse their market dominance. But I believe the smaller regional airports of the EU should only be regulated when they are found to be operating anti-competitively.
Newcastle Airport in the UK, for example, with 5.2 million passengers, still has to compete with other airports all over the north of England to attract business. Why add burdensome and costly red tape to the smaller regional airports that do actually compete with each other and need to grow? That is why I want the possibility for national regulators to opt out their airports from this regulation."
Avril Doyle (Fine Gael, EPP-ED, IE) said: "I fully support the need for more transparency in airport charges. As charges at airports are not part of the operational costs of airlines but are part of the operational, development and maintenance costs of airports, I would like to know the Commission’s view on the compulsory need for airlines to refund airport charges if a passenger has to cancel a flight.
At the very least they should get full credit, if not an actual refund of any airport charges on a cancelled flight. I do not think it is acceptable for airlines to pocket airport charges if flights are cancelled. Some of them are doing that at the moment, others will refund after taking a hefty administration charge out of it, which makes it unworthy to pursue the actual refund itself." Adopted text on airport charges
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0004 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External relations
Grand Mufti of Syria: a single civilisation unites us all
2008-01-21 - 13:43
In a speech to MEPs on Tuesday (15 January) on the subject of intercultural dialogue, the Grand Mufti of Syria, Ahmad Badr Al-Din Hassoun, stressed the value of culture as a unifying rather than a dividing force. Dr Hassoun was addressing a formal sitting of Parliament as the first speaker in a series of visits by eminent religious and cultural leaders in 2008, which has been designated European Year of Intercultural Dialogue. Opening his address, the Grand Mufti stressed that "really there are no separate cultures, there is but one single culture" in the world, namely "the culture of mankind". Indeed, he said, "we, in our region, do not believe in a conflict between cultures".
If a clash did exist, it was "where there is ignorance, terrorism and backwardness". Stressing the universality of culture, he said that the Soviet and American space agencies, in sending men to the moon, had built on the civilisation founded by Europeans before them. In addition, "those who built the pyramids are our great-grandfathers". These examples showed that "civilisation is one".
No such thing as holy war
The Grand Mufti then asked "Does civilisation have a religion?". His answer was that there is no Islamic, Christian or Jewish civilisation. "Religion gives civilisation its moral values but culture is something that we built", he stressed, adding that religion "is the work of god" whereas civilisation is created by mankind.
"We do not believe, in our region, in the multiplicity of religions", said the Grand Mufti. "Abraham, Moses, Jesus and Mohamed came with one single religion". Therefore "there is no holy war, because a war can never be holy: it is peace that is holy." Later he said it was wrong to use religion to justify killing.
Separation of religion and state
Turning to education, Dr Hassoun said, "Let us teach our school pupils that what is sacred in the world is man" since man "is the creation of the creator". If we want peace, starting for example with Palestine and Israel, he suggested that rather than building walls, "let us build bridges of peace". He also argued that "we must create states on a civil basis, not a religious basis", adding "I don't impose my religion on you, nor do you impose your religion on me".
The Grand Mufti also spoke on the subject of women, saying that in his country women were valued and respected, though they may face injustice because of the actions of men. Still, he maintained, women participate in all fields of society in Syria.
Closing his speech, Dr Hassoun praised Europe today as embodying a "miracle" in overcoming two world wars and bringing down the Berlin wall without bloodshed. Seeing the European Parliament as a model, he called on the EP "to help us build a universal parliament". And since Damascus is this year the Cultural Capital of the Arab World, he asked the EP, as a practical gesture, to agree to hold "a meeting for cultures" in Damascus "to say that the world is at one".
EP President Pöttering sees tolerance as the cornerstone of dialogue
In his introductory speech, European Parliament President Hans-Gert Pöttering said "peaceful coexistence between cultures and religions, both in the European Union and in relations with peoples in all parts of the world, in particular on the other side of the Mediterranean, in the Middle East, is both possible and essential". He added "we must build an intellectual and cultural bridge across the Mediterranean, one founded on mutual enrichment and shared values". He stressed that "Tolerance is central to intercultural dialogue. But tolerance does not mean indifference. Tolerance means defending one's views, hearing out others and respecting their convictions."
Lastly the president said "The fact that the Grand Mufti has been accompanied here today by senior religious leaders offers clear evidence of that successful coexistence". Before starting his own speech, the Grand Mufti took the hand of Bishop Antoine Odo, President of the Chaldean Bishops of Syria, and together the two men faced the assembled MEPs, who responded with a warm round of applause. Grand Mufti of Syria website 2008 - European Year of Intercultural Dialogue
EN
1
LINK
http://www.drhassoun.com/index.php?lang=en&PHPSESSID=4cc00d9e58aaa1c8d88913ce82404b00
EN
2
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/culture/portal/events/current/dialogue2008_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External relations
Kenya: MEPs call for fresh presidential elections
2008-01-21 - 13:43
MEPs call for "fresh presidential elections" in case a credible and fair recount of the votes in the presidential election by an independent body proves impossible, according to a resolution adopted by the European Parliament. MEPs also ask for the freezing of further budgetary support to the government of Kenya until the current crisis is resolved. The joint resolution was adopted by a large majority in a show of hands. The House deplores the fact that Mwai Kibaki - Kenya's incumbent President - appointed his cabinet unilaterally, which severely undermined mediation efforts.
MEPs call on Mwai Kibaki to respect his country’s democratic commitments enshrined in the country’s National Constitution and the guidelines of the African Charter of Human and People’s Rights relating to free and fair elections and to agree to an independent examination of the presidential vote.
Both sides should engage in tangible remedial action through negotiation, according to the resolution. Support is given to mediation efforts by a panel of African elders led by Kofi Annan, the former United Nations Secretary-General.
MEPs condemn the tragic loss of life and critical humanitarian situation.
Electoral process
MEPs call for fresh presidential elections should it prove impossible to organise a credible and fair recount of the votes in the presidential election by an independent body. The House calls for concrete measures to establish a "truly impartial Election Commission which will be better able to conduct free and fair elections in future".
Economic situation and budget support
The House is preoccupied by the social repercussions of the current economic crisis, detrimental to the country’s socio-economic development but likely to have consequences for neighbouring countries, which depend to a large extent on Kenya’s infrastructures.
The disbursement of EDF budget aid to the Kibaki government directly after the elections could be misunderstood as "politically biased", say MEPs. They ask for the freezing of further budgetary support to the government of Kenya until the current is resolved. Budget support is when a donor provides funds directly to a partner government's central exchequer in support of their programmes.
European Parliament involvement in the crisis
Alexander Lamsdorff (ALDE, DE) headed the EU EOM (European Union Election Observation Mission) to Kenya. Jan Mulder, Dutch Liberal, headed a four-strong delegation of MEPs to observe the elections. They were on the spot from the 26th to the 29th December. The other Member of the delegation were Valdis Dombrovskis (EPP-ED, LV), Horst Posdorf (EPP-ED, DE) and Johan Van Hecke (ALDE, BE).
British and Irish speakers in the debate - Wednesday, 16 January 2008
Speaking in the debate in Strasbourg on 16 January 2008, Glenys Kinnock (Labour, Wales, PES, UK) said: "We need to identify the fact that Kenya is a country where most people are actually subsisting on a couple of dollars a day.
There is massive discontent and deprivation; a whole army of discontented people, as we have seen, has been engendered by the situation there, because what they realise is that the gap between the haves and the have-nots in Kenya has widened – and that in the context of that 6% growth in GDP which others have mentioned."
I would add my voice to those that have said that the EU must suspend budget support to Kenya until a political resolution to the present crisis has been found. Of course, it is unacceptable that that EUR 40.6 million was sent the day after the election criticisms were made."
Finally, the perpetrators of those irregular election results that the observers have reported to us must be held to account and must not be allowed to get away with it."
David Martin (Labour, Scotland, PES, UK) said: "We now know that there is deep-rooted social and economic disarray in the country and that for years the Government has operated on a basis of corruption and economic mismanagement. The concept, as Mrs Kinnock rightly says, of good governance and respect for democracy are prerequisites for European Union aid. But, contrary to what other speakers have said, that does not mean that we should abandon the country. It means we should rechannel our aid through agencies and organisations that can get money to the poor, the neediest and the weakest in Kenya. Clearly, if the election results are not properly monitored and respected, we cannot continue to channel money through the Kenyan Government. We have to send a clear message: good governance is a prerequisite for assistance from the European Union."
Eoin Ryan (Dublin, Fianna Fáil, UEN, IE) said: "I think it is generally accepted that the recent presidential elections in Kenya were flawed. I think that is a great pity because Kenya is a country that has been politically stable for many decades. Sadly that has changed in the last two weeks and we have seen over 600 people killed and 250 000 people have been displaced. Unfortunately, again, that violence is ethnic in nature.
I think we all should remember – and particularly the Kenyan people and the politicians should remember – that history has shown, time and time again, that, where there is a political vacuum, that vacuum can often be filled by extremists, but the people of Kenya deserve better." Text adopted - Kenya
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0018 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External relations
MEPs speak out in favour of more regional cooperation in the Black Sea region and the South Caucasus
2008-01-21 - 13:43
The European Parliament adopted two reports, calling for more regional cooperation in the Black Sea and South Caucasus regions. In both areas, the House stressed the importance both of democratic principles and human rights and of the necessity to improve economic and trade relations, especially regarding energy supplies. The own-initiative report by Roberta Anastase (EPP-ED, RO) on the Black Sea region is a response to the Commission's communication on Black Sea Synergy. The Parliament is not satisfied by the progress made since the last such communication, published in 1997, and calls for a "genuine regional dimension tailored to this area," with "concrete proposals for fostering regional cooperation." It underlines the importance of involving Russia and Turkey in any regional cooperation efforts, and supports the creation of a free trade area in the region.
The House approves the doubling of financial resources under the ENPI (European Neighbourhood Policy Instrument) for cross-border projects, and notes a number of priority fields in which cooperation is necessary. These include the EU's role in overcoming the unresolved conflicts in the region, the creation of "new infrastructure and viable transport corridors diversifying both suppliers and routes" for energy and the tackling of environmental problems in the region, especially in the Black Sea and the Danube delta.
South Caucasus
Lydie Polfer's (ALDE, LU) report on the South Caucasus calls for a differentiated approach to the three countries of the region, asking the Commission to "not ignore the three states' particular characteristics." It calls for a feasibility study to evaluate the possibility of a free trade agreement with Georgia and Armenia, underscores the importance of supporting and empowering civil society and developing people-to-people contacts and specifically urges all countries to "strengthen the representation of the parliamentary opposition in their delegations" to the Parliamentary Cooperation Committees with the European Parliament.
With respect to the individual states, the report calls for "further efforts to be made in establishing an independent judiciary, in promoting reforms in the police, the civil service and local government, in fighting corruption and in creating a vibrant civil society" in Armenia. It "reiterates its serious concern about the deterioration of the human rights situation and media freedom in Azerbaijan," and "expresses deep concern over the recent developments in Georgia." On this topic, the Parliament "expresses its satisfaction that the overall assessment by the International Election Observation Mission" was positive, notes that "this election was the first genuinely competitive Presidential election" in Georgia, but calls on Georgian authorities to address the shortcomings noted in the preliminary report of election observers before the parliamentary elections to be held this spring.
Frozen conflicts
MEPs also addressed the issue of frozen conflicts in the region, noting that they reject "all attempts by foreign powers aimed at creating exclusive spheres of influence," while also urging the states in the region to "stop the increase in their military spending.". The House "reiterates its unconditional support for the territorial integrity and inviolability of the internationally recognised borders of Georgia," as well as taking the view that "further delay in the settlement of the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict will not benefit either of the sides involved." MEPs also reiterate their call on Turkey to "engage in serious and intensive efforts for the resolution of outstanding disputes with all its neighbours [...] including a frank and open discussion on past events." A more effective EU policy for the South Caucasus/A Black Sea regional approach policy
-//EP//TEXT TA 20080117 TOC NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Human rights
Arrest of Chinese dissident Hu Jia
2008-01-21 - 13:43
In a resolution adopted on Thursday afternoon (17 January), MEPs called on the Chinese authorities to release human rights campaigner Hu Jia and to respect human rights in the run-up to this year's Olympic Games. Hu Jia was taken from his home in Beijing by police on 27 December 2007 on charges of inciting subversion. He and his wife Zeng Jinyan, who were among the candidates for last year's European Parliament Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought, have thrown the spotlight on human rights abuses in China over the past few years and spent many periods under house arrest as a result of their campaigning.
Last November Hu Jia spoke via audio-phone from Beijing to a hearing held in Brussels by the EP's Human Rights Subcommittee on Human rights in China in the run-up to the Olympic Games. At that time the subcommittee's chair, Hélène Flautre (Greens/EFA, FR), congratulated Hu Jia on his courage in speaking out and said he could always count on the support of the European Parliament.
Human rights organisations described the December arrest as another move by the Chinese authorities to silence critics ahead of the Beijing Olympics, and 57 intellectuals from China immediately published an open letter calling for the instant release of Hu Jia. European Parliament President Hans-Gert Pöttering has already issued a statement criticising the arrest.
MEPs demand immediate release of Hu Jia and other dissidents
In the resolution, Parliament "strongly condemns the detention of Hu Jia and demands his prompt release and that of all the dissidents who have been arrested and jailed for crimes of opinion". It also urges the authorities "to allow Hu Jia and all the other dissidents under arrest to receive medical assistance if necessary" (Hu Jia suffers from a liver disease).
China urged to live up to its human rights commitments - especially in Olympic year
MEPs call on China "to respect its commitments to human rights and the rule of law, in particular the provisions of the UN Declaration on Human Rights Defenders" and "not to use the Olympic Games as a pretext to arrest and illegally detain and imprison dissidents, journalists and human rights activists".
Indeed, Parliament repeats its view that "human rights concerns should receive far more attention in the build-up to the Beijing Olympic Games", and points to Articles 1 and 2 of the Olympic Charter, which advocate 'respect for universal fundamental ethical principles' and the promotion of a peaceful society concerned 'with the preservation of human dignity'.
Reform of Chinese criminal law needed
In addition, MEPs call on China "to reform its criminal law to allow greater freedom of expression to journalists, writers, free-lances, reporters etc." who will report to the world on the Olympic Games. They also urge the authorities "to close the so-called 'black jails', places of detention set up to detain 'troublemakers' in advance of this year's Olympics".
Lastly, the EU Council is urged to take action in relation to the Chinese authorities regarding not only the arrest of Hu Jia but also the disappearance on 22 September 2007 of Gao Zhisheng, a noted human rights attorney. Adopted Resolution
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0021 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Human rights
Democracy and human rights in Egypt
2008-01-21 - 13:43
In a resolution adopted on Egypt, MEPs call on the government of that country to take a range of measures to improve democracy and human rights, such as ending the harassment of journalists and human rights defenders, lifting the state of emergency, investigating suspected cases of torture and guaranteeing the independence of the judiciary. Parliament first of all "recognises the role that Egypt plays in the Middle East peace process and the importance that EU-Egypt relations have for the entire Euro-Mediterranean area and in the fight against international terrorism and fundamentalism" but it then "points out that respect for human rights is a fundamental value of the EU-Egypt Association Agreement and reaffirms the importance of the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership for promoting the rule of law and fundamental freedoms".
Government pressed to guarantee rights and freedoms
In the wake of "recent arrests and action against NGOs and human rights defenders", MEPs call on the government "to end all forms of harassment, including judicial measures, detention of media professionals and, more generally, human rights defenders" and to "respect freedom of expression, in conformity with Article 19 of the UN International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, which has been signed and ratified by Egypt".
The government is also urged to "honour its undertaking to lift the state of emergency on 31 May 2008", "to amend law No 25 of 1966 on martial courts" and to ensure that all measures adopted to fight terrorism are "fully in accordance with international human rights law".
Law on associations, judicial independence
The EP strongly backs academic, media and religious freedom. The need for independence of the judiciary is also stressed, as is protection of the freedoms of association and expression for judges, in line with UN principles.
MEPs want measures against trade union and human rights bodies to be rescinded and urge that "the law on associations should not impose arbitrary restrictions on the peaceful activities of civil society organisations". They call for the release of dissidents, including Kamal Abbas and Ayman Nour.
Rights for migrant workers
Migrant workers and their families should have their rights protected through implementation by Egypt of two relevant conventions, say MEPs, who also back a call by a UN committee for investigations into the killing of 27 Sudanese asylum-seekers in 2005 to be re-opened.
Torture allegations must be investigated
Urging an end to all forms of torture and ill-treatment, MEPs call on the government to allow a visit by the UN Special Rapporteur on torture.
Lastly, Parliament urges the EU to put human rights developments "very high on its agenda" during the forthcoming meeting of the EU-Egypt Subcommittee on Political Matters.
The resolution was adopted by 52 votes to 0, with 7 abstentions. Resolution adopted
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0023 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Human rights
Sexual violence in Congo is "the worst in the world"
2008-01-21 - 13:43
Parliament unanimously adopted a resolution calling on the international community to take action against the widespread sexual violence in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), which it describes as "the worst in the world". According to the resolution, the war and unrest in eastern DRC "has resulted in sexual violence against women on a widespread and alarming scale committed by armed rebel groups, as well as by government, army and police forces". Women are being "systematically attacked on an unprecedented scale".
War atrocities are "structured around rape, gang rape, sexual slavery and murder". This not only leads to "the physical and psychological destruction of women" but seems to be used "as a way of humiliating women in front of their families and communities and thus destroying the integrity, morale and cohesion of those communities". The end result is to "destroy all social networks and represent a genuine national threat".
Perpetrators can be prosecuted under national and international law
Parliament's resolution "condemns the use of rape as a weapon of war and recalls that the International Criminal Court has jurisdiction over such acts", which are classified under the ICC's statute as crimes against humanity and war crimes.
The government of DRC also has a clear responsibility "to put an end to impunity and to implement the new law adopted by its Parliament outlawing sexual violence, which lays down stiffer penalties for perpetrators".
Parliament therefore urges that "the perpetrators of sexual violence against women be reported, identified, prosecuted and punished, in accordance with national and international criminal law".
Support needed from global community
The wider international community is called upon "to take all necessary steps to support the relevant national authorities in investigating these acts and prosecuting those responsible", while the EU is urged "to allocate substantial funds to providing medical, legal and social support for victims of sexual abuse and empowering women and girls as a way of preventing further sexual abuse".
The EU and the UN are asked "formally to recognise rape, forced impregnation, sexual slavery and any other forms of sexual violence as crimes against humanity, serious war crimes and a form of torture, whether or not they are carried out in a systematic manner". All UN member states that send personnel on the MONUC peacekeeping mission are urged "to bring individuals who have committed sexual abuse to court as quickly as possible".
Lastly, the DRC government and the UN mission (MONUC) are asked to guarantee security for members of humanitarian organisations. Resolution adopted
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0022 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Fundamental rights
European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights: adoption of a Multiannual Framework for 2007-2012
2008-01-21 - 13:43
MEPs adopted a non-binding report on the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights with 462 votes in favour, 60 against and 51 abstentions. The amendments extend the scope of the Agency to cover new areas of competence. In February 2007, legislation adopting the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights was published and the Agency became fully operational on 1 March 2007. The Agency’s objective is to provide Community institutions, bodies, offices and agencies, as well as the Member States, with assistance and expertise in the field of fundamental rights – particularly so when formulating policies and legislation concerning fundamental human rights. The tasks entrusted to the Agency include the collection and analysis of information and data; the provision of advice through reports and opinions; and awareness raising.
Firstly, the report states that the Framework should include the fight against racism, xenophobia and related intolerance amongst the thematic areas of the Agency's activity and the protection of the rights of persons belonging to ethnic or national minorities.
One important amendment stipulates that the Agency shall deal with issues relating to discrimination based on sex, in particular instances of ‘multiple discrimination’. The notion of ‘multiple discrimination’ should be examined closely so as to try and understand this complex form of discrimination. In its work in the thematic areas, the Agency shall seek to identify the economic, social and cultural factors that contribute to respect for human rights in those areas or which may constitute root causes of violations of human rights such as extreme poverty and social exclusion.
The report states that the Agency may work outside the thematic areas determined in the Multi-annual Framework at the request of the European Parliament, the Council or the
Commission provided its financial and human resources so permit. The Commission, the Council and the European Parliament may request the Agency to investigate specific actions or concerns.
The report also calls for better democratic scrutiny and urges the other institutions to involve the European Parliament in this process as much as is possible. The Agency should report regularly to the European Parliament.
On the specific issue of the Agency’s five year framework programme, MEPs consider that although this framework provides stability for the work of the Agency, there should be a possibility to update or review this framework during this period as new challenges to the protection of human rights may arise.
Lastly, the report states that the Agency shall actively cooperate with candidate countries in the field of fundamental rights in order to facilitate their compliance with Community law.
Debate 15 January 2008
Speaking in the debate Michael Cashman the author of the report,(Labour, West Midlands, PES, UK) said: "There are some delegations, some politicians and some Member States who want the Agency to fail. They do not want it to be effective, and that is why I have been absolutely specific in the demands that we are making upon this Agency. I want it to succeed. I believe that the amendments that were adopted in committee will help it to succeed, while not placing upon the Agency undue demands which will go beyond the resources, both human and financial.
There have been suggestions amongst some of the women’s groups that this does not go far enough, but we have introduced the gender perspective and taken account of the Gender Institute. Of course, there must be complementarity, but we must not have duplication because, again, that would waste the resources.
Of course minority languages are important, of course other areas are important, but there is nothing more important than an Agency for Fundamental Rights which is successful in the work that we set it to do." Text adopted - Multiannual Framework for the Fundamental Rights Agency for 2007-2012
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0014 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Industry
More science funding needed to meet CO2 targets for car industry
2008-01-21 - 13:43
Research funding needs to be increased to meet binding CO2 targets in the car industry, says the European Parliament's report on a competitive automotive regulatory framework (CARS 21). The House adds that cars should be permitted to emit more CO2 if these emissions result from mandatory safety measures, and that intellectual property rights must be effectively protected worldwide. The report was adopted by 607 votes in favour to 76 against and 14 abstentions. The own-initiative report by Jorgo Chatzimarkakis (ALDE, DE) stresses the economic importance of the European automotive industry as a sector producing 19 million vehicles yearly and providing 2.3 million direct jobs and a further 10 million in ancillary sectors. MEPs say that, while the industry will have to undergo substantial change, adjustments in EU policy will also be needed to ensure regulations do not lead to job losses.
Allow higher CO2 emissions if they result from safety measures
As the development of new types of passenger cars takes about five to seven years, MEPs urge the Commission not to set any final mandatory targets for CO2 emissions for any date before 2015. From then on, however, an average target of 125g/km of CO2 emissions for new passenger cars should be achievable, says the report.
MEPs stress that additional safety systems might increase the weight of passenger cars and thus lead to higher CO2 emissions. They therefore call on the Commission to develop a system that allows car manufacturers to emit additional CO2 if these are a result of legally binding safety measures.
Increase research funding to meet CO2 targets
Binding CO2 targets have to be accompanied by an increase in Member States' funding for research and development for the automobile sector, says the report. The European Parliament suggests that one of the first knowledge and innovation communities of the new European Institute of Innovation and Technology (EIT) should address CO2 reduction through vehicle technology.
Effective protection of intellectual property rights
MEPs are concerned that the European automotive industry might lose its position as one of the most competitive industries in the world due to "unfair competition and the infringement of intellectual property rights". "Effective protection of IPR" should be a precondition for any partnership with China.
Within the EU's current negotiations for a free-trade agreement with Korea, the removal of that country's non-tariff barriers is seen as essential, and any strategy of phasing out EU import tariffs should depend on this, says the House.
A common market for spare parts
The Commission should come forward with proposals to create a common market for custom and tuning parts such as special tyres, wheels and other tuning and spare parts. The European Parliament stresses that independent operators should have genuine access to technical information, training, spare parts, multi-band diagnostic tools and testing equipment.
Motor sport and hybrid engines
MEPs recognise the role motor sport can play in changing attitudes and customer behaviour towards environmentally friendly technology. The House therefore asks the FIA and others involved in Formula 1 to change their rules accordingly, so that environmentally friendly technologies like bio-fuels, four-cylinder engines or hybrid can be more easily applied.
Membership of CARS 21 high level group
Among the Members of the CARS 21 high level group are:
Malcolm Harbour Member of the European Parliament (EPP-ED, Conservative, West Midlands, UK), Joint Chairman Forum for the automobile and society. Margaret Beckett at the time was Secretary of State for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, United Kingdom.
Debate in Strasbourg plenary - Monday 14 January 2008 - British speakers in the debate
Malcolm Harbour (West Midlands, Conservative, EPP-ED, UK) said: "One of the things that we ask from the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection is for this Parliament to take an initiative in getting other national parliamentarians together in this House to talk in the framework of CARS 21 about how they, as national and local politicians, are going to contribute to these overall goals of achieving a competitive car industry with the highest possible technology and preserving and developing jobs and employment, while achieving the goals that we all want to meet in terms of science, safety and environmental improvements."
Gary Titley (North West, Labour, PES UK) said "Yes to simplification, replacing 38 directives with UN regulations – as long as we are not seen as abdicating our right to legislate should we need to – and yes to the development of technologically driven solutions such as ECOR. But I would hope that the Commission could take more action, as Ms Mann has suggested, on intellectual property rights, particularly in relation to China. We would like to see a proper implementation of the Regulation on Motor Vehicle Distribution in the EU and we believe it is fundamental to address non-harmonised implementation, the End-of-Life Vehicles Directive.
We have to improve cross-border inspections of vehicles and cross border enforcement of traffic rules in other Member States, because otherwise the whole situation becomes very disparate. But, like Mr Turmes, I believe that what we should be looking for is a framework which extends to 2020 and beyond."
Chris Davies, (North West, Liberal Democrat, ALDE, UK) said: "The car industry should have reduced its emissions by a great deal more than it has, but we are where we are and it takes time to achieve change economically, so I welcome the rapporteur’s proposal to set a target of 125 g by 2015, to bring it in line with the vote of this Parliament last October.
On Ryanair
We do not want to fight our business leaders and our entrepreneurs. On the contrary, if we are to combat climate change and reduce the threat that now hangs over the survival of billions of people in the poorest parts of this planet, we have to get them to accept responsibility for their actions. I was wrong in November when I claimed here that Michael O’Leary, the boss of Ryanair, had said that he did not give a toss for the environment so long as he could stuff his pockets and those of his airline full of gold. That may be the impression his scorn for environmentalists sometimes creates, but I apologise and withdraw the claim, and look forward to taking up his offer of a debate. But if we are to tackle the problem of climate change, we need people like Mr O’Leary and his counterparts in the car industry on side, working with us, pushing the boundaries of innovation and leading from the front." Resolution adopted - CARS 21: A Competitive Automotive Regulatory Framework
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0007 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Employment policy
MEPs call for better protection of workers from occupational diseases and workplace accidents
2008-01-21 - 13:43
In a report on the Community strategy on health and safety at work 2007-2012, the European Parliament regrets that the Commission "is silent on targets for the reduction of occupational diseases". New and emerging risks had to be identified, and asbestos needed to be phased out. MEPs also repeat their call for a better protection of healthcare workers from blood borne diseases. The report was adopted with 598 votes in favour, 20 against and 23 abstentions. The International Labour Organisation (ILO) estimates that in 2006 in the EU approximately 167,000 people died from a work related accident or disease. Another 300,000 workers suffer permanent disability every year, estimates the Commission.
Protect healthcare workers from blood borne infections
The report by Glenis Willmott (East Midlands, Labour, PES, UK) criticises the Commission saying that it still does not propose to amend the directive on the exposure to biological agents at work so as to protect healthcare workers from blood borne diseases due to needle stick injuries. MEPs warn that healthcare workers are at risk of contracting more than twenty life-threatening viruses such as hepatitis B, hepatitis C, and HIV/Aids. They expect "a suitable amendment to the directive to be adopted well before the end of the legislature in mid-2009".
Opening the debate in Strasbourg Ms Willmott said: "The European Agency for Safety and Health at Work estimates that every year over 140,000 people in the EU die from occupational diseases and nearly 9000 die from work related accidents. These figures mean that every three and a half minutes somebody in the European Union dies from a work related cause. That means that, in the short time I have been speaking already, it is possible that somebody has died and, by the time this debate is finished, it is probable that 20 people will have died.
We need a Framework Directive on musculoskeletal disorders to address a problem such as lower back pain, repetitive strain injuries and, effectively, lower back disorders."
New legislation on occupational diseases and musculoskeletal disorders needed
The Commission has set itself the ambitious target of reducing workplace accidents across the EU by 25%. But also for the reduction of occupational diseases - such as occupational cancer - targets need to be set, says the Parliament. MEPs, therefore, suggest transforming the EU recommendation on occupational diseases into a minimum directive.
They are also concerned about the increasing occurrence of musculoskeletal disorders (MSDs) and therefore ask the Commission to consider proposing a directive covering all risks concerning work-related MSD.
Identify new and emerging risks and phase out asbestos
The Parliament also stresses the need "to identify and monitor new and emerging risks, e.g. psychosocial risks, in good time".
Member States should draw up national action plans on phasing out asbestos which should include obligations to map asbestos in buildings and to provide for a safe removal, say MEPs.
Obligatory job retention
The report calls on governments to ensure that people who have experienced a physical or mental illness during their working lives retain their jobs e.g. through training or reallocation of tasks.
Corporate Social Responsibility
Finally, MEPs consider Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) as one of the effective tools to improve the competitiveness, better occupational and safety at work, better working environment and in this aspect encourages exchange of good practices at local, national and European levels among the Member States and globally at multinational level as well as further applying of CSR on voluntary bases, but as an integrated part of business strategies for development. Resolution adopted: Community strategy 2007-2012 on health and safety at work
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0009 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Taxation
EU action needed on tax treatment of cross-border corporate losses
2008-01-21 - 13:43
Targeted action at EU level to align the currently varying tax treatment of cross-border corporate losses could be of great benefit to the functioning of the internal market, according to a report adopted by Parliament with 491 votes in favour 109 against and 90 abstentions. The own initiative report, drawn up by Piia-Noora Kauppi (EPP-ED, FI) in response to a Commission communication on the subject, says that differing company tax regimes create obstacles to entering different national markets and the proper functioning of the internal market, distort competition and prevent the maintenance of a level playing field.
Parliament stresses that any measure for cross-border loss relief should be defined and implemented on the basis of a multilateral, common approach and coordinated action by Member States. This would only be an intermediate solution, say MEPs, pending the introduction of a Common Consolidated Corporate Tax Base, which would be a comprehensive long term solution for tax obstacles linked to the cross-border off-setting of profits and losses.
Action in favour of groups of companies doing business in several Member States should be a priority, as these often suffer different treatment from groups operating within one country, which in most Member States are effectively treated as a single entity. While extending domestic regimes is difficult where the tax bases differ, Parliament believes that as far as possible, corporate groups present in several Member States should be treated in the same way as those in a single Member State. Particular attention needs to be given to the needs of small- and medium-sized enterprises.
While avoiding double taxation, any solution would also need to prevent one loss being off-set twice and tax avoidance. The concept of what constitutes a ‘corporate group’ would also need to be carefully defined to avoid opportunistic distribution of profits and losses among Member States. Text adopted on tax treatment of losses in cross-border situations
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0008 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Justice and home affairs
Rights of the child: the European Parliament set out its strategy
2008-01-21 - 13:43
An EU strategy on the rights of the child won Parliament's backing with 630 votes in favour, 26 against and 62 abstentions. MEPs call for the strategy to include tougher measures to combat paedophilia on the internet as well as steps to counter child sex tourism and enable suppliers of products manufactured with child labour to be prosecuted in Europe. The own-initiative report, drafted for the Civil Liberties Committee by Roberta Angelilli (UEN, IT), is Parliament's response to a Commission communication of 4 July 2006 titled Towards an EU strategy on the rights of the child.
The report restates Parliament's opposition to all forms of violence against children and calls for a specific budget heading for their rights, with which to fund work required by the strategy.
Hijab and headscarves paragraph deleted from final report
MEPs deleted a paragraph in the original report from the Civil Liberties Committee (200 in favour, 367 against and 134 abstentions) which stated: "Is concerned at the multiple violations of rights affecting girls from a migrant background. The committee had "urged Member States to ban headscarves and hijab at least at primary school, in order to anchor more firmly the right to be a child and to ensure genuine and unenforced freedom of choice at a later age."
Combating paedophile pornography and violence on the Internet
Among the European Parliament's many proposals, MEPs call for technical measures to combat the dissemination of paedophile content via the Internet. They would also like to involve access suppliers, search engines and even banks, so as to block payment by would-be purchasers of illegal content.
In addition, the House wishes to protect children by tightening up rules on the transmission of harmful content via the internet or multimedia messaging services and the sale of violent video games. It would like a uniform classification and labelling system to be created for such games, and for all audiovisual content.
Children should be better informed of their rights via a dedicated internet site to be set up for this purpose, argues the European Parliament.
Enforce ban on child labour
Among other points, MEPs advocate a mechanism to enable the prosecution, in Europe, of suppliers of products that have been manufactured with child labour. The Commission is urged to check whether production lines comply with rules prohibiting child labour.
Early warning system on child abductions and prosecution of sex criminals
The House recommends setting up a European early warning system on child abductions and supports the Commission's plan to introduce a telephone help-line for children. It also urges the creation of a European strategy, and a single EU-wide set of extraterritorial criminal laws, to counter child sex tourism.
Community instrument on adoption
Pointing out that every child has the right to a family, MEPs suggest establishing a Community instrument to facilitate adoption. Lastly, the EU is urged to sign up to the UN and Council of Europe conventions on the rights of the child. Text adopted - Towards an EU strategy on the rights of the child
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0012 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Justice and home affairs
EUROPOL revamped
2008-01-21 - 13:43
Parliament adopted a report with 502 votes in favour, 46 against and 41 abstentions on a draft Council decision converting Europol into an EU agency, meaning that its funding will be provided from the EU budget, its staff will become Community officials and changes to its remit will be easier, thus enabling it to respond more quickly to new crime threats. Europol is the EU body that deals with criminal intelligence. Its purpose is to improve cooperation between Member States' authorities on intelligence in the fight against serious organised crime and terrorism, with an emphasis on targeting criminal organisations. It is politically accountable to the Justice and Home Affairs Council via the Europol Management Board. The Council controls the appointment of Europol's director as well as its budget, which is currently funded from Member State contributions, rather than the EU budget.
The intention is now for the existing Europol Convention to be replaced with a Council decision, due to be finalised by 30 June 2008. The new Europol (also known as the European Police Office) will be funded from the EU budget as from 1 January 2010.
In addition, the draft decision seeks to extend Europol's mandate to criminal activity not strictly related to organised crime. This will make it easier for Europol to support Member States in cross-border criminal investigations where the involvement of organised crime is not demonstrated from the start.
The decision also provides for Europol to receive data from private bodies and to support Member States in connection with major international events with a public order policing impact.
More safeguards needed on data protection, say MEPs
In a consultation report drafted by Agustín Díaz de Mera García Consuegra (EPP-ED, ES), MEPs adopted a number of improvements to the draft decision. They welcome the creation of an independent Ombudsman to protect Europol data but they want extra safeguards on data protection, since data obtained from private bodies may not have been obtained in the first place by safe, reliable means.
Regarding democratic scrutiny, MEPs call for Parliament to have the right to be consulted not just over any proposed dismissal but also over the appointment of Europol's director. MEPs welcome the proposals for Europol to be funded from the EU budget as this will allow Parliament greater involvement in the agency's financing.
Lastly, this Decision, say MEPs, should be revised within a period of six months following the date of entry into force of the Treaty signed at Lisbon on 13 December 2007 amending the Treaty on European Union and the Treaty establishing the European Community. Text adopted - EUROPOL
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0015 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Education
Barriers for adult learning should be lifted, say MEPs
2008-01-21 - 13:43
MEPs adopted on an own-initiative report by Doris Pack (EPP-ED, DE) on adult learning saying that barriers that keep adults from participating in education should be lifted, and the quality of the adult learning should be assured. The report was adopted with 609 votes in favour, 39 against and 16 abstentions. Millions of adults should participate in lifelong learning in the coming years if the targets set by the Lisbon Strategy in order to increase the knowledge and competitiveness of the European work force are to be reached.
The European Parliament welcomes the Commission proposal for an Action plan for Adult Learning. The Action Plan was presented by the Commission in September 2007 and aims at removing barriers to the participation in adult learning, to increase the quality and efficiency of the sector, to speed up the process of validation, recognition of qualifications and to ensure sufficient investment and monitoring of the sector.
MEPs approve the approach by the Commission. They call on Member States to establish a lifelong learning culture, focusing on education and training for adults.
4 million more adults should participate in training
MEPs stress that education and training are critical factors for achieving the Lisbon Strategy and that 4 million more adults would need to participate in lifelong learning if the participation rate of the benchmark agreed by the Member States in the framework of Education and Training 2010-process should be reached. Figures from the Commission Communication show that the goal of 12.5% participation in adult learning by 2010 is far from reached; in the 2006 there was even a slight decrease to 9.6% of participation.
According to Eurostat's latest figures, (see link below) the UK scores highly at 26.6% just behind Sweden and Denmark. Ireland's figure is 7.5%. Life-long learning refers to persons aged 25 to 64 who stated that they received education or training in the four weeks preceding the survey.
In order to improve participation in lifelong learning, the House urges that more should be done in order to motivate more people to participate, and agrees that special phone lines and websites are very successful means to promote adult education To increase the potential of the adult learning. MEPs also want to link adult learning to the European Qualification Framework, so the qualifications obtained can be recognised in other Member States.
Lifelong learning during working hours
Lifelong learning should also be compatible with family life, the House states, and points out that this calls for social, economic and tax incentives to promote the access for adults to training. MEPs also say that it is important to encourage employers to could provide company childcare facilities for parents who return to work, and assure that these parents have the possibility to continue lifelong learning during working hours. The practice of employers financing and organising of training should become widespread and supported by tax concessions, MEPs believe.
Solidarity between generations
With view to the demographic challenges ahead, MEPs underline the need to improve the transmission and exchange of knowledge between the generations, in the form of mentoring schemes to support various entrepreneurial and craft activities.
The European Parliament also emphasises the importance of more support for language courses especially those aimed for immigrants, and for encouraging the learning of foreign languages among the population as a whole. Text adopted - Adult learning: it is never too late to learn
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0013 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Agriculture
Remote sensing applications developed within the CAP
2008-01-21 - 13:43
The European Parliament adopted a non-binding report on remote sensing applications developed within the CAP with 594 votes in favour, 23 against and 54 abstentions. The EU’s agricultural policy takes account of the social structure of agricultural and the natural disparities between the various agricultural regions of the EU. Hence there is a need for information on land condition and crop use. Remote sensing applications help provide some of this information. Between 2003 and 2007 a pilot project on remote-sensing techniques was initiated.
In July last year the European Commission proposed to extend the draft pilot project on remote sensing which was launched in 2003 until 2013. The Commission says that the techniques used have proven their efficiency in the domain of the management of CAP notably in terms of predicting yields and the follow-up of ground and earth conditions.
The remote-sensing applications constitute a tool for the Commission to: (a) help manage agricultural markets; (b) allow for agro-economic monitoring such as crop condition in order to estimate yields; (c) promote access to information regarding agricultural land and crop yield estimations; and (d) ensure technological follow-up of the agro-meteorological system.
The European Parliament says the financial framework for the implementation of this programme for the period 2008 to 2013 is hereby set at €9.2 million. The annual appropriations should be authorised by the budgetary authority within the ceilings of the budget headings in the financial framework.
Clarifying the objectives of the regulation
Parliament says that Joint Research Centre Agriculture Unit website should making all relevant research data freely available to the public.
The Commission should create an inventory of all spatial data, remote-sensing and agro-meteorological projects and consolidation of existing spatial data infrastructure and websites.
MEPs also clarify that remote sensing alone is not sufficient to manage agriculture markets. The purpose of the remote-sensing applications is to provide digital information to improve the tools for managing and monitoring the common agricultural policy. However, farm surveys, says the House, will remain necessary and these applications thus do not suffice for the full management of agricultural markets.
The regulation should be adopted at the next Agriculture Council held under the Slovenian Presidency. Adopted text - Commission measures in 2008-2013 to make use of CAP remote-sensing applications
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0010 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Adopted texts from 14-17 January 2008/ Agenda for plenary on energy and climate change on 23 January / Draft agenda for Brussels plenary 30 and 31 January 2008
2008-01-21 - 13:43
The texts adopted at the European Parliament plenary session in Strasbourg on 14-17 January 2008 can be found below. The agenda for the extraordinary plenary on energy and climate change on 23 January 2008 and the draft agenda for the Brussels plenary 30 31 January 2008 are available. Adopted plenary texts by date Extraordinary plenary agenda, Brussels 23 January 2008 on energy and climate change Wednesday, 30 January 2008 - Thursday, 31 January 2008 plenary agenda
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
3
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?reference=2008-01-2&language=EN
-//EP//TEXT AGENDA 20080123 SIT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-FULL DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-FULL DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111BRI18238 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
