Preparing the European economy for challenging times ahead
Economic and monetary affairs
2008-01-22 - 21:23
The European economy and how to help it deal with immediate and longer term challenges were at the heart of a debate on Tuesday at the annual meeting of MEPs from the Economics Committee with their counterparts from national parliaments. Participants included Žiga Turk, Slovenian Minister for Growth, ex-Commissioner Mario Monti - and current Economics Commissioner Joaquín Almunia, who insisted that Europe was in a better position than the United States to weather any economic slowdown ahead.
Although the next Commission economic forecasts were a month away, Mr Almunia said: "We can already observe that growth in 2008 will be lower than we expected a few months ago and inflation higher. This is a difficult situation for policymakers: an economic slowdown at the same time as increased inflationary pressure. It will not be easy, but we should not consider the EU as being in the same position as the US. They have serious problems with the economic fundamentals, we do not. The euro area has a current account surplus, and the EU as a whole a small deficit; the US has a huge deficit, which reflects too low a level of saving by the public sector, households and private companies. We do not have the same problem in Europe. This is an important advantage in tackling present problems. We have no sub-prime mortgage sector in Europe and we have a more consolidated fiscal position."
Economic success through projecting values…
The main topic of the day's debate was how to update the EU's Broad Economic Policy Guidelines, the EU's main instrument for coordinating economic policy in the context of the Lisbon Strategy.
Žiga Turk, Slovenia's Minister for Growth, said the world was now in a new era in economic history, where creativity was more important to profit than purely technical innovation. "The price of fulfilling a function is dropping. Do you buy a cheap product which serves a purpose (whether a watch, a car or an MP3 player), or do you spend more to one which has the right design, image and values?"
He suggested that European values could be the crucial factor in competitiveness: "This is the role Europe will have in the future. Others may lead in manufacturing. But when it comes to caring for people and the environment, good design, being fair and trustworthy, Europe has an advantage in values. If we can project them and create products which reflect them, we can succeed. If not, we will become so poor that manufacturing will come back to Europe." A key goal therefore was to "educate, track and retain talent," he said, asking why seven out of ten Europeans who go to study in the United States stay there to work, rather than coming back to Europe.
…and governance of the market economy
For Mario Monti, who, after ten years as a Commissioner, latterly responsible for competition, now chairs the board of the Bruegel think tank and is President of Bocconi University, it was time to pay more attention to the "remarkable heterogeneity among EU countries." Different reforms and policies were needed in different circumstances. But structural reforms were "the key to giving the Member States and the EU more economic dynamism."
Mr Monti saw a further future advantage for the EU: "Europe can aspire to be a leader or co-leader in governance of the market economy. Little by little we have put in place two key aspects of governing a modern market economy - monetary policy and competition policy. The Commission and in particular the ECB have put in place a currency which accompanies and may in part replace the key currency of the world. On anti-trust and competition policy, the Microsoft case is an example of how the EU has become an obvious reference for standards."
Environmental leadership
Co-chair of the meeting and chair of the Finance and Monetary Policy Committee of the Slovenian Parliament Bojan Starman was one of several speakers who stressed the need to put the environment and climate change at the centre of economic policy. "We tend as politicians only to look to the next election, not the next 200 years, but the future of the planet is at stake, and we need to show leadership in making economic development compatible with the environment," he said.
Policy coordination in the US
Concluding the day's discussions, the other co-chair, Pervenche Berès (PES, FR), Chair of the EP's Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee, stressed the need to improve the prospects for small and medium sized enterprises, so they could grow and become exporters. She also referred to the US fiscal stimulus package which was followed by an interest rate cut: "This is the second time that we have seen a dialogue between the US President and the Fed; it does not mean the independence of the Fed is under attack." She added: "I do not think you can transpose this model directly to the EU system, but we should be able to go further together [than now]. I hope the tenth anniversary of Economic and Monetary Union will be the time to think about how to get the most out of the euro."
2008-01-23
Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee meeting with National Parliaments
Co-chair: Pervenche Berès (PES, FR), Chair of the EP Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs
Co-chair: Bojan Starman, Chair of the Slovenian Parliament Committee on Finance and Monetary Affairs
20080121IPR19239 Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs Homepage
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=ECON
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
