Streamlined support for research-driven SMEs
Industry
2008-01-24 - 19:21
Research-driven small and medium sized enterprises (SMEs) need the best conditions for science and technology, not bureaucracy, said speakers in a Industry Committee mini-hearing on the EUROSTARS research funding programme for R&amp;D-driven SMEs, on 24 January. The Commission proposes that the EU co-finance EUROSTARS to the tune of €100 million.
The EUROSTARS programme was set up by the EUREKA intergovernmental network for industrial research last year. The EU's Seventh Research Framework Programme (FP7) is to co-finance it to the tune of €100 million, and the 22 participating EU Member States and five Associated Countries will jointly provide another €300 million.
Cut red tape
Each project will receive €1.5 million on average, estimated Luuk Borg of the EUREKA Secretariat. "We have to make funding transparent and unbureaucratic.
SMEs do not want to have too much paperwork", stressed EP rapporteur on the co-decision proposal Paul Rübig (EPP-ED, AT), reminding participants of Enterprise and Industry Commissioner Verheugen's goal of reducing red tape by 25% by 2012. Mr Rübig proposed that all enterprises who do EU-funded research should fly the EU flag, to show "the joint effort".
"Bureaucracy is often caused by too many participants", said Mr Borg, explaining that EUROSTARS projects will have "a leading SME finding its own friends, doing the research and getting the product on the market".
Create best conditions for science and technology
"SMEs have a key role and are the source of innovation for research activities", said Slovenian Minister for Higher Education Science and Technology Mojca Kucler Dolinar, "but there are still too few companies which have their own research and which are growing to big global actors."
"We want to create all conditions possible to make investment in science and technology logical and needed", said Research Commissioner Janez Potočnik. He told MEPs that SMEs had applied for about € 627 million in FP7 research funding in 2007.
"We look at EUROSTARS and we find exactly what we need as SMEs", said Martijn de Lange of ACE Associated Computer, representing a research-driven SME with "a long record of technological achievements". "The big pain for SMEs is getting from the idea to the product", he explained, adding that his company needs seven years to develop new products and another five for commercial payback.
2008-01-23 Committee on Industry, Research and Energy In the chair Paul Rübig EPP-ED AT
Procedure: Co-decision, first reading
Committee vote: 28 February
Plenary vote: April I 2008
20080121IPR19250 Committee on Industry, Research and Energy
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=ITRE
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
