Iran's nuclear negotiator leaves sceptical MEPs short of answers
External relations
2008-01-24 - 12:55
Jalili - Iran "has right to enrich uranium"
Iran's ultimate intentions over its nuclear programme and its record on human rights were discussed Wednesday when its chief nuclear negotiator Saeed Jalili met MEPs on the Foreign Affairs committee. After a question and answer session with Members, the chair of the Committee, Polish EPP-ED Member Jacek Saryusz-Wolski, declared his regret that many of the MEPs questions remained unanswered by Mr Jalili.
Saeed Jalili has recently taken up his position as General Secretary of Iran's Supreme National Security Council as well as his country's chief negotiator on nuclear issues.
He was in the Parliament just one day after the five permanent members of the UN Security Council - plus Germany - agreed a new draft resolution calling for sanctions against Iran if it fails to halt uranium enrichment.
MEPs raised the issue of Iran's enrichment of uranium with Mr Jalili. In particular they asked why Iran had opted for higher levels of enrichment when only 4-6% was necessary for peaceful purposes. This brought them to a wider issue of why a country like Iran - with its vast oil reserves - would need nuclear power at all.
On the enrichment issue Mr Jalili said "we have the right to enrich uranium" and that Iran "needs 20 000 megawatts of energy for the next 20 years".
Trust in Tehran a crucial issue
The behaviour of Tehran was brought up by Spanish MEP José Salafranca from the centre-right EPP-ED group. He raised the issue of Tehran's recent purchases of rockets from North Korea and torpedoes from Russia. He wondered why Iran would want to buy such weapons "if it was truly interested in peace in the region?"
For many MEPs at the meeting it was a question of the extent that Tehran could be trusted. German Socialist MEP Helmut Kuhne asked "what safeguards can you give that five minutes after you get enough uranium, you do not walk away from the Non-Proliferation Treaty and build a bomb?"
In reply Mr Jalili said "we have fulfilled our obligations as member of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) and the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT)". He told MEPs that Iran had even gone beyond them by suspending enrichment for 2 years.
Saeed Jalili restated Iran's position that the country is "against nuclear weapons" and is undertaking a peaceful program: "in our defence doctrine nuclear weapons have no place" and that weapons of mass destruction "cannot bring security, nor power". He also said Tehran was ready to help provide a final report to the International Atomic Energy Agency and its director Dr Mohamed ElBaradei by March.
Moving away from the nuclear issue several MEPs were concerned about the breaches of human rights in Iran, mentioning examples like the practice of stoning, hanging people on cranes and harassment of women and journalists.
At the end of the session, however, many Members felt that their questions were left unanswered prompting committee chair Mr Saryusz-Wolski to observe that "closing the gap of confidence is crucial".
Diplomatic activity at the United Nations
A draft UN Security Council Resolution agreed Tuesday by foreign ministers from the six major powers (Germany, US, France, the UK, Russia and China) reiterated international demands for Iran to halt uranium enrichment. The resolution will be submitted to the UN Security Council in the next few weeks.
The European Parliament Delegation for Iran travelled to Tehran in December 2007 in order to hold the 2nd EP-Iran Interparliamentary meeting with one of the subjects on the agenda being nuclear non-proliferation.
Next week the European Parliament will hold a full debate on Iran with the EU's High Representative for Foreign Affairs Javier Solana.
Late last year the United States released an intelligence assessment on Iran's nuclear program. It stated that with "high confidence" that Iran ceased any nuclear weapons programme in 2003 and with "moderate confidence" that no such programme has recommenced since. Nevertheless international diplomats remain sceptical of Iran's ultimate intentions for its nuclear programme.
20080121STO19277 Foreign Affairs Committee EP delegation to Iran
EN
1
PHOTO
20080123PHT19466.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/activities/committees.do?language=EN
EN
3
LINK
/activities/delegations/homeDel.do?body=D-IR&language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
