Special needs of women prisoners
Women's rights/Equal opportunities
2008-01-29 - 11:16
In an own-initiative report adopted unanimously by the Women's Rights Committee on Monday, MEPs highlight the situation of female prisoners, a minority of the prison population but a fast-growing one. The report focuses on prison conditions, the preservation of family ties and reintegration into society and the workplace.
Women account for a small percentage of the prison population in the European Union - around 5% - with Spain and Portugal having the largest numbers at 8% and 10% respectively, but most European countries have experienced a significant increase. The female prison population grew by 410% in Cyprus between 1994 and 2003 and by 173% in England and Wales from 1992 to 2002.
Due to the lack of resources for prisons, "women in prison are a minority whose special needs are not sufficiently taken into account in EU countries", according to Marie Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou (EPP-ED, EL), who drafted the report.
Prison conditions
Women's needs differ from those of men, notably in health and maternity care. MEPs call on the Commission and Council to adopt a framework decision on minimum standards for prisoners' rights based on Article 6 of the EU Treaty, to reflect the special needs of women.
As a high proportion of female prisoners have been victims of violence, sexual abuse or ill treatment, Member States are urged to provide psychological support, especially to women prisoners who have suffered such violence, to mothers with family responsibilities and to minors.
On the maternity front, MEPs say pregnant women should have access to prenatal and postnatal care.
The committee also wants special arrangements for foreign prisoners, who it says should be able to contact their consulates and have access to prison resources and programmes.
Preserving social and family ties
If imprisoning women is likely to seriously disrupt family life (e.g. in cases of lone parent families or responsibility for dependants) the report suggests greater use of non-custodial punishments if the sentence is minor and the risk to public safety is low.
MEPs also call for judicial systems to guarantee the rights of children and for Member States and penal institutions to set up separate mother-and-child units with qualified staff to help prisoners who are mothers to meet their educational and care responsibilities.
Social reintegration
To encourage their reintegration into society, the report stresses the need for women prisoners to have access, without encountering discrimination, to jobs and voluntary work as well as to varied vocational and civic training courses adapted to job market requirements.
MEPs also want every detention centre to have monitoring and individual support programmes available to all prisoners on a voluntary basis, to devise and implement personal reintegration plans.
Lastly, the report calls on Member States to invest more in resources for prisons to develop literacy, life-long learning and vocational training programmes, partly by using financing instruments such as the European Social Fund and PROGRESS.
Procedure: Own-initiative
Plenary vote: March - Strasbourg
2008-01-28 Committee on Women's Rights and Gender Equality Chair Anna ZÁBORSKÁ EPP-ED SK
20080128IPR19735 Committee on Women's Rights and Gender Equality
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=FEMM
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
