Boosting Europe’s economic potential
Economic and monetary affairs
2008-01-29 - 19:42
Sound economic policies would help to restore confidence following the financial market turmoil, says the Economics Committee in a report adopted on Tuesday. It recommends a series of measures to boost Europe’s long-term growth potential in what is a wide-ranging assessment of EU economic policy.
The committee says that growing imbalances, aggregate demand and global inflationary pressure may become a significant challenge for monetary policy, as could exchange rate volatility and financial market uncertainty.
Enhancing growth potential
Europe, says the committee, needs to enhance its growth potential to increase employment. The report warns that the high levels of the euro exchange rate harm competitiveness and reduce the margin of manoeuvre for monetary policy. It says that in most countries consolidation of public finances would help long-term fiscal sustainability, while modernisation of public administrations could help in this regard. MEPs add that the rise in productivity should go hand in hand with a fairer distribution of the benefits of growth and a strengthening of social cohesion.
EU and the world economy
The report says the EU should aim to shape globalisation rather than merely passively adapt to it – transatlantic relations are particularly important for this purpose. It says measures to combat protectionism both within and outside the EU are needed. Protectionism, the committee argues, undermines rather than defends consumers’ and citizens’ rights. Promoting growth and cooperation with third countries, and further economic openness of the EU are vital to properly managing migration flows and fighting illegal immigration.
Growth and the environment in synergy
MEPs in the committee say that environmentally-friendly technologies can help enhance synergies between environmental protection and economic growth, while market based instruments should be used to help meet the European Council’s target to make Europe into an energy efficient, renewables-based economy. Shifting the tax burden from labour to environmental degradation is an effective approach.
Economic growth boosting measures
While respecting financial consolidation, a coordinated approach by Member States to growth, with intensive spending, stimulation of private investment and public-private initiatives could help meet transport, communication, energy and environmental challenges, says the report. There should be an accelerated integration of the services market. The delivery of effective public services, accessible to all, has, says the committee, an important role to play in a competitive and dynamic economy. Opening up of network industries to competition is a necessity.
A coordinated fiscal framework, including corporate tax arrangements is needed. It should be favourable to companies, in particular small and medium sized enterprises, and geared to renewing growth and generating employment.
The EU's economic policy coordination process
These recommendations came in an own-initiative report, adopted with 28 votes in favour to 2 against with 13 abstentions, based on a draft by Margarita Starkevičiūtė (ALDE, LT), which makes a series of recommendations to the Council ahead of the adoption of the new Broad Economic Policy Guidelines and suggests a number of specific changes that could be made to the existing economic guidelines in order to take these into account.
The Council is due to adopt a new set of Broad Economic Policy Guidelines for the next three years this spring. These form the main instrument for coordinating economic policies in the Member States in the context of the Lisbon Strategy, which aims to make the EU economy more competitive. Together with the Employment Guidelines, they form the “Integrated Guidelines for Jobs and Growth.” This is the second cycle of guidelines to be adopted since the Lisbon Strategy was relaunched and refocused in 2005.
Procedure: Own-initiative report --
Plenary vote: February, Strasbourg
2008-01-29 Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs In the chair Pervenche BERÈS PES FR
20080128IPR19729 Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=ECON
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
