Humanitarian consensus: relations with the military under scrutiny
Humanitarian aid
2008-01-30 - 11:09
The tangible impact of the new European Consensus on Humanitarian Aid was discussed at a hearing held at the European Parliament on Tuesday. MEPs and guest speakers looked at issues including relations between military forces and humanitarian workers.
According to the European Commission, the Consensus is "the EU's response to the major developments that have altered the humanitarian context". Josep Borrell (PES, ES), the chair of the Development Committee, added that "humanitarian aid is one of the most visible pillars of the EU's role in the world". He also mentioned that the EU spent €670 million in this area in 2006. If aid from Member States is included, the EU is the world's largest humanitarian aid donor.
"For the European Parliament, the adoption of a European Consensus on Humanitarian Aid by the three institutions is not an end in itself but the start of a process that will increase the effectiveness of aid delivered by the EU and broaden the scope of humanitarian aid as Europe wants, from preventing the risk of disasters to reconstruction, without overlooking follow-up humanitarian aid in forgotten crises", said Thierry Cornillet (ALDE, FR), the EP standing rapporteur on humanitarian aid.
Good local knowledge
Turning to the complex relations between humanitarian and military personnel deployed in conflict zones, Antonio Cavaco, director-general of ECHO (the European Community humanitarian aid office) said "we must ensure that the military have a good understanding of humanitarian issues in complex crises, as was the case in Congo, Lebanon and Chad".
Glenys Kinnock, co-president of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly, asked "how can we ensure that civilian protection forces respect the principles of neutrality and impartiality of humanitarian aid?", principles which were mentioned by John Holmes, the UN Under-Secretary-General for Humanitarian Affairs.
Mr Holmes, citing the deployment of EUFOR (European Union Force) in Chad, argued that "the European force is not a humanitarian force; it must give us a stable environment to operate in. We must above all be pragmatic and avoid a confusion of roles".
Background
On 17 December 2007, EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering, Commission President José Manuel Barroso and Portuguese Prime Minister and EU President-in-Office José Sócrates signed the European Consensus on Humanitarian Aid, which had earlier been the subject of an own-initiative report by the European Parliament.
The report focused on the need to clarify relations between activities supported by the Commission through the stability instrument for the prevention, management and resolution of crises (including disarmament, demobilisation, mine clearance, the reintegration of displaced populations and refugees) and accompanying activities carried out by ECHO.
The Lisbon Treaty, currently awaiting ratification, establishes humanitarian aid as a Community policy.
2008-01-28 Committee on Development Chair Josep Borrell Fontelles PES ES
20080128IPR19727 Website of Development Committee Website of ECHO
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?body=DEVE&language=EN
EN
2
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/echo/index_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
