January Brussels Plenary: Iran, Gaza, Postal Services
Institutions
2008-02-04 - 15:41
MEPs voted on opening the postal market
The last days of January saw MEPs converge on Brussels for two days of debates and votes. Wednesday saw the EU's foreign policy chief Javier Solana discuss Iran's nuclear intentions and events in the Gaza Strip with MEPs. Later the US's plan to station missile defence batteries in Poland and the Czech Republic and the impact on European defence policy came under the spotlight. On Thursday MEPs voted to open up the EU's postal services.
Read more about these and other issues in our focus.
20080204FCS20432
Wednesday in Plenary: Iran, Gaza, anti-missile shield, postal services
Crisis in Gaza - not exactly child's play Javier Solana, the EU's foreign affairs chief was in Parliament on Wednesday to report to MEPs on relations with Iran and events in the Gaza strip. He stressed the need to ensure that Tehran's nuclear ambitions were peaceful - a call echoed by MEPs. Plans by Washington to station anti-missile batteries in the Czech Republic and Poland and the effect this would have on European security policy were discussed. MEPs also debated proposed legislation liberalising postal services in Europe.
Iran "our objective is to remove suspicions" The High Representative for Common Foreign and Security Policy told the House that Iran is a key country in the Middle East that it is "an imperfect democracy" but better than nothing and that "we should engage with its parliamentarians." "None of us have a problem with an Iranian civil programme, in fact, we are offering to help (but) we need to ensure that their intentions are purely peaceful". Mr Solana added, "our objective is to remove suspicions". He also raised concerns over the high number of executions, reports of torture and uranium enrichment. On a positive note he pointed out the international community's good cooperation with Iran in Afghanistan. EU Commissioner Benita Ferrero-Waldner criticised the state of human rights: "Without systematic improvement on human rights...our relations with Iran cannot develop properly." In the debate that followed, MEPs criticised the fact that more that 30% of candidates were excluded form the March parliamentary elections in Iran. Some speakers suggested that the EU support the Iranian opposition or set up an EU Representation in Iran. Gaza Strip On January 19 Israel closed the border with the Gaza strip and stopped fuel supplies as a response to continuing rocket attacks from this area controlled by Hamas. Mr Solana said, the "humanitarian situation has worsened and, security deteriorated. A possible solution could be an EU border mission that would attempt to police the situation." MEPs were sympathetic to the position of the Palestinian population of Gaza, with recent events prompting calls for the EU to move away from a policy of isolating Hamas and accepting the need for talks. Others however reminded the House that Hamas is on the EU list of designated terrorist organisations and emphasised the right of Israel to defend its own population. Parliament will adopt a resolution on the subject in February. Read the detailed report of the debate on this website. US anti-missile system Following Council and Commission statements, MEPs debated the controversial US anti-missile defence system designed to counter threats from potential emerging nuclear powers. Some MEPs stressed that the matter is a European one and that whatever steps Warsaw and Prague take will impact on any emerging EU foreign policy. Other speakers said it is up to Poland and the Czech Republic to take measures they consider necessary for their security. Postal services MEPs debated the accomplishment of the internal market in postal services, including the expiry of remaining postal service monopolies by 2011, - or 2013 for some Member States. Other issues
British Liberal Fiona Hall presented her own-initiative report on an action plan for energy efficiency.
MEPs also supported the outcome of the recent Bali climate change conference (3-14 December 2007 Iran debate Iran's chief nuclear negotiator meets MEPs US anti-missile defence system Postal services: market opening by 2011 on track Post briefing - full round up from the session
Thursday Plenary in Brussels: climate roadmap, Roma, postal services
Roma language classes in Slovakia Thursday saw MEPs adopt resolutions on an action plan to combat climate change and on a European strategy to improve the position of the 10 million Roma people in the EU. MEPs also voted on the liberalisation of postal services in a second reading vote on legislation. This is likely to lead to the EU's postal services open for greater competition. A report on steps to improve energy saving were also agreed. Thursday also saw an incident in the Chamber sparked by a row over a procedural matter.
Climate change roadmap on track A resolution adopted by MEPs welcomed the Bali roadmap's 2009 deadline for the conclusion of an international agreement on climate change. Though satisfied that the Bali Action Plan contains "a clear timetable" for reaching agreement, MEPs regretted "that it was not possible to make unambiguous references to science in relation to the necessary greenhouse gas reductions". They welcomed, however, the Kyoto Protocol parties' recognition of the need for industrialised countries to cut emissions by 25-40% (compared to 1990 levels) by 2020. The EP also called for the WTO to consider "temporary measures that favour the manufacture and export of climate-friendly products and innovative technology". Call for better rights for Roma people Out of the 12 to 15 million Roma living in Europe, about 10 million live in EU countries. A majority of them became EU citizens after the 2004 and 2007 enlargements. MEPs believe Roma communities still suffer clear discrimination and adopted a resolution on the European Strategy on the Roma warning of the risks of anti-Gypsy sentiments promoted by extremists. They call for renewed efforts to integrate Roma through positive measures in housing, health, education and employment.
Parliament condemned substandard and unsanitary living conditions and wide scale "ghettoisation" of Romani people.
Calls for steps to get more Roma people into the labour market and the use of more training.
MEPs also want the Commission to strengthen anti-discrimination legislation in education. Other votes Other votes during the day included two reports reported in detail elsewhere on this site: a legislative report on European postal services and a non-binding but keenly-followed report on energy conservation. On postal services, Parliament voted for a general ending of postal monopolies in Europe by 2011, with a few exceptions until 2013. This outcome effectively seals an agreement with Council, which had already accepted Parliament's position on the subject. On energy conservation, Parliament's vote drew widespread attention across the continent as a pointer to the direction of European energy conservation policy. Parliament focused on domestic energy use and on private homes in particular, while the headlines homed in on the report's recommendation on outdoor "patio" heaters. Incident in the chamber In the course of proceedings a point of order raised by a British Member Daniel Hannan (EPP-ED), during which he drew a parallel between some of the European Parliament’s procedures and parliamentary manoeuvrings in 1930s Germany, provoked strong protests from MEPs across the House. Later in the day, Joseph Daul, leader of the EPP-ED political group, announced the intention to expel Mr Hannan from the group. Mr Daul said that "these comments are unqualified and disgraceful. I respect Mr Hannan as an MEP but his remarks this morning are incompatible with the EPP-ED Group's values. It is for this reason that I will ask the Group to proceed with the expulsion of Mr Hannan, according to our Rules of Procedure and after consultation with the Members of the British Delegation European Parliament supports Bali roadmap, calls for urgent review on EU biofuels policy: Roma in Europe: MEPs vote on anti-discrimination measures Postal services vote Roma rights Energy saving measures
EN
1
PHOTO
20080130PHT20195.jpg
EN
2
PHOTO
20080130PHT20193.jpg
EN
8
PHOTO
20080131PHT20232.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080129IPR19894 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080121STO19277 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080131IPR20216 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080122BRI19370 ITEM-001-EN NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080129BRI19892 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080129IPR19922 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080125STO19645 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080130IPR20129 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080129IPR19931 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080129IPR19924 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
