The Week Ahead: 11-17 February 2007
2008-02-08 - 15:23
Meetings of committees and political groups - Brussels
Preparing for the plenary. The EP's political groups will devote most of the week to preparations for the Strasbourg plenary session of 18-21 February. Key points on the agenda include the adoption of the EP's opinion on the Lisbon Treaty , votes on reports on the free movement of goods within the EU and boosting consumer confidence in the "CE" mark, as well as debates on Kosovo and economic policy . MEPs will hear the views of Swedish Prime Minister Fredrik Reinfeld on the future of Europe and will hold a formal sitting with John Agyekum Kufuor, President of Ghana and of the African Union.
Hans-Gert Pöttering in New York. Parliament's President will take part in a meeting at the United Nations on climate change and give a speech at the City University. On his return, Mr Pöttering will make an official visit to the Belgian authorities (Wednesday) .
Climate change/Prince Charles. During a visit to Brussels aimed at focusing attention on climate change, the Prince of Wales will address an audience of MEPs and have a private meeting with President Pöttering (Thursday) .
Fundamental rights. The Civil Liberties Committee will hold hearings of the two candidates for the post of director of the EU Fundamental Rights Agency (Monday) .
Lisbon Strategy. The internal market, research, globalisation and the labour market will be among the issues discussed at the fourth parliamentary meeting on the Lisbon Strategy held by the EP and the Slovenian presidency (Monday) .
Space and defence. The Subcommittee on Security and Defence will hold a workshop looking at using Member States’ satellites for operations carried out under the EU security and defence policy (Monday) .
Pakistan. A delegation of MEPs led by Robert Evans travels to Pakistan to observe the parliamentary elections taking place on 18 February (from Friday) .
Intercultural film festival. As part of European Year of Intercultural Dialogue, the European Parliament is hosting a film festival, starting on Wednesday, showing films dealing with the topic of intercultural dialogue from all the Member States.
2008-02-11 The President's diary . 09:30 Thematic debate of the United Nations "Addressing Climate Change: The UN and the World at Work"
10:15 Participation in the panel "Rising to the Challenge: Partnerships on Climate Change" (UN Headquarters)
18:00 Lecture at the City University of New York 09:30 19:00 New York, USA Press conferences 10:30 - The European Emergency Number 112 Day - Kathy SINNOTT (IND/DEM, IE), Jacek SARYUSZ-WOLSKI (EPP-ED, PL - Chair of the Committee on Foreign Affairs), Piia-Noora KAUPPI (EPP-ED, FI) and Giovanna CORDA (PSE, BE) 10:30 11:00 Brussels, PHS 0A50 Parliamentary committees LIBE Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs
Hearing with the candidates for the post of director at the Fundamental Rights Agency
MEPs will hold a hearing with the two candidates shortlisted for the post of director at the Fundamental Rights Agency. The candidates pre-selected by the European Commission are: Dario CARMINATI and Morten KJAERUM (15:00-16:30) . The Civil Liberties Committee and the Council will hold independent hearings and send their motivated opinions to the Agency's Management Board, which will formally appoint the director after taking the opinions into consideration. 15:00 18:30 Brussels, ASP 3G3 DROI Human Rights
Discussion with the Slovenian Presidency on the activities and work programme of the Working Party on Human Rights (COHOM) 15:00 18:30 Brussels, ASP 1G3 Other events 4th Joint Parliamentary Meeting on the Lisbon Strategy
The Fourth Joint Parliamentary Meeting on the Lisbon Strategy, organised by the European Parliament and the Slovenian National Assembly, will cover inter alia the following topics: Internal market and strategies - research and development: responses to globalisation, Investment in people and labour market, and Measuring progress and monitoring the Lisbon Strategy.
The meeting will be co-chaired by the President of the Slovenian National Assembly France CUKJATI and EP Vice-president Rodi KRATSA-TSAGAROPOULOU (EPP-ED, EL). 15:00 18:30 Brussels, Plenary Chamber Workshop on the Reform Treaty and ESDP The Subcommittee on Security and Defence is organising a public workshop on the Reform Treaty and ESDP. The workshop will examine the major innovations of the Lisbon Treaty in the field of ESDP, in particular the strengthening of the High Representative, the introduction of a mutual assistance clause and a solidarity clause and the possibility to establish permanent structured cooperation. 15:00 18:30 Brussels, ASP 5G2 2008-02-12 The President's diary . 11.30 Meeting with Dr Henry Kissinger, former US Secretary of State 11:30 12:30 New York, USA Delegations Delegation For Relations With The Countries Of Central America
Exchange of views with the Central American Court of Justice: President Ricardo Dario Lobo, Vice-President Carlos Antonio Guerra Gallardo, and Vice-President Silvia Rosales Bolanos 12:00 13:00 Brussels, ASP 5G2 Please check room number on screens Other events 4th Joint Parliamentary Meeting on the Lisbon Strategy
The Fourth Joint Parliamentary Meeting on the Lisbon Strategy, organised by the European Parliament and the Slovenian National Assembly, will cover inter alia the following topics: Internal market and strategies - research and development: responses to globalisation, Investment in people and labour market, and Measuring progress and monitoring the Lisbon Strategy.
The meeting will be co-chaired by the President of the Slovenian National Assembly France CUKJATI and EP Vice-president Rodi KRATSA-TSAGAROPOULOU (EPP-ED, EL). 09:30 12:30 Brussels, Plenary Chamber 2008-02-13 The President's diary . Official visit to Belgium 09:30 18:30 Brussels Press conferences 16:00 - Mission entrusted to Alain Lamassoure by Nicolas Sarkozy on practical application of Community law - Alain LAMASSOURE (EPP-ED, FR)
16:00 16:30 Brussels, PHS 0A50 Other events Intercultural film festival at the European Parliament
As part of the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue, the European Parliament will be hosting a European film festival on intercultural dialogue in the Yehudi Menuhin space, starting on 13 February 2008. This initiative, organized by EUNIC, a European network of national cultural institutes in Brussels in collaboration with Parliament's Communication Directorate-General, will screen cinematographic works from all EU Member States during 2008.
Screenings of the films will be open to anyone holding a Parliament access badge, including the accredited press, and to people especially invited by cultural centres and embassies. They will take place in the Yehudi Menuhin space (PHS building) at 19.00h, two or three times per month throughout the year.
To stimulate debate after each screening, directors and actors will be invited to take part in discussion with spectators. Furthermore, at each screening, an MEP from the producer country will be present at the invitation of the cultural centre concerned. The festival opens on 13 February at 19.00h with the Slovene film "Express, express", attended by the European Union Presidency, Slovene MEP Romana Jordan Cizelj (EPP-ED) and European Parliament President Hans-Gert Pöttering. The director, Mr Igor Sterk, will also be present. 19:00 21:00 Brussels, PHS - Yehudi Menuhin 2008-02-14 Public hearings Urban mobility - one size fits all? EU policy and technological possibilities The Committee on Transport and Tourism
Every day, millions of EU citizens are faced with daily traffic congestion in urban areas and with its adverse impacts on the economy and the environment. Therefore, urban mobility should be improved in a way that fosters economic development and makes cities more accessible, while at the same time enhancing the quality of life of their inhabitants.
On Thursday 14 February, the Committee on Transport and Tourism will hold a public hearing on urban mobility policy. In the course of this hearing, representatives of various cities in the EU will be asked to express their views on subsidiarity (who does what in the EU?), financing and their attitude towards suggested steering instruments (e.g. green procurement). In order to give insight into logistic concerns and discuss examples of best practice, the invited experts will be asked about upcoming technological developments, such as smarter urban transport.
09:00 12:30 Brussels, PHS 1A002 Programme of the event Other events Workshop on Space Policy and ESDP The Subcommittee on Security and Defence is organising a public workshop on Space Policy and ESDP. It will look at the ways the satellite systems owned by EU countries can support ESDP operations. Several experts from the field and officials working for European institutions will address the topic. 09:00 12:30 Brussels, ASP 5G2 Prince of Wales – Speech at European Parliament on Climate Change
The Prince of Wales (Prince Charles of the United Kingdom) is to visit Brussels to help raise the profile of climate change in the European Union. He will speak on the subject to an invited audience of MEPs and others at the European Parliament on Thursday morning.
The meeting will be shown live on Europe by Satellite and also streamed on the European Parliament website.
Access to the meeting is strictly by invitation only . Journalists wishing to follow the event are advised to do so via EbS, including in the EP Press Room - or in the overflow room ASP 1E2.
The Prince will also have a bilateral meeting with EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering. 10:30 11:30 Brussels, ASP 3E2 2008-02-15 Press conferences 11:00 - Briefing on the Strasbourg plenary session of 18-21 February 11:00 11:30 Brussels, PHS 0A50 Delegations Observation mission delegation to Pakistan for the parliamentary elections The European Parliament is sending an electoral observation mission to Pakistan, to monitor the parliamentary elections on 18 February. The delegation is chaired by Robert Evans (PES, UK), and will complement the long-term EU observation mission, which is headed by Michael Gahler (EPP-ED, DE). The six other Members of the delegation are: Ivo Belet (EPP-ED, BE), Lilli Gruber (PES, IT), Jo Leinen (PES, DE), Marianne Mikko (PES, ET), Nickolay Mladenov (EPP-ED, BU) and Baroness Emma Nicholson of Winterbourne (ALDE, UK). 09:00 19:00 Pakistan 2008-02-16 Delegations Observation mission delegation to Pakistan for the parliamentary elections The European Parliament is sending an electoral observation mission to Pakistan, to monitor the parliamentary elections on 18 February. The delegation is chaired by Robert Evans (PES, UK), and will complement the long-term EU observation mission, which is headed by Michael Gahler (EPP-ED, DE). The six other Members of the delegation are: Ivo Belet (EPP-ED, BE), Lilli Gruber (PES, IT), Jo Leinen (PES, DE), Marianne Mikko (PES, ET), Nickolay Mladenov (EPP-ED, BU) and Baroness Emma Nicholson of Winterbourne (ALDE, UK). 09:00 19:00 Pakistan 2008-02-17 Delegations Observation mission delegation to Armenia for the Presidential elections A European Parliament election observation mission will be in Armenia to monitor the Presidential elections on 19 February. The delegation will be chaired by Marie Anne Isler Béguin (Greens/EFA, FR) and consist of 3 additional MEPs: Sarunas Birutis (ALDE, LT), Alexandra Dobolyi (PES, HU) and Gabriele Stauner (EPP-ED, DE). The delegation is to hold a press conference on 20 February in Yerevan to announce its evaluation of the elections. 09:00 19:00 Armenia Observation mission delegation to Pakistan for the parliamentary elections The European Parliament is sending an electoral observation mission to Pakistan, to monitor the parliamentary elections on 18 February. The delegation is chaired by Robert Evans (PES, UK), and will complement the long-term EU observation mission, which is headed by Michael Gahler (EPP-ED, DE). The six other Members of the delegation are: Ivo Belet (EPP-ED, BE), Lilli Gruber (PES, IT), Jo Leinen (PES, DE), Marianne Mikko (PES, ET), Nickolay Mladenov (EPP-ED, BU) and Baroness Emma Nicholson of Winterbourne (ALDE, UK). 09:00 19:00 Pakistan
EN
1
LINK
/document/activities/cont/200802/20080201ATT20359/20080201ATT20359EN.pdf
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AGD DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AGD DOC XML V0//EN
