EP President Pöttering in Japan calls for partnership on climate change
External relations
2008-02-08 - 12:52
West meets East: President Pöttering meets students
Parliament's President Hans-Gert Pöttering used his five-day visit to Japan to stress the importance of a "strategic partnership" between the EU and Tokyo to fight climate change. He told Prime Minister Yasuo Fukuda and Japanese MPs that Europe and Japan must work together. Mr Pöttering said he had chosen Japan for his first visit to Asia as President because of "shared values" of democracy and constitutionalism. He also held talks with Emperor Akihito.
In the land where the Kyoto protocol on climate change was signed the importance of finding an agreement beyond Kyoto is of considerable importance. The main focus of talks with Mr Fukuda on 5 February was the issue of how major industrialised countries can cooperate.
In public comments President Pöttering praised the Prime Minister's speech on climate change at the World Economic Forum a few days ago, in which he stressed the importance of a fair and effective post Kyoto agreement.
Mr Pöttering also praised Japan's founding of a "global fund for new technologies" to help developing countries access environmentally-friendly technology.
Climate change was the focus again when Mr Pöttering spoke to students at Keio University on 6 February he said Japan "can be the bridge between the main emitters of the industrial countries, the United States and the European Union".
He also reiterated the Parliament's commitment to the targets for cuts in Europe's CO2 emissions recently outlined in the plenary chamber by President of the European Commission José Manuel Barroso.
"No taboos"
In Japan's wider relations with the EU he said that "between democracies...there can and must be open and frank discussion on all issues". He went on to say that there should be "no taboos" in the relationship. He referred to the death penalty "which is unfortunately still used in Japan" although said the situation was not comparable to China.
His speech also touched upon cultural exchange in this, the year of intercultural dialogue. He told the students that "our long term aim should be to build a bridge across the Mediterranean and the Middle East".
In a speech at an official dinner with the Speaker of the House of Representatives the President recalled the "far-reaching political dialogue between the EU and Japan since 1991".
As well as meeting key political figures Pöttering also met Japanese academics, foreign correspondents and a group of Japanese retirees.
Finally, in his remarks at the official dinner with the speaker he drew attention to a part of Japan which is near the European Parliament in Strasbourg. He thanked the Japanese Parliament for their 1996 gift (to mark the visit of a former EP President) of 25 Cherry Blossom trees planted near the building.
Japan facts
Population: 127 million (Japan has the world's oldest population).
Japan has the 2nd biggest GDP in the world and is a leader in high-tech.
"I come from Europe" is "私はヨーロッパから来る" in Japanese.
20080208STO20709 Website of Hans-Gert Pöttering Parliament's delegation to Japan
EN
1
PHOTO
20080208PHT20720.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/president/defaulten.htm
EN
3
LINK
/activities/delegations/membersDel.do;jsessionid=4B72086F2B5F87FBD4BC62AECB1CAA0A.node2?body=D-JP&language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
