Complete internal market and invest in research, say MEPs and national MPs
Economic and monetary affairs
2008-02-12 - 09:52
Europe needs to complete its internal market and invest more in a highly-skilled workforce and in research and development - according to MEPs and national MPs taking part in Monday's opening session of the fourth Joint Parliamentary Meeting on the Lisbon Strategy, which aims to boost the competitiveness of the European economy and thus create more growth and jobs.
The meeting is addressing "some of the key topics Europe is facing today", according to EP Vice-President Rodi Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou as she opened this year's Joint Parliament Meeting on the Lisbon Strategy, which will evaluate the progress achieved and assess what still has to be done . Although the new Treaty would not lead to a common economic policy, it would strengthen the participation of national parliaments in EU affairs said Ms Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou. The other co-chair of the meeting, France Cukjati, President of the Slovenian National Assembly ( Državni zbor), said that "European integration started as a coal and steel community - an attempt to pool together strategic resources of that period. Now knowledge, innovation, and jobs have become strategic goods".
Europe not on the eve of recession, says Verheugen
In the name of the European Commission, which published a stocktaking report on the Lisbon Strategy in December last year, Günter Verheugen, Vice-President and Commissioner for Enterprise and Industry, said that although growth projections had to be reduced for the year ahead, "the Commission doesn't believe that we are on the eve of an economic recession". Among the most pressing issues of European policy he named energy and climate, the role of small and medium sized enterprises, and innovation. The Commissioner regretted that the EU will only achieve an average investment of 2.5% into research and development by 2010, instead of the 3% set in the Lisbon strategy. He went on that "since 2005 6.5 million new jobs have been created and we expect a further 5 million to be created in the coming two years". However, he also stressed that "the shortage of high-skilled workers in some regions has become a real obstacle to growth".
Internal market still to be completed
The two rapporteurs who are drawing up the EP's resolution on the Lisbon Strategy presented the key points of the text which will be put to the plenary next week in preparation of the Spring European Council. This year Parliament's "strategic position" will focus on the three key topics of internal market, labour market and monitoring progress, said co-rapporteur Klaus-Heiner Lehne (EPP-ED, DE). "We don't have satisfactory growth", he stressed, adding that "in certain areas the internal market is still not completed". He, therefore, welcomed the Commission's intention to propose a Small Business Act.
CO2 reduction and trade
Co-rapporteur Rebecca Harms (Greens/EFA, DE) underlined that "we have to cease living beyond our means", especially as regards wasting energy. She had the impression that "in Europe there is a competition for every gram of CO2 reduction day after day". Ms Harms called for "qualified external protection". High demands on European industry and free market access for "Kyoto deniers" at the same time would lead to unfair competition, she stressed.
Reforms in Slovenia
Slovenian MP Tomaž Štebe underlined the achievements reached in Slovenia's Lisbon Strategy implementation, so far: a comprehensive tax reform, an improved legal framework for the protection of intellectual property rights, shorter waiting periods for the registration of businesses and a lower administrative burden. "This is an opportunity for us to give a new impetus to a policy which will put the EU and each Member State on the top of global competitiveness", he concluded.
Following the opening MEPs and MPs split into three working groups to discuss responses to globalisation through research and development, investment in people and the labour market, and measuring the progress made towards the Lisbon goals.
The Lisbon Strategy was created in 2000, with the aim of making the EU the world's most competitive and dynamic knowledge based economy by 2010. At the half way stage, results were disappointing, and the strategy was relaunched in 2005 with a renewed focus on measures to boost growth and employment rates.
2008-02-11 Co-chair Rodi KRATSA-TSAGAROPOULOU EP Vice-President GR Co-chair France CUKJATI President of the Slovenian National Assembly
4th Joint Parliamentary Meeting on the Lisbon Strategy
20080211IPR20872
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
