Lobbying rapporteur Stubb calls for more transparency ahead of report
Institutions
2007-11-05 - 10:40
Stubb: "MEPs have to be transparent as well"
Greater transparency and stricter rules on lobbying are two of the proposals likely to be contained in a new report on lobbying being prepared by the EP's Constitutional Affairs Committee. Greater financial disclosure and more information about companies' clients are may also be required. Parliament's rapporteurs may be called on to put in their report all the people they have consulted. Ahead of the report's release we spoke to the man who will draft it - Finnish MEP Alexander Stubb (EPP-ED).
The Commission’s Transparency Initiative is the starting point for your report. A central point of the initiative is to register lobbyists. What are your thoughts on the register?
After listening to a lot of people and sending questionnaires to all MEPs, my feeling is we need to have more transparent and slightly stricter rules.
I see basically three models of dealing with lobbying; one is the American model, which has gone to extremes. You have 575 pages of rules for lobbyists and if for example a politician is present at a seminar you cannot offer a sit-down dinner, it has to be a buffet-dinner! The reason for that system is that political funding is very closely linked to lobbying.
Then you have another extreme which we actually have in most EU Member States where there are no lobby rules whatsoever. Various parliaments listen to so-called "experts" who are of course lobbyists.
Then we have the EU model, where the Commission had nothing so far, but in the Parliament we have a register already since the 1990s. The question now is what we should do with our Parliament register…
… do you think there should be a common register with the European Commission?
In the beginning I was sceptical about the administrative feasibility of this. Having thought about it long and hard, I don't think it is such a bad idea after all. Lobbying in the two institutions, however, differs. Here at the Parliament you get a badge and you walk around freely, in the Commission you can’t get a badge to walk around. Therefore, I would first want to see how we can do this in practice.
Would the register apply equally to all lobbyists?
I think that all lobbyists were created equal. For me the representatives of industry and the representatives of trade unions are lobbyists when they are engaged in lobbying activity. They are all pushing for a vested interest.
I believe that the register should be voluntary. This is because otherwise if somebody for instance from the agricultural union in Poland just wants to come and see an MEP: is he allowed to do that if the register is mandatory? Or would he be required to go through the whole rigmarole to register? That might be going a little too far…but if you want to be a serious lobbyist, you will register anyway.
How far do you think financial disclosure should go?
I feel that there should be a certain amount of financial disclosure, because that improves transparency.
Private companies could tell the percentage of their revenue spent on lobbying. I think professional lobby organizations should tell who their clients are, and NGOs where their funding comes from.
Transparency works both ways - the MEPs have to be transparent as well. For this reason I am going to propose a system, where as the Parliament’s rapporteur, you should indicate in a footnote all the different people and lobbyists that you have heard in the process. I call it the "legislative fingerprint". I think that lobbying is something positive and essential, but it just has to be transparent.
In what ways are lobbyists important for the Parliament?
My argument is that the best briefed person in Brussels is the Commissioner, because he has hundreds of civil servants behind him. The second best briefed person is the Minister who comes to the Council, because he or she has between 100 and 1,000 civil servants behind him, depending on the size of the ministry and the country. An MEP has only a few assistants, usually between one and three.
So, as an MEP you need to have a certain network, and I think in providing basic information the lobbyists are good. They are necessary for the legislative process. If for instance we are dealing with the speedometers of two to three wheeled motor vehicles, it would be ridiculous for me to say that I am a specialist in the field.
Have you been approached by lobbyists for your report on lobbying?
Yes, definitely, I have been lobbied by lobbyists on lobbying. For the sake of transparency I have actually written down in my blog all the different lobbyists that have seen me. We Finns are perhaps a bit too transparent for the liking of some.
I am quite strict with lobbyists myself in the sense that I give lobbyists 15 minutes in and out: make your case, leave me your papers, thank you, good-bye and then I draw my own conclusions. Due to time constraints, I think that working dinners or lunches are a waste of time, but that is just me.
The adoption of the report on lobbying by the constitutional affairs committee is expected for December, and plenary vote in January.
20071105STO12638 MEPs put EU lobbying under spotlight ahead of report: 8 October 07 Shedding (more) light on Brussels lobbies: 16 October 07 Profile MEP Alex Stubb: Constitutional Affairs Committee
EN
1
PHOTO
20071105PHT12631.jpg
EN
4
LINK
/members/expert/groupAndCountry/view.do?partNumber=1&group=1533&country=FI&id=28261&language=EN
EN
5
LINK
/activities/expert/committees/presentation.do?committee=2364&language=EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071008STO11293 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071012STO11624 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
