Parliament's Trainees - work and fun in a multinational mix
Youth
2008-02-15 - 12:27
EP Trainees Konchyta (Spain) and Matthias (Austria)
Thursday saw some of the 385 young people coming to the end of their 5 month traineeship in the Parliament meet its President Hans-Gert Pöttering . These internships - commonly known by the French word "stage" are a feature of the European Institutions. For many it is the start of a career in European affairs, for others it's 5 months living away from home and getting a taste of how the EU Institutions work. Places are highly sought after - these trainees were chosen from 4,628 applicants.
Parliament's President Hans-Gert Pöttering stressed the importance of young people to the European project when he recently met a group of stagiares. He told them, "we need your engagement, the engagement of the young generation in favour of European unity".
There are paid and unpaid traineeships - however the majority are paid. Those who take a paid placement in the Parliament are known as Robert Schuman Scholars. Parliament's Traineeships Office said "the number of trainees we can accept depends on the budget available and the capacity of the services to supervise the work."
Being part of the multinational mix
For Spanish intern Concepción Zúñiga "the most interesting thing is that you work with 27 different nationalities. It is a big challenge to write in other languages." Working in Parliament's Press Room she said the experience has given her confidence although she would have liked to have stayed longer than 5 months "as it's a short time to realise what is going on".
Indeed, learning more about the Parliament and other European Institutions is an essential part of being a trainee. "What's a DG?" is one of the first questions European Commission trainees often ask after being assigned to a Directorate General (department) of the EU's executive.
Orsolya Zsemba worked for Hungarian MEP Gábor Harangozó and "managed to learn more than I expected". She said she "learned about the internal procedures of the European Parliament, the inter-linkages of the different policies, the ways of lobbying and policy-making."
"I will learn a lot about myself"
For many people the traineeship is the first chapter in their professional career. Belgian trainee Stéphanie Van Cauwelaert has just started work in Parliament's Web-Communication Unit. She said "I'm sure my work here at the EP will be a great experience and will be a good start for my future working life...I will learn a lot about the EP and the European culture, but I will also learn a lot about myself".
Many find they want to stay in Brussels after their traineeship. Spanish trainee María Jesus Arroqui said "I would like to stay longer in Brussels and find a job related to communication and European Affairs, but it is difficult because of the competition." Karin Flygare, a trainee in the Parliament's External Policy department, said "after this stage I will be looking for a job either in Brussels or in Stockholm. I am interested in working with EU external relations and I think this stage improves my understanding of everyday diplomacy and negotiations."
Trainees are usually based in Parliament's offices in Brussels and Luxembourg. They can also attend the monthly plenary sessions in Strasbourg or be in one of Parliament's Information Offices around Europe's capitals.
The Parliament's Translation Office recruits a couple of hundred stagiares at its office in Luxembourg. There are also some places for young conference interpreters - although these are reserved for people from countries who have just joined the EU or are candidate countries - Turkey for example.
Who becomes a stagiare?
The trainee programme is also open to people from outside the EU. Last year applications came from as afar a field as Belarus, Canada and Taiwan. Only university graduates are accepted for paid traineeships.
Most EU applications come from Italy, Germany, France and Spain and about twice as many women as men apply.
It's not all work is it?
An essential part of the experience is meeting people from different nationalities and backgrounds. Much of this is done at various stage parties around Brussels - many of which have a national or regional theme such as "Blue Danube" to highlight countries of a particular region.
The European Commission has up to 10 times the number of interns as the Parliament so there are a lot of people sharing the same experience over five months.
"One advantage with doing a stage is the social life," said Karin Flygare. "There are parties organised by associations connected to the EP and the Commission that we go to. For the moment we are also "eating our way through" Brussels, trying new cafés and restaurants every weekend."
20080211STO20963 Traineeships at the EP EP trainees' association Your MEPs
EN
1
PHOTO
20080213PHT21217.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/parliament/public/staticDisplay.do?language=EN&id=147
EN
3
LINK
http://www.epstage.eu/news.php
EN
4
LINK
/members/public.do?language=en
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
