Interview with Sweden's PM Fredrik Reinfeldt
Future of Europe/European integration
2008-02-19 - 18:30
Stockholm to Strasbourg: Swedish PM Reinfeldt
Swedish Prime Minister Fredrik Reinfeldt was in the European Parliament on Tuesday 19 February to address MEPs as part of the future of Europe debate. He spelled out his vision of welfare reform, job creation and the need for the Europe to act on climate change. Prior to his speech we caught up with him and asked him a few questions about his attitude towards the EU, climate change and Kosovo.
As you prepare for your speech this afternoon, what do you think the greatest strengths and weaknesses of the EU are? Also, as yours could be the first EU Presidency to operate under the new Lisbon Treaty, do you think that is going to make a big difference?
The greatest achievement of Europe is to be found in peace, in cooperation and in trade. It's the first time ever that this has been possible and it is the European Union which makes it possible. Moreover, it is opening up for others to join under the same circumstances.
The biggest problem is that although we have said we want an internal free market, it's still not yet fully there. Therefore for a small country like Sweden who has grown rich out of trading with others, it would be very helpful if the internal market really was the internal market, without so many national subsidies, national bureaucracy, and so on - which get in the way of trade and greater efficiency.
On the changes that Lisbon could bring; (Sweden will hold the Presidency of the EU in the last half of 2009): I think everyone is very relieved that all the internal discussions seem to be over, that we can now discuss and focus on politics, on climate change and combating international crime. We will have better means to do that, but of course the institutional balance needs to be protected. We think the European Parliament will have greater influence on legislation.
Can we ask about climate change issues? The Swedish Presidency of the EU will coincide with the run up to the Copenhagen climate conference: are you confident a consensus can be found?
Laughs: I would say it would be one of the most fantastic moments in history if it was possible. Will Europe be able to take a decision regarding burden sharing? We were discussing a timetable with the European Parliament; Member States need to take their decisions, and hopefully once that's in place it will make Europe stronger to influence China, US, India. I also think it will be very decisive who will be the next President of the US.
I think it's very clear we need a Chinese leadership that says they are also part of the solution. We cannot say in these discussions that they are still an emerging economy and that's it's only the old industrial part of the world which should take responsibility
All these factors may come together in autumn 2009, if not in time for Copenhagen, then as soon as possible after. The Kyoto process was a "coalition of the willing". The problem is that the willing themselves stand for a minority of greenhouse emissions. The majority of the emissions come from countries outside the Kyoto protocol.
Would you be offering any thoughts to the European Parliament about this weekend's declaration on independence by Kosovo?
We think it was important to try and keep European countries together, but that has not been possible. We now have a division in the UN Security Council, and we have partly a division in the European Union. Even if we say yes to independence for Kosovo, we have to say at the same time that it will be a long term process under international influence. Therefore it will not be a new nation tomorrow, it's a nation emerging and it will take quite a long time.
There are specific circumstances regarding Kosovo. It cannot be linked to other situations of minority groups inside countries. There are many divisions on this question. I think most can accept independence but many ask themselves what will happen in my home country. Kosovo is a specific situation. The Europe ideal is to take away barriers and make movement of people easier. So we will not accept new barriers and keep people from each other, that's not the European idea. We also need a European perspective for Kosovo, Serbia and all the Western Balkans.
Concerning the Swedish model of high welfare coverage and low unemployment. Does that offer as model a lesson for others in Europe?
Laughs: I think everyone wants their own model! My perception is that we have a Nordic welfare model. We are trying to further the argument we had in the election in 2006 - and the Swedish people agree - is that welfare cover is good but we need to create more jobs for people to sustain it. More jobs, more productivity, a strong economy.
20080215STO21489 Swedish Prime Minister argues for a "strong Europe" and no halt to enlargement Swedish government
EN
1
PHOTO
20080219PHT21660.jpg
EN
3
LINK
http://www.sweden.gov.se/sb/d/2058
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215IPR21457 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
