Removing obstacles to trade - goods package debated Tuesday
Free movement of goods
2008-02-19 - 08:01
Europe’s shop shelves are stacked high with goods from across the continent. Consumers benefit from a single European marketplace, with their choice of goods unimpeded by barriers to trade. Or do they? Technicalities still often hamper cross border trade, hurting small businesses in particular. MEPs are set to seal a package of new measures to ease the sale of goods within the EU and to boost consumer choice and confidence. Watch the debate live on Tuesday morning.
Selling a product in another country can be difficult - even in the European Union's internal market. Differing rules on size, weight, labelling and packaging can make it unprofitable and unpractical for firms to sell their goods in another country. Adapting products for another market can require re-tooling a production line, using translators or having extra tests done on a product. All this costs money and the companies hit hardest are small and medium size enterprises.
Tuesday starts with a joint debate on the marketing of products with three legislative reports being debated. The free movement of goods within the EU is expected to speed up following a legislative package being put forward by the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection. The reports relate to 3 Commission proposals on mutual recognition and market surveillance.
It is estimated that EU rules on mutual recognition applies to trade worth €500 billion. This "mutual recognition" principle means that EU members may not refuse entry to goods from another member if they are already legally sold there.
Tuesday debate by MEPs
The aims of the reports to be debated are:
Remove barriers to mutual recognition.
Ensure that goods flow around the 27 member bloc as easily as possible.
Shift the burden of proof to members of the Union.
Establish EU-wide procedures if EU states want to limit or not to apply the principle of mutual recognition.
Define the rights and obligations of business and governments.
"It reduces red tape"
Many of the goods currently sold in the EU's internal market that are affected are everyday items like bread, bikes, kettles and even scaffolding.
Finnish MEP Alexander Stubb (right of centre EPP-ED) acted as parliament's rapporteur on one of the regulations in the goods package. Speaking to us ahead of the debate he said that "goods will move around Europe freer than before, which will increase consumer choice. For example, in the future, a bike made in Finland won't need to be equipped with hand brakes for the Belgian market".
He went on to say that "foremost, this is a victory for small and medium-sized enterprises. It reduces red tape". He also welcomed the speeding up of appeal processes "companies usually had to face a lengthy 2-3 years court case. This regulation envisages a 20 to 60 days procedure for the same purpose and only the most disputed cases would go to court".
Other reports in the goods package have been authored by André Brie (Germany, GUE/NGL) and Danish Socialist Christel Schaldemose. These two reports focus on the surveillance of the marketing of products and product safety. At present there is no common EU marking system of products. The Commission is expected to propose possible alternatives to the "CE" mark. Industry is said to favour a new, independent global standard to cut red tape costs and ease trade.
Last Wednesday EU Ministers and MEPs reached agreement on the proposals. Parliament will vote on Thursday. During the debate, the chair of Parliament's Internal Market Committee, British Labour MEP Arlene McCarthy will ask the Commission about safety marking on consumer products.
20080215STO21486 Watch live from 0900 Tuesday Agenda Full background Hearing told of obstacles to freer trade across Europe European Commission on mutual recognition
EN
1
PHOTO
20080218PHT21581.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/faces/live/live-video.jsp?language=en
EN
6
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/enterprise/regulation/goods/mutrec_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT AGENDA 20080219 SIT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080129BRI19893 ITEM-005-EN NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070611STO07714 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
