Pakistan’s elections competitive despite significant problems
Institutions
2008-02-20 - 13:41
An election observation delegation of the European Parliament spent the last five days in Pakistan, observing the elections held on 18 February. The delegation was part of the EU’s Election Observation Mission that had been observing the two month run-up to polling day. Chief Observer Michael Gahler (EPP-ED, DE) and EP Delegation Chair Robert Evans (PES, UK) presented the preliminary findings at a press conference today, along with the press release below.
The National and Provincial Assembly elections were competitive and the polling process achieved increased public confidence, but there were significant problems with the election framework and environment, concludes the preliminary assessment of European Union Election Observation Mission (EU EOM).
“We are relieved that election day has passed better than had been anticipated and commend the commitment shown by voters, candidates, election staff, and representatives of media and civil society,” said Michael Gahler (EPP-ED, DE), Chief Observer of the EU EOM. “However, elections were held in an environment that provided significant challenges for the conduct of democratic elections.”
The EU EOM concluded that polling was assessed positively on the whole, although some disorder and procedural irregularities were noted, particularly in female polling stations. The compilation process was positively assessed in the majority of constituencies observed. However, candidate agents and observers were not granted sufficient access to the results compilation at the constituency level. Very few returning officers displayed constituency results with a breakdown of polling stations - a basic transparency requirement.
Problems with the framework and environment included public authorities favouring the former ruling parties, serious restrictions on the right to stand as a candidate, restrictions and pressure on the media, involvement by Nazims [local governors] in campaigning activity, and a complaints and appeals framework that fails to provide effective remedy. Technical preparations for the elections saw some improvement. However, problematic issues identified during the 2002 elections have not been sufficiently addressed. There remains a lack of confidence in the independence of the Election Commission.
“The election period has shown the strong desire of the Pakistani people for democracy and the rule of law”, said Robert Evans (PES, UK), Chair of the European Parliament Delegation. “In response, we urge political parties to work responsibly to address the challenges ahead and demonstrate commitment to strengthening the electoral and wider democratic process”.
While the campaign was low key and subdued, it saw a broad range of views expressed. Regrettably, there was significant loss of life, including the assassination of Benazir Bhutto. Restrictions and pressures were imposed on the media during the election period, limiting freedom of expression. Private media provided candidates and parties with pluralistic coverage during the campaign, but the public broadcasters gave substantial coverage to the President, government and PML-Q, and only limited coverage of other parties.
Mr Gahler said that the mission is currently observing the results consolidation process and will remain in Pakistan to observe post election developments, including complaints and appeals. He called for “all outstanding complaints and appeals against the results to be processed quickly, impartially and transparently,” as well as the publication of detailed results by polling station. “A final report containing detailed recommendations for the future will be published within two months of the completion of the entire process,” Mr Gahler added.
The EU EOM has been in Pakistan since 9 December 2007. On election day the mission had 131 observers from 23 European Union countries as well as Norway and Canada, including the seven Member delegation of the European Parliament. For more detailed information on the EU’s findings, please consult the EU EOM’s preliminary statement, which can be found on their website through the link below.
EP delegation
The European Parliament’s delegation was headed by Robert Evans (PES, UK), and included: Ivo Belet (EPP-ED, BE), Lilli Gruber (PES, IT), Jo Leinen (PES, DE), Marianne Mikko (PES, ET), Nickolay Mladenov (EPP-ED, BG) and Baroness Emma Nicholson of Winterbourne (ALDE, UK). They were in Pakistan from 15-20 February.
2008-02-15
Chair : Robert Evans (PES, UK) Ad-hoc delegation for observation of the elections in Pakistan
20080220IPR21891 MEPs in Islamabad watch as Pakistan counts and waits "Healthy rivalry" in Pakistan elections - MEP observers Preliminary statement (EU EOM web site)
EN
3
LINK
http://www.eueompakistan.org/xxdefault.asp?id=1&show=19&m=0
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080218IPR21585 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080215STO21488 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
