Wednesday in Plenary: Lisbon Treaty, Kosovo and Europe's demographics
Institutions
2008-02-21 - 11:58
MEPs backed the Lisbon Treaty
Midweek saw MEPs back by a large majority a report that supports the new Lisbon Treaty as a step forward for democracy and transparency. A few Members spoke against the Treaty and called for referenda in individual states. The independence of Kosovo was another hot topic of the day, with a debate and declarations by the Council and the Commission. MEPs also debated the application of community law and the demographic future of the EU.
On Wednesday morning, British Labour MEP Richard Corbett and Spanish EPP-ED Member Íñigo Méndez de Vigo presented their report on the Treaty of Lisbon.
An overwhelming majority of MEPs expressed their support for the new Treaty, which they believe will enhance the EU's democratic accountability, protect citizens' rights and improve the functioning of EU institutions. In addition, MEPs highlighted the fact that the new Treaty will also enhance Parliament's powers as a fully recognised co‑legislator with increased budgetary powers. It will also give the Parliament a key role in the election of a future President of the European Commission.
Rapporteur Corbett called this Treaty a "massive increase in democracy in the European Union". Co-rapporteur Méndez de Vigo called it a "political solution", which allows us to "move beyond the crisis and standstills" of the past. "We had left many of our ambitions on the roadside, but nevertheless we managed to preserve the essential parts of the Constitution" added Mr Méndez de Vigo.
A few Members nonetheless voiced concerns, notably about some states having ratified a not yet consolidated text. There were calls for referenda, and claims that that a EU political elite was imposing its will on the people.
So far, five Member States have ratified the Treaty (Hungary, France, Slovenia, Malta and Romania) and ten others have launched ratification procedures. Ireland is the only country to hold a referendum on the Treaty. Member States should ratify it by the end of this year, to pave the way for the June 2009 European elections, says the Constitutional Committee's own-initiative report.
Mixed feelings on Kosovo
Reaction to Kosovo's independence on Sunday 17 February ensured a lively debate and a mixed response from MEPs. Doris Pack (EPP-ED) chairs Parliament's delegation to South East Europe, she spoke of the inevitability of Kosovan independence but expressed her concern about the solution which had been found. She emphasised that "is not a precedent - it is a sui generis case."
Austrian Socialist Member Hannes Swoboda said that "we can understand that there is a collective sense of loss in Serbia", but "no other solution was found".
French Member Francis Wurtz (GUE-NGL) told the House that "several Member States have dangerously weakened the future credibility of international law through their support for the unilateral declaration of independence of a province of a sovereign UN member state".
Speaking for the current holders of the Presidency of the Union, Slovene Minister Dimitrij Rupel for the Council said that "the EU needs Serbia and Serbia needs the EU"; "The time has come for true dialogue between the Serbs and the Albanians in Kosovo, between Serbia and Kosovo, between Serbia and the EU".
Also in the debate Europe's enlargement Commissioner Olli Rehn said "this is a difficult moment for Serbia. However, time has come to turn the page on the past"; "We condemn the use of violence, and call on all leaders and people of the region to remain calm and maintain peace and stability"; He also thanked the EP for supporting the EU perspective of the Western Balkans.
Outside the plenary, the Foreign Affairs Committee also focused on Kosovo. In a specially convened meeting, it played host to the Foreign Minister of Serbia, Vuk Jeremić, who spoke in frank terms about his government's reaction to the declaration of independence and the role played by wider Europe. Read our report on the visit at the link below.
Other debates
The House also debated a report by Italian Member Monica Frassoni (Greens/EFA) on monitoring the application of Community law, dealing with infringement procedures, to be voted on Thursday.
Late in the evening, the Chamber debated a report by French Socialist MEP Françoise Castex on the demographic future of Europe. The report deals with the European demographic decline and suggests several measures to deal with this problem. Vote on Thursday. (See our interview with Françoise Castex on her report via the link below).
To watch the plenary live and to get more information on the debates and votes, click on the links below.
20080215STO21491 Watch live Press service: results of votes Ratify the Lisbon Treaty this year says the European Parliament Press info on Kosovo Press info on Serbian Foreign Minister's visit to AFET As Europe ages - how can we tackle its demographic decline?
EN
1
PHOTO
20080221PHT21973.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/faces/live/live-video.jsp
EN
3
LINK
/news/expert/tous_les_epvotes/default/default_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080219IPR21733 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080219IPR21734 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080219IPR21605 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080204FCS20431 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
