CAP health check: continuing the work begun in 2003
Agriculture
2008-02-26 - 16:42
The EP Agriculture Committee believes the "health check" of the common agricultural policy should enable the last round of reforms to be consolidated without reducing further the funding available under the "first pillar" nor applying discriminatory degressivity to direct aid. Account must also be taken of the special needs of regions in difficulty and of sensitive sectors such as stockfarming, while simplifying the rules further for farmers.
The report by Lutz Goepel (EPP-ED, DE), adopted on Tuesday by an overwhelming majority by the Agriculture Committee, approves with a few changes the broad thrust of the Commission's paper on the "CAP health check", except its plans for "degressivity" of direct aid received by the largest farms and the important additional "modulation" of funds from the first pillar (market support) to the second (rural development). It also emphasises that any change in the system of direct aid (decoupling of aid from production and separation from historical reference values) and the increase in dairy quotas are to be applied in the Member States on voluntary basis. No fewer than 636 amendments were tabled to the rapporteur's draft report but compromises struck between the political groups to simplify the vote enabled MEPs to reach agreement on the key issues.
Direct aid, decoupling and extension of single payment system
The Agriculture Committee is in favour of the Member States having more flexibility, if they wish, in order to separate direct payments more from historical reference values at national level. MEPs want a study of the potential impact of an area-based premium, in particular with regard to farms with high livestock densities.
The committee also approves the principle of faster decoupling of production aid (which has in general led to a successful market orientation of European agriculture). It also approves, more cautiously, the principle of posssibly integrating other crops (dried fodder, hemp, flax, potato starch) into the single area payment scheme, although only after thorough impact studies and an appropriate transition period and provided this does not endanger the existence of these crops, which are very important for some regions.
However, MEPs believe that special animal premiums should not be altered for the time being, given the difficulties in the stockfarming sector following the exceptional rise in feed prices. They call on the Commission to devise a global strategy to safeguard stockfarming in the EU over the long term.
They also stress that direct payments will remain necessary after 2013, not only in the event of market failures but also for the provision of public goods by farmers and as compensation for Europe's very high environmental, food safety and animal welfare standards.
Set-aside, cross-compliance and simplification of the CAP
The Agriculture Committee believes that the set-aside obligation, as well as direct payments without cross-compliance, should be abolished. However, they reject the idea of broadening the scope of cross-compliance until substantial progress is made towards simplifying and harmonising monitoring rules. In addition, they say the EU should assist the new Member States in applying the rules on cross-compliance for a transition period. The environmental goals of set-aside could be achieved via rural development measures.
Market intervention, risk management
MEPs are in favour of to lowering the intervention thresholds for market crops to ‘0’ (except for wheat) and, more broadly, replacing the current system by a safety net for crises, which are likely to be more frequent owing to global warming.
They believe that private sector or mixed insurance schemes must be developed as a matter of urgency, with public financial support, while ensuring that the level-playing-field between different Member States is not endangered. They call on the Commission to consider introducing or supporting a Community-wide reinsurance system covering climate-related or environmental disasters, and they stress that risk prevention measures should be funded under the first pillar.
"Progressive modulation", an alternative to compulsory modulation and degressivity
The Agriculture Committee rejects, in its present form, the Commission proposal on degressivity of direct aid for large farms as there is no clear link between the size and wealth of a farm. It stresses that the proposal does not factor in the workforce needed to maintain a large scale agricultural holding and that it would put large farms or associations at an unjustifiable disadvantage.
It also opposes the further "modulation" of funding under the first pillar (market support) to the second pillar (rural development) as proposed by the Commission. This would be equivalent to a reduction of 8% in direct payments to farmers up to 2013.
Instead, MEPs argue that a progressive modulation could be envisaged, on the basis of an impact assessment on the consequences for farms ( farm structure, labour and/or labour cost). The funds generated from the progressive modulation would be distributed according to the prevailing rules governing modulation funds and would remain in the regions or Member States in which they accrued.
This progressive modulation, applicable over the period 2009-2013, would consist of a reduction of 1% of the total of direct aid from €10,000 to €100,000, 2% for €100,000 to €200,000, 3% for €200,000 to €300,000 and 4% for payments over €300,000.
Article 69 revised, a key to new types of support?
The committee believes that the current "Article 69" mechanism, which enables Member States to keep and reallocate up to 10% of direct aid to their farmers under the first pillar, should be reviewed so that the funds are devoted as a priority to the preservation of livestock farming in mountain areas, those with water shortages, wetlands or disadvantaged areas, the restructuring of key agricultural sectors (e.g. the dairy and sheep sectors), area‑based environmental measures (e.g. organic farming) and risk management.
The budget for the revised Article 69 could, subject to the results of an impact assessment, cover up to 12% of the direct payments for Member State who wish it.
Preparing for the end of the dairy quota system
Aware that the current system of milk quotas is unlikely to be continued after 2015 in its present form, the Agriculture Committee calls on the Commission to put forward for the period after 2015 a convincing plan for the milk sector, including in mountainous areas and other areas with difficulties. It recalls Parliament's votes in July 2007 within the framework of the mini milk package in relation to market measures and the milk funds. Lastly, MEPs argue for a 2% increase in dairy quotas in the milk year 2008/2009 on a voluntary basis for each Member State (see our separate press release on milk quotas, published today).
M. Goepel's report was approved, as amended, with 33 votes in favour, 6 against and 3 abstentions -- Procedure: own initiative report -- Plenary vote: March session, Strasbourg
2008-02-26 Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development Chair Neil Parish EPP-ED UK
The report by Mr Goepel, as amended, was approved by 33 votes to 6 with 3 abstentions Procedure: Own-initiative Plenary vote: March, Strasbourg
20080225IPR22117 Webpage of EP Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development Commission communication on the CAP "health check" EP press release: presentation of the communication to the Agriculture Committee
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=AGRI
EN
2
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/agriculture/healthcheck/index_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071119IPR13319 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
