MEPs debate Middle East peace prospects with EU Special Representative
External relations
2008-02-26 - 14:03
"Even if slow, and not visible, progress is real," said EU Special Representative for the Middle East Peace Process Marc Otte at an exchange of views with the Committee on Foreign Affairs on Monday. MEPs asked Mr Otte about the efficacy of EU humanitarian aid to the Palestinians, the deteriorating situation in Gaza, and the future role of the EU in the peace process.
Philippe Morillon (ALDE, FR) asked pointedly whether the EU can do anything in the region besides paying large amounts of money, primarily for humanitarian aid to the Palestinians. Mr Otte replied that although some Arab donors have indeed attached certain strings to their aid, pledging money to Palestinians on condition that Israel will do certain things in return is a problematic line for the EU to take. Referring to the new EU financing instrument set up for disbursing funds in the Palestinian territories, he said "PEGASE is a good way to monitor the delivery of our aid."
Reopen Gaza checkpoints
Most discussion took place on the issue of the Gaza strip. Committee Chairman Jacek Saryusz-Wolski (EPP-ED, PL) asked about the prospects for reinstating the EU’s border assistance mission EUBAM at the Rafah crossing between the Gaza strip and Egypt. Mr Otte replied that "in this area, Egypt, the Palestinian Authority and Israel have different priorities, and they need to be aligned" towards the same objective before the EU can play a role here. He also noted that a deployment of an international force in Gaza is "not a realistic option at present."
Véronique De Keyser (PES, BE) urged that checkpoints between Israel and the Gaza strip be reopened, as "without that, nothing can work on any front," whether humanitarian aid, economic reconstruction, or process in peace negotiations. "The strangulation of Gaza is not a defence against rockets," she said. Mr Otte agreed, saying that "we need to be firm with Israel: it’s not in their interest to have Palestinian society disintegrate."
EU "watching from the sidelines"
"I am frustrated with the situation, and the lack of impact the EU is having," said Ana Gomes (PES, PT) during the meeting. "The EU seems to be watching from the sidelines," added Margrete Auken (Greens/EFA, DK). Several MEPs called for more political will on the part of EU Member States to really engage Europe in the Middle East peace process. Mr Otte replied that "the more united we are, the more impact we have in the region," while noting that "it is usually those on the outside who wish we were more united, not the Member States within."
2008-02-25 Committee on Foreign Affairs In the chair Jacek Saryusz-Wolski EPP-ED PL
20080225IPR22111 Committee on Foreign Affairs
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=AFET
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
