Monday in Plenary: Gaza, Airline security, Green transport
Institutions
2008-03-11 - 14:43
Is there a flicker of hope for peace in Gaza?
Opening the March sitting of the European Parliament its President Hans-Gert Pöttering led a minute's silence for an EU peacekeeper killed in Chad. He also read out a statement on the Gaza Strip saying "the peace process launched at Annapolis must not founder on violence and terror". Also on Monday MEPs debated ways of reducing greenhouse gas emissions from Europe's transport sector. Outside the plenary, parliamentary leaders launched a review of rules on the employment of MEPs' assistants.
Gilles Polin was a French soldier stationed with EUFOR mission in Chad. He was killed last week in the border region with Sudan. On behalf of the Parliament Mr Pöttering sent his condolences to Mr Polin's family.
Violence in the Middle East
Attention then turned to the recent upsurge in violence between Israelis and Palestinians. Mr Pöttering spoke of the "disproportionate military force" deployed against Palestinians by the Israeli army and the "murderous attack" on a Jerusalem school by a Palestinian extremist. He condemned “the violence by Hamas and other Palestinians extremists” and recalled on the government of Israel “to listen to those voices calling for peace rhetoric to be replaced now by peace acts and deeds”.
He went on to pledge faith in a negotiated solution "the peace process launched at Annapolis must not founder on violence and terror" he told the House. He also announced a meeting of the new Parliamentary working group on the Middle East for a follow-up to the Paris donor’s conference, to discuss aid on the ground.
Full reaction to this statement from the political groups can be found in the first link below.
Review of assistants system
Senior parliamentarians on Monday night unanimously agreed to a proposal from EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering, backed by political group leaders, to launch a review of the system for the employment and payment of Members' assistants. The review will cover the operation of the current system and examine possible future reforms.
Common rules for aircraft security
MEPs also debated a report that sets out new common rules to ensure that Europe's airports and aircraft are as safe as possible. The report, drafted by Italian MEP Paolo Costa (ALDE) calls for common rules on the screening and searching of passengers and baggage as well as security checks on airlines. The report - based on a proposed Europe wide regulation - also deals with in-flight security and the carrying of weapons on planes by so called "sky marshals".
Cutting greenhouse gas emissions from transport
Greenhouse gas emissions from Europe's transport sector already account for a quarter of all CO2 emissions and this figure is growing. Monday evening saw MEPs debate a report by Italian Member Gabriele Albertini (EPP-ED) which proposes new fuels, taxes on polluters and congestion charging among the ways to reduce CO2 emissions. He also wants to see airlines make greater reductions in emissions.
Both the Costa and Albertini reports will be voted on Tuesday.
Data protection and consumers' rights
In the wake of a bilateral agreement reached by the Czech authorities with the US on passenger name records (PNR), Commissioner Franco Frattini was called to the House to report to MEPs on the implications for wider EU policy on visas and the sharing of personal data with the US authorities. The House also debated data protection and consumer rights more widely, focusing on internet.
Mobilisation of the European Union Solidarity Fund for the UK
On Monday, MEPs discussed the mobilisation of €162.4 million from the EU Solidarity Fund to help meet the cost of emergency measures such as rescue services, cleaning up after flood damage, and repairs to essential infrastructure in the UK.
In June and July 2007 storms and floods caused an estimated €4.6 billion worth of damage in the UK. In events of a major natural disaster EU members have the possibility to request aid from the EU Solidarity Fund.
20080307STO23283 MEPs debate the situation in Gaza and in Israel Common rules for safeguarding civil aviation - sky marshals Sustainable European Transport Policy €162.4m for the UK in EU Solidarity Fund following floods last summer Parliament’s Bureau launches review of assistants system
EN
1
PHOTO
20080311PHT23642.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307IPR23280 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080219BRI21798 ITEM-005-EN NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080219BRI21798 ITEM-006-EN NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080219BRI21798 ITEM-008-EN NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307IPR23298 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
