Estonian President Ilves on Europe's past and future
Institutions
2008-03-12 - 10:22
A speech to the European Parliament on Tuesday by Estonian president Toomas Hendrik Ilves ranged across Europe's recent past as well as its prospects for the next ten years and beyond. Among the key issues facing the EU, Mr Ilves highlighted competitiveness, energy security and the Union's relations with its neighbours. But he also stressed the need for Europeans to remember "where we came from and how we got here".
In his welcoming speech to Mr Ilves, EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering emphasised "how far we have come" in recent years. After the communist period, we now had a president of Estonia - and former MEP - freely chosen by his people addressing a European Parliament which included freely representatives of all three Baltic states.
At the start of his address, President Ilves first pointed out that "as Estonia is about to enter its fifth year as a member of our Union, we no longer are 'new members' ". Indeed, he stressed, to applause from the House, that "it is time now to put aside the term „new member“ as an anachronism".
Looking to the future
He then turned to the challenges facing the EU, saying "Here and today I want to look ahead when we are all old or older members, ten years into the future". He pointed to two external issues, "global warming and declining availability of fossil fuels" as well as an internal one: "the competitiveness of the European Union".
On the latter question, he said "we need to be grateful to Jean Monnet and later Jacques Delors for creating the Single Market" for "it is the Single Market that allows individual European nations to keep themselves competitive on the global arena". However, "Current thinking in the EU is not a cause for optimism" for two reasons: "the lack-lustre fulfilment" of the Lisbon Agenda and "the EU’s increasing turn to protectionism".
Europe was falling behind its competitors in innovation, research and development. The underlying reasons, according to Mr Ilves, are that "We are averse to immigration, our children increasingly choose not to study maths, science and engineering, and we are choosing to close ourselves off from competition within the EU in one of the most competitive sectors of the world economy: services."
Energy security
Competition or its lack within the EU has security implications as well. A clear threat was that "Europe’s single largest source of energy is a country that has proclaimed itself 'energy superpower' and which states on its foreign ministry home page that energy is a foreign policy tool". Mr Ilves argued that "a common Energy Policy with an energy commissioner with the negotiating heft of the trade commissioner is an absolute must" along with internal liberalization.
What to do
As to solutions, the first step, for Estonia, is the Reform Treaty. For "without expanding Qualified Majority Voting we will founder in paralysis, without a President and a Foreign Minister we simply will punch far below our weight".
Turning to EU enlargement and the European Neighbourhood Policy, the president asked "How large will our Union be in 2018?". His answer: "It is clear that we will not be as large as some of us want, but almost certainly larger than today. To our East and our South lie countries that certainly will never join". However, "It seems to me that one of our fundamental concerns should be that differences in economic well-being and political liberty between the EU and its neighbours not be so great that we be faced with a high level of illegal immigration or with political refugees."
A Europe of European citizens
Mr Ilves than pointed out that "qualified majority voting will do little if we do not develop a more fundamental understanding of European interests". He went on to say "We need to return to the fundamental understanding that has made the EU successful: national interests are best served when we all give up a little so that the Union as a whole is successful".
The president then highlighted the need "to upgrade our education in the languages of the Union", saying "Certainly in ten years time we should be able to look upon a Union where every student knows another member state language, other than English".
The need "to think more in terms of regions" was also important. "Here the Parliament has shown that it can play a larger role than ever imagined", said Mr Ilves, adding "I am proud that an initiative I was associated with when I was here, the Baltic Sea Strategy is one of the first EU policies that actually started here, right here in the European Parliament". "The Parliament is precisely that link between the EU institutions and the citizen that makes the EU work", he emphasised.
History
Finally, the president stressed the importance of history. "No less important for citizens Europe, a Europe of European citizens, is that we know who we are, where we came from and how we got here", he said. "Our task, my dear colleagues, is to know our Europe", he continued, and cited "one of the greatest Europeans of the 20th century", Salvador de Madariaga, who when in exile from the Franco regime had said:
"This Europe must be born. And she will be born when Spaniards say “our Chartres”, Englishmen “our Cracow”, Italians “our Copenhagen” and Germans “our Bruges”…. Then Europe will live. For then it will be that the spirit which leads Europe will have uttered the creative words: Fiat Europa”
Mr Ilves' closing words were "Europe is far from complete, we still have so much to do. In my homeland, Estonia, when we have a great task to fulfil, we say: may we have the strength to do it".
20080307IPR23406 Briefing article 6.3.08 with related links Audio - speech by Estonian President Toomas Hendrik Ilves (EN) Audio - Hans-Gert Pöttering and the Estonian President Toomas Hendrik Ilves (EN)
EN
2
MULTIMEDIA
20080311MLT23660.asf
EN
3
MULTIMEDIA
20080311MLT23666.asf
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080219BRI21798 ITEM-002-EN NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
