The Week Ahead 10-16 March 2008
Institutions
2008-03-07 - 10:44
Plenary Session - Strasbourg
EP 50th anniversary. Parliament will mark 50 years since the first sitting of the Assembly set up by the Treaty of Rome, with a ceremony including speeches by EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering, President-in-Office of the European Council, Janez Janša and Commission President José Manuel Barroso (Wednesday).
Spring Summit. MEPs will discuss with Commission and Council the agenda of the spring European Council meeting, mainly devoted to economic matters (Wednesday). The summit itself will begin with an address from and discussion with President Pöttering, who will then give a press conference (Thursday - Brussels).
World Affairs. President Pöttering will make a statement on Gaza , followed by a reaction from political group leaders (Monday). The President will also make statements to mark the European Day against Terrorism (Tuesday) and on the plight of hostages in Colombia (Wednesday).
EP/Estonia. Toomas Hendrik Ilves, President of Estonia, will address Parliament in a formal sitting. He will hold a joint press conference with President Pöttering (Tuesday).
Aviation Security. Common rules on passenger aviation security look set to be adopted after an agreement between Parliament and Council representatives (debate Monday, vote Tuesday).
Innovation and Technology. Another agreement with Council should see the adoption of legislation to create the European Institute of Innovation and Technology (debate and vote Tuesday).
CAP Health Check/Milk Quotas. Parliament will give its views on reforms proposed for the Common Agricultural Policy, and on plans to increase milk quotas (debates Tuesday, votes Wednesday).
EU-Iraq. MEPs will debate the EU’s role in Iraq and then vote on a report on the issue (debate Wednesday, vote Thursday).
President’s diary. President Pöttering will meet the Belarusian opposition leader Aliaksandr Milinkevich , winner of the 2006 Sakharov Prize (Tuesday) . He will also be meeting the President of Lithuania, Valdas Adamkus (Friday – Osnabruck).
20080307IPR23221 For details of all the week's events, see The Agenda
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081100AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
