MEPs give us their thoughts on International Women's Day - 8 March
Women's rights/Equal opportunities
2008-03-07 - 11:46
Smiling for women's rights
This weekend sees International Women's Day - 8 March - being marked around the world. "The world perceives this day as a symbol of the political, cultural and social equality of women" said the chair of Parliament's Women's Rights and Gender Equality Committee Anna Záborská (EPP-ED). Ahead of the celebrations we asked some members of the Women's Rights Committee their views on the day, its significance in their country and how it is marked.
"Politics is still a man's kingdom"
The education gap between women and men is narrowing, men spend more time at home and women are better represented in politics, but improvements remain to be made in gender equality.
Portuguese Socialist Edite Estrela, a vice-chair of the committee said, "in spite of the advances, there is still a long way ahead and many obstacles to overcome. Women continue to suffer all kinds of discrimination: in the family, in the labour market, in politics. Women are the last to access the labour market and the first to get unemployed. And politics is still a man's kingdom. Overall, laws are progressive, but mentalities remain retrograde."
For Hungarian Socialist Zita Gurmai, "international Women's Day is an occasion when women on all continents, often divided by national boundaries and by ethnic, linguistic, cultural, economic and political differences, come together to celebrate". She said that they can draw on "a tradition that represents at least nine decades of struggle for equality, justice, peace and development".
Celebrations differ around the world
Around the world demonstrations, conferences, newspaper and TV programmes use the day to highlight some of the issues that women face around the world.
Spanish Green Raül Romeva i Rueda said that in Spain "the focus will be on three issues: violence against women and how to fight it, the reform of the legislation on abortion and the pay gap".
For some - especially those countries that lay behind the Iron Curtain - the day still carries unwelcome connotations of the past. Speaking of her native country, Ms Záborská said "the majority in Slovakia understand International Women's Day as a residue of Socialism, as it is very much connected to the former totalitarian regime". Today the "day is not celebrated in such a mass style as it was in the past regime, during which it was a propaganda tool," she said.
Men and Women's Day
Although Women's Day puts women's fight for equality centre stage, increasingly they are finding allies among men. Sweden's Eva-Britt Svensson (GUE/NGL) said "more and more men are starting to show support for gender issues".
In some countries men give presents to women to celebrate the day. In Hungary "men give flowers (snowdrops and carnations) to their friends, relatives, colleagues, wives and daughters. I'm sure that my husband and my two sons will think about me and make this day special with a little present. Of course, for me, their love is the most important present I can ever get," said Ms Gurmai.
Conferences discuss issues women face
To mark Women's Day, the Women's Rights Committee organised two conferences on 6 March. "The role of women in Intercultural Dialogue" and "Gender mainstreaming in parliamentary work" aim to raise international awareness of the issues women face.
The Parliament gives an annual Equality and Diversity Award to reward exceptional efforts in the field among its staff. This year there will be two awards: the Best Practice Award and the Role Model Award. The winners will be announced on 11 March, 2008.
20080229STO22605 Committee on Women's Rights and Gender Equality
Women in Parliament - how does the European Parliament compare? MEPs statements ahead of Women's Day Press Info on Conference
EN
1
PHOTO
20080306PHT23158.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=FEMM
EN
4
LINK
/eplive/archive/multimediaav_page/23030-20080306MAV23029-AUDIO/default_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080229STO22577 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080303IPR22669 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
