Women as key players in dialogue and peace
Women's rights/Equal opportunities
2008-03-07 - 10:44
The role of women in promoting dialogue and peace was the main topic discussed on Wednesday, on the eve of International Women's Day, at a meeting of the EP Women's Rights Committee with members of national parliaments. EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering called for the creation of a European representative for the protection of women's rights in international relations.
In the view of Anna Záborská (EPP-ED, SK), chair of the Women's Rights Committee, "intercultural dialogue is essential to achieve peace and the European Union is a model in this area". "Dialogue means listening", she stressed.
A representative for women's rights in international relations
"The EU must be able to conduct a dialogue in Africa, the Middle East, beyond the Mediterranean and also in the rest of the world", said President Pöttering at the start of the conference. "The role of women in society is crucial to intercultural dialogue".
The EP President endorsed a proposal by Kathalijne Buitenweg (Greens/EFA, NL), to appoint a European representative for the protection of women's rights in international relations. This figure could report to the EU's foreign policy high representative. Parliament would be involved in the appointment and kept abreast of the representative's work.
Women in conflicts
Gertrude Mongella, President of the Panafrican Parliament, voiced concern that women had not managed to organise in favour of peace. "There can be no intercultural dialogue without peaceful co-existence", she said, referring to the many forms of violence raging throughout Africa.
"What dialogue can one have in a conflict situation?" asked Naomi Chazan (Israel), member of the International Women's Commission for a Just and Sustainable Israeli-Palestinian Peace. "Real dialogue enables a solution to be found", she emphasised, and pointed out that her organisation is working for a settlement of the conflict involving recognition of two states based on the 1967 borders.
"As long as there are controls and humiliations, violence will increase", argued Amal Khreisheh (Palestinian Territories), a member of the same organisation. "The support of the international community is crucial in the peace process and to enable women to develop. In the Palestinian Territories, without peace it will be difficult to achieve equality between women and men", she added.
In the discussion between guest speakers and national MPs, Kerstin Griese, chair of the Bundestag committee for family and women's issues, highlighted the close links between women's rights questions and intercultural dialogue. Speaking on the same topic, Swedish MP Engström Hillevi pointed to the oppression of women - such as honour crimes and female genital mutilation - in certain cultures and religions.
Respect for difference
Intercultural dialogue entails respect for difference, stressed Naomi Chazan. "We must build a culture of respect", insisted EU Education Commissioner Jan Figel, citing the example of the EU. "Cultural diversity is an asset and not a problem". Christa Prets (PES, DE), believed "This work must continue and not stop on 31 December 2008".
Erna Hennicot Schoepges (EPP-ED, LU), highlighted "the timidity of the institutions about speaking of inter-religious dialogue, which is a sign of fear and insecurity". Women, she said, had a key role to play here.
Best practice on male-female equality
The meeting was also used to swap ideas about best practice on equality between men and women in parliamentary work. Members of national parliaments described the situation in their own countries.
The aim is to reach a figure of 40% of women, said Marjet Cotman, Slovenia's labour minister, who explained that 40% of her country's MEPs were women, thanks to a quota system. Gisèle Gauthier of the French Senate welcomed the "law on parity" adopted in 2000, saying "if this law had not been passed, we would not have had the progress we see today".
According to Employment Commissioner Vladimir Spidla, "Women today suffer discrimination in the world of work. Pay levels and access to senior positions remain a problem". This view was shared by Trifon Mitev, chair of the subcommittee for gender equality at the Bulgarian National Assembly, who believed progress was still needed on the economic front. "Bulgaria's target is to have 60% of women in work by 2020".
The European Parliament is keen to set the pace on equality, said EP Vice-President Rodi Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou, who chairs the high level group for equal opportunities in the EP. However, Swedish MP Olle Thorell pointed out that was "impossible in the European Parliament for an MP who has just had a baby to have someone stand in for her, unlike the Swedish Parliament".
2008-03-06 Committee on Women's Rights and Gender Equality Chair Anna ZÁBORSKÁ EPP-ED SK
20080303IPR22669 Committee on Women's Rights and Gender Equality
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?body=FEMM&language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
