EP Fisheries Committee delegation visits Ireland
Fisheries
Ireland
2008-03-25 - 15:27
EP Fisheries Committee delegation visits Ireland
On Tuesday 18 March, a delegation from the European Parliament's Fisheries Committee, led by Scottish MEP Elspeth Attwooll, visited Ireland. The visit focused on the importance of marine research for the fishing industry and the survival of the coastal zones. In Galway, the delegation met with Fisheries Groups at Iasc Mhara Teo. in Ros a' Mhíl, the visiting MEPs met with the Irish Seafood Producers Group in Cillchiaráin and visited a fish farm in Lettermullan Bay.
In Cork, the delegation met with the Irish South West Fish Producers Organisation and visited the Bord Iascaigh Mhara Training Centre in Castletownbere.
Chairperson of the delegation, Elspeth Attwooll MEP said that "it is important for Parliament's Committees to visit different parts of the EU so that we can listen to people's concerns and gain an understanding of how the decisions we take will affect them. It is particularly important in this case as there are so many different types of fisheries with regional and local variations."
Seán Ó Neachtain MEP, who organised the delegation's visit to Galway, pointed out that "this visit is an opportunity for a frank exchange of views between Irish fishing groups and EU policy makers so that we can see how we can move forward and improve the Irish fishing industry and our aquaculture industries into the future."
Also speaking about the delegation's visit, Colm Burke MEP, who organised the delegation's activities in Cork said that “Irish coastal communities dependant on fisheries face particular hardship at this time as the fishing industry struggles to deal with the increasing number of restrictions it faces such as limited TACs and quotas, high fuel costs, decreasing fish stocks and the burden of a multitude of administrative obligations.” He went on to say that "this is a timely opportunity for key players in the industry to discuss their concerns with Members of the European Parliament."
20080325IPR24771 European Parliament Office in Ireland European Parliament Fisheries Committee
EN
1
PHOTO
20050818PHT00435.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.europarl.ie/
EN
3
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=PECH
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
