EP for a social and healthy Europe
Employment policy
2008-03-18 - 10:18
The EU is about more than just competition, the internal market and price stability, it is also about social rights and safeguarding health - two factors which could be improved by the Lisbon strategy, aimed at creating more competitiveness and better jobs. Social and health policy are in the hands of EU countries, but the European Parliament has called repeatedly for a Europe where business and profits go hand in hand with social inclusion and responsibility.
It's a vast and complex issue. Read our focus to find out more about some of the aspects of social Europe. We delve into some of the detail of the European Social Model, the health insurance card and access to health services across the EU, Europe's move towards a tobacco-free Europe and the inclusion and rights of people with disabilities in the workplace. Click below to read more.
20080307FCS23267
The European Social Model: what's it all about?
The EU answer to globalisation exists and has a name: the European Social Model. The EU is not only focused on economic growth but also on a set of common principles which contribute to the prosperity of the EU: social justice, equality and solidarity. Social policy is a national responsibility, but the European Social Model is a reference for national social systems. The European Parliament's Employment and Social Affairs Committee is an advocate for a more "social Europe" with better social cohesion and more and better jobs. Last October, the Parliament called for ambitious targets to reduce poverty when it approved its latest report on Social Protection and Inclusion.
The Lisbon Strategy - the EU recipe
In March 2000 EU leaders launched the Lisbon Strategy, aimed at making the EU "the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world by 2010". Alongside the goal of a stronger economy to drive job creation the strategy includes social and environmental policies to ensure sustainable development and social inclusion.
That includes modernising the European Social Model to invest in people through job creation, equal opportunities, lifelong learning and up-to-date social protection and to combat social exclusion. "Rethinking (it) means strengthening and making it economically and socially sustainable in the long term," said José Albino Silva Peneda (EPP-ED/PT), the 2006 EP rapporteur on a "European social model for the future".
So far, the Lisbon Agenda has paid less attention to social policy than to price stability, cost cutting and budget deficit reduction, according to a 2005 report by Ilda Figueiredo (GUE/PT).Globalisation is intensifying competition for markets around the world...The present tendency towards an increasing liberalisation of services will increase competition and cause more job losses and poverty. The solution is to invest more in employment and flexicurity," she said. " I urge a reform of the Lisbon Strategy as an effective answer to globalisation principles."
Despite the focus on innovating Europe's economy and discernable progress, there is growing concern that the reform process is not fast enough and that the ambitious 2010 targets will not be reached.
Social Europe and the new reform Treaty
While each EU country has its own system of social and economic policies and structures, all 27 countries have affirmed their commitment to the same key values and objectives based on fundamental rights for all. The EU treaties commit them to working for a high level of social protection, equality between men and women, raising living standards and combating social exclusion, among other objectives.
The European Social Charter, written in 1961 and revised in 1996 and ratified by 47 countries, is not part of the reformed EU Treaty, but has inspired the Charter of Fundamental Rights, which will have legal force when the Reform Treaty comes into force. Report by Ilda Figueiredo Report by Jose Albino Silva Peneda, Proinsias De Rossa Lynne report: Employment Committee The Charter of fundamental rights
Patient mobility in the EU
Europe. But what happens if they fall ill or have an accident while abroad, who takes care of the treatment costs? EU citizens working in another EU country are covered, but what about everyone else? The Parliament is looking at these services at the EU level, and asking member states to treat all EU citizens on an equal basis.
Many EU countries don't reimburse the costs of treatment in another member state, unless it has been authorised in advance. Patients generally prefer to be treated at home, but what if they need urgent help while abroad, or there is a long waiting list, and what about citizens living in border zones? These issues still need to be addressed.
On the other side of the equation, the health systems of all EU countries are experiencing, difficulties over the fundamental challenge of controlling costs while delivering quality services to all sectors of society. EU action does not mean harmonisation but it seems unlikely that an effective solution can be found at an exclusively national level.
Environment and Health Committee Chairman Miroslav Ouzký said, "I would leave health care financing in the competence of national states." German Socialist Karin Jöns, the rapporteur on Health care and care for the elderly, added, "We have to guarantee access to high-quality and affordable health care services to all EU citizens regardless of their income, social status, age and place of residence."
Where we stand now - a case study
The introduction of the EU health card in 2004 was meant to provide coverage if you fell ill during a holiday or when studying abroad, or if treatment was authorised by the national authority. Here's how it works:
Brigitta is insured in Sweden and has authorisation for an operation in Germany. The cost of her hospital stay in Germany is €4,000. For a similar treatment in Sweden, only €2,800 would be reimbursed, compared with €3,200 in Germany. Thanks to the authorisation, Brigitta will be reimbursed €3,200. If the home country offers a higher rate of reimbursement, the patient will receive the higher rate.
If there is no authorisation, in principle you are not covered for the costs of hospital treatment in another member state.
EP push for health improvements
The Parliament is very active in this area.
Following a Parliament request, the Commission will come up with a proposal on health services , dealing specifically with patient mobility among member states and patients' rights early in 2008.
In July the House approved an EU action programme on public health for 2008-2013, which included EP objectives on reducing health inequalities as well as the promotion of cross-border care and the mobility of patients and health professionals.
In May it excluded health services from the services directive and asked the Commission to propose "a specific text" guaranteeing patients broad access to health care systems across the EU and the free establishment of doctors, researchers and nurses.
In March it approved a report calling for greater legal clarity in cross border health care . MEPs welcomed the Commission's 2007 consultation procedure on health services , aimed at ensuring the right of access to health care across Europe.
"Health in Europe is moving 'cross-border' and so the EU is rightly considering how to advance and codify patient mobility and safety...and to encourage cross-border cooperation," said British Conservative John Bowis, the rapporteur on patient mobility and healthcare. "There are many 'league tables' for health...my preference is to identify and disseminate sites of good practice in the different health fields and perhaps to designate 'demonstration sites'". Environment Committee Florenz report European Commission action on health services (09/2006)
Europe - a smoke-free zone by 2009?
Of these 80,000 die from passive smoking, with research showing one bar worker a week killed in this way. There is a clear trend towards smoke-free environments throughout Europe. Many countries have introduced nationwide smoking bans but there are still improvements to be made. In October, the Parliament strongly supported a report by German Christian Democrat Karl Heinz Florenz calling for "wide-ranging measures to restrict smoking in public places". "In my country 350 people die every day because of tobacco smoke. If a plane with 350 passengers crashed every day, it would be a shock. This is why we have to fight this dangerous pollutant, which contains thousands of chemicals, including 250 carcinogenic and toxic substances," said Mr Florenz. All EU countries have some form of regulation on smoking, but the scope and character varies widely.
Comprehensive bans on smoking in all enclosed public places and all workplaces, including bars and restaurants, were introduced in Ireland in March 2004 and across the UK by Summer 2007.
Smoke-free legislation with exemptions was introduced in Italy in January 2005; Malta in April 2005; Sweden in June 2005; Lithuania in January 2007, and in France between February 2007- January 2008.
Smoking is banned in enclosed public places and workplaces in Belgium, Cyprus, Estonia, Finland, the Netherlands, Slovenia and Spain. Luigi Cocilovo, an Italian member of the ALDE group said, "I think bans in Europe should safeguard the possibility, for people who want to smoke, to do so. Moreover, I don't think prohibitions and bans help smokers to give up. This goal is reached only through personal free will". EP calls for further action on tobacco, snus On smoking tobacco, the Parliament wants:
an unrestricted smoking ban in all enclosed workplaces, including catering establishments, and in all enclosed public buildings and transport in the EU;
Also wanted is an EU-wide ban on the sale of tobacco products to under 18s, including making cigarette machines inaccessible to young people and a ban on distance sales of tobacco products to young people and measures to make it easier for smokers wishing to give up to do so. It has also called on the Commission to urgently investigate the health risks associated with consumption of an oral tobacco known as snus and its impact on the consumption of cigarettes. Snus is currently banned across the EU aside from in Sweden, though some say the Swedish example shows that snus can help wean people off cigarettes and reduce the number of annual deaths from lung cancer. "If the rest of Europe would use snus instead of tobacco there would be yearly 250,000 less lung cancer cases. We need to investigate whether it could help decrease tobacco-related illness in Europe," said Christofer Fjellner, a Swedish EPP-ED MEP. "Smoking less tobacco is an essential part of getting a smoke-free Europe!" Do Europeans want to stop smoking? A May 2007 Eurobarometer survey "Attitudes of Europeans towards Tobacco" found a noticeable drop in consumption compared with the last survey in 2002, although 32% of Europeans are still smokers. The highest concentrations are in Greece with 42% and Latvia, Hungary and Bulgaria, all with 36%. Sweden has the fewest smokers with 18%. Some 88% of Europeans support a smoking ban in offices, indoor workplaces and indoor public spaces like airports, shops and metros. And bans on smoking in bars and restaurants also win strong support. In January 2007, the Commission launched a broad public consultation on the best way to promote smoke-free environments in the EU through its green paper "Towards a Europe free from tobacco smoke". Health Commissioner Markos Kyprianou said: "I am heartened that public support for smoke-free work and public places in Europe remains so high. This can only strengthen the momentum towards making European public and work places smoke-free by 2009." Smoking kills in other ways Cigarettes don't only cause deaths from ill-health. Data from 14 Member States show that over 2,000 deaths a year are caused by cigarette-related fires. Later this year, the Commission will come up with proposals to make self-extinguishing cigarettes mandatory in all 27 EU countries. Florenz report EP calls for EU-wide ban on smoking in the workplace (press service)
Green and socially responsible: Europe's new business model?
In the past the role of business was to primarily create jobs and profits. However, they are increasingly being asked to be socially responsible and serve the society in which it is based. This mantra is called "Corporate Social Responsibility" (CSR) and last week MEPs voted to back a report calling for its practices to be included into EU policies. It also wants a type of mandatory "environmental audit" that would mean businesses had to report on the environmental impact of their operation.
CSR - ethical business or window dressing?
Corporate social responsibilty can best be described as businesses taking more account of the wider environment in which they operate. This means ensuring its workers and their families are well cared for, consulting members of the local community and NGOs before taking decisions and not investing in unethical products.
Nowadays international companies who sell their goods around the world go out of their way to show their CSR credentials. Many cynics dismiss it as a cynical window dressing to hide their real intentions - although allegations of using child labour against a certain sports company had a dramatic impact on their sales. Image is all and companies want to show their good intentions.
Making CSR concrete
The report - drafted by British Socialist MEP Richard Howitt - makes a number of recommendations for expanding CSR. These include:
identifying good practice and publicising success stories
include CSR principles in all EU policies and programmes
introduce mandatory environmental and social reporting
ensuring that EU countries with operations abroad uphold the highest standards on the International Labour Organisation
creating a European wide ombudsman to undertake enquiries on CSR issues.
History of CSR
In 1999 Parliament adopted a resolution on the issue calling for a binding code of conduct to govern EU companies' environmental, labour and human rights compliance worldwide.
Last year it organised a a public hearing on "Corporate Social Responsibility - is there a European approach?". Also that year the European Commission called on companies to make Europe a "pole of excellence" for CSR More on CSR EP Resolution
Independence, inclusion and rights for people with disabilities
Helmut Kuhne MEP and Annika Flaake Around 50 million Europeans - almost 10% of the population - have some form of disability and 1 in 4 have a disabled family member. A recent parliamentary report said that improving access to public transport and making websites more usable are 2 vital steps in tackling unemployment among disabled people. The European Parliament is playing an active role - both as a legislator and an employer.
Traineeships are very popular in the Parliament. A recently-launched scheme has earmarked resources to recruit more trainees with disabilities. Annike Flaake from Germany is one of the first. She is blind and using a specially designed Braille keyboard means "I can do the work that sighted people can do." Although she gets lost in Parliament's corridors - something all new staff can relate to - she enjoys the experience. She says "it would help if the lifts were labelled with braille." Her local MEP Helmut Kuhne helped arrange her traineeship - and the Parliament's Secretary General Julian Priestley described Annika as "a symbol of a new policy" for recruiting disabled trainees.
Access to public transport, websites vital
In its role as legislator, the Parliament has always tried to raise awareness of disability issues. In 2003 - the "European Year of people with disabilities" it hosted a Parliament of people with disabilities from all over Europe. The aim was to discuss ways in which improvements at a local, national and European level could be made. They adopted a manifesto for the 2004 EP elections.
The report adopted by Parliament's Employment Committee this month calls for more opportunities for disabled people in education and the job market. As well as improving access to public transport it wants better websites - 80% of public websites, including those of the EU institutions, are not accessible to disabled people - a vital tool in finding a job.
According to British Liberal Liz Lynne who drafted the report: "non-discrimination in access to goods and services must be guaranteed for every EU citizen..." She called for a specific European disability directive. The vote will be discussed in the November plenary session.
This report builds on one by Italian People's Party MEP Mario Mantovani in 2004.
Last year marked the 25th anniversary of the Parliament's all party intergroup on disability, which has forged close links with the European Disability Forum - an NGO working to promote disability issues at a European level.
In House: "breaking the barriers"
As well as the scheme to increase the numbers of disabled trainees it takes on, the EP last year updated its 2000 "Code of Good Practice" for employing people with disabilities. The Code offers practical steps on the modification of equipment and buildings, flexible working arrangements and "job redesign" for those who have disabilities. Parliament also has a "breaking the barriers" guide to help its staff communicate more easily with disabled colleagues Apply for an internship Disabled people in the EP
European Health Insurance Card
The holiday season has arrived. Your suitcases are packed, your neighbours are watering the plants and feeding the cat and your tickets are ready. But have you also thought about bringing your European Health Insurance Card?
European Health Insurance across borders
Free movement in all 27 EU countries is one of the prime achievements of the European Union. EU Citizens have the right to travel without restrictions. To be able to profit from this freedom, citizens also need simple reimbursement of necessary health care they receive abroad. The EU has therefore adopted legislation for issuing one single European Health Insurance Card (EHIC) that replaces the different forms (in particular the well known E111) that were previously used.
The regulation that allowed the EHIC to be issued follows the adoption of legislation by the European Parliament in December 2003. In order to introduce the card, previous legislation on social security schemes needed to be amended. The Parliament was keen on having the card quickly introduced and MEPs therefore adopted only a few amendments, merely asking the EU members to ensure that the individuals concerned would be informed of their rights and obligations.
This paved the way for a rapid introduction of the EHIC and since 1 January 2006 it has been issued and is recognised in all the EU Member States as well as in Iceland, Liechtenstein, Norway and Switzerland.
The EHIC: some practical information
The EHIC makes it easier to obtain access to medical treatment you may need while staying temporarily in another country. The treatment is provided in accordance with the rules of the country that you are visiting, and the costs incurred are reimbursed in line with the tariff scales applied in that country.
The EHIC covers only medical care which becomes necessary during a stay in another EU country, so in principle the card is not issued for deliberately seeking medical treatment in another Member State. You can only make use of the EHIC if you go to a health care provider covered by the health insurance scheme provided for by law in the host State.
If you are insured, or covered, by a statutory social security system in one EU country, you are entitled to an EHIC. Each Member is responsible for producing and distributing the EHIC on its territory. To request a card, you should contact your health institution. Take note that the E111 form is no longer valid since 1 January 2006.
So, bring your EHIC, or a provisional replacement certificate, with you while travelling abroad, but try to avoid needing it. Have a nice vacation! For more information, click on the link to the EHIC website.
The production and distribution of the European Health Insurance Card is carried out exclusively by the authorities of EU Member States. Therefore, the information in this article is provided only as a guide with the aim of helping the reader to find information Green light for European health insurance card European Health insurance card
EN
1
PHOTO
20080311PHT23644.jpg
EN
2
PHOTO
20080310PHT23603.jpg
EN
6
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=EMPL
EN
7
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/justice_home/unit/charte/index_en.html
EN
8
PHOTO
20080310PHT23599.jpg
EN
9
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=ENVI
EN
11
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/health/ph_overview/co_operation/mobility/docs/comm_health_services_comm2006_en.pdf
EN
12
PHOTO
20080310PHT23601.jpg
EN
15
PHOTO
20070321PHT04479.jpg
EN
16
LINK
/sides/getDoc.do?type=IM-PRESS&reference=20070309IPR03999&language=EN
EN
18
PHOTO
20061023PHT11966.jpg
EN
19
LINK
/parliament/public/staticDisplay.do?language=EN&id=147
EN
20
LINK
/meetdocs/2004_2009/documents/pr/620/620913/620913en.pdf
EN
21
PHOTO
20060720PHT09926.jpg
EN
22
LINK
/sides/getDoc.do?type=PRESS&reference=TW-20031203-B&language=EN#SECTION9
EN
23
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/employment_social/healthcard/index_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A6-2005-0035 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A6-2006-0238 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A6-2007-0400 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT MOTION B6-2007-0098 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0471 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071023IPR12111 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0062 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
