Look positively at Africa, says President of Pan-African Parliament
Development and cooperation
2008-03-19 - 11:16
"Europe plays a great role for Africa" - Ms Mongella
Europe can play a role as a partner in sharing sanitation and healthcare technology with Africa. That was one of the messages that President of the Pan-African Parliament Gertrude Mongella brought to Parliament when she was in Brussels for international women's day to promote the role of women. Tanzanian born Ms Mongella also wants more women in political office in Africa and believes they can play a leading politically and culturally. The Pan-African Parliament forms part of the African Union.
During her visit to the Parliament on 6 March we put some questions to Ms Mongella.
There seems to be growing interest in Africa from emerging economies and the industrialised West. Is this new "scramble for Africa" an opportunity or a threat for Africa’s development?
It's a big opportunity. I think the other "scramble” for Africa was just dividing it up. Now everybody is noticing that Africa has potential in its population. Our market is big. But also the most important thing is the natural resources; we are still a continent with rich natural resources which are not yet tapped.
We must be careful that the "scramble" is not going to endanger the African people, like the political scramble, the scramble of Berlin (she refers to Berlin conference in 1884-85) that partitioned Africa.
Can the European Union be a model for the African Union?
It is important to look at your neighbour and learn something from them. But we would make a big mistake to just take what you have in the EU and put it into the African Union. It would equally be a mistake not to appreciate the systems that are serving the EU.
For example the European Parliament has developed over 50 years. So it has a rich experience on how to establish a continental parliament. We have to look at that and then see what best we can pick for our Pan-African Parliament. We are working together to share the experience. But at the same time we need to interpret it to fit the African situation.
How do you assess Europe’s role in relation to Africa and its hot spots?
Europe plays a great role for Africa. Europe has been in Africa for a long time in one way or the other. So some of what we see today is a result of mismanagement of Europe in Africa – poor governance, which made it so difficult to get away from this disaster of colonialism.
But then we have to continue to be partners. We have to examine what is the new role of Europe. We should look at Africa positively, as partners. If we are dealing with poverty and if we are in partnership we should come out with solutions for this problem.
There are so many women dying because of maternal complications. Europe has the technology, Europe has the resources, Europe has developed much scientific knowledge.
Can't we together solve some of these basic problems? Water problems: we have rivers and lakes, it's a matter of putting in pipes. Can’t Europe play with all these resources and work meaningfully with Africa? I am sure if there is a political will, we can sort some of these problems. Europe has a big role to play. And Europe cannot afford to exist without Africa, can you?
Would Africa be better off if there were more women in high political offices?
I think that’s definitely a yes. In fact, not only more women in political offices – but more women than men! If that was the case, Africa would be completely different…
… why is that?
(Ms Mongella laughs) - because it’s the men that have made all that mess - simple. Why are we in a mess? Women have never taken up high decision making positions. Africa is in conflict, Africa is underdeveloped, and it has all been under men.
So we say, the time of men is up, let’s put Africa into the right direction. We are getting there: I am the President of the Pan-African Parliament. We have Ellen Johnson-Sirleaf leading Liberia from a mess of conflict caused by men. So we continue, until we fix Africa.
Endnotes: Tell me about the African Union
The African Union is an organisation of 53 African states. It was established in 2001 as a successor to the Organization of African Unity. Its headquarters is in the Ethiopian capital Addis Ababa. The aim is to help secure Africa's democracy, human rights, and sustainable economy, to end up intra-African conflicts and to create an effective common market.
One of its institutions is the Pan-African Parliament with 265 elected representatives gathering at Midrand, South Africa. Gertrude Mongella from Tanzania has been its President since 2004.
20080307STO23351 Pan-African Parliament EU-Africa relations: joint strategy to tackle the continent's problems MEP Ana Maria Gomes on China's "scramble" for Africa EP report on EU Africa relations (Oct. 07) ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly African Union Scramble for Africa
EN
1
PHOTO
20080314PHT24326.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.pan-africanparliament.org/default.aspx
EN
6
LINK
/intcoop/acp/
EN
7
LINK
http://www.africa-union.org/
EN
8
LINK
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scramble_for_Africa
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071130STO14197 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080227STO22422 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2007-0483 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
