2009 EU budget: Parliament's priorities
Budget
2008-03-27 - 16:08
Among issues already influencing the debate on next year's EU budget are the European Parliament's new legislative and budgetary powers if the Lisbon Treaty is ratified and the membership of the next Commission and EP. Two reports adopted by the EP Budgets Committee on Thursday highlight MEPs' priorities and concerns in this context.
A report by Jutta Haug (PES, DE) on the budget framework and priorities for 2009 is the first programming text adopted by MEPs as part of preparations for the EU's next annual budget. It take account of the changes set to take place in 2009 that will have a major impact on the budget. Some are linked to the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty: the shift in the EP-Council balance of budgetary power in Parliament's favour and the scrapping of the distinction between compulsory and non-compulsory spending. Others will follow from the 2009 European elections and the end of the present Commission's mandate. The MEPs elected in 2009 must be ready to use the new budget procedure in time for the 2010 budget.
Reduced budget margins
In contrast to previous years, the report does not refer directly to the Commission's Annual Policy Strategy (APS). MEPs nevertheless take note of the priorities proposed by the Commission for 2009, namely climate change and sustainable development. But they are surprised that at this early stage the Commission "has already embarked on a reprioritisation exercise", including in those headings of the multiannual financial framework which have "a particularly small margin". MEPs call on the Commission to present a "clear and transparent" preliminary draft budget that can be understood by the public, is realistic and enables Parliament and Council to "thoroughly scrutinise" the implementation of the different EU programmes and policies.
MEPs in the committee say they are concerned that it is now more difficult to distinguish operational from administrative expenditure by the Commission, as well as by the Commission’s practice of outsourcing spending on staff, which they say reduces the transparency of the administrative expenditure in the budget.
In their negotiations with the Council, Parliament expects to make use of all the powers conferred on it under the interinstitutional agreement, including the flexibility instrument if necessary. The report stresses the importance of the solidarity principle, arguing that it must remain one of the EU's guiding principles, particularly for regional and development policy.
Parliament will vote on the Haug report at the Strasbourg plenary session in late April, when it will also vote on a resolution by the political groups on the Commission's APS. Later in the year, the Budgets Committee will make an initial assessment of the 2009 preliminary draft budget, which will be presented at the July plenary session.
Expenditure of the institutions
A report by Janusz Lewandowski (EPP-ED, PL), also adopted on Thursday, deals with the guidelines that MEPs would like to establish for the expenditure of the EU institutions other than the Commission in 2009, including the EP.
This report refers to the issue of the ceiling of 20% of total EU administrative expenditure (under heading 5 - Administration) voluntarily imposed on itself by the European Parliament, given that the EP's powers and legislative activity will expand if the Lisbon Treaty enters into force. The new Members' statute (which will require Parliament to pay most of MEPs' pay and allowances) and the 2009 elections will also have an impact on the EP's budget. But MEPs believe it will be possible to meet these needs without going over the 20% limit.
Among the priorities for Parliament’s budget, as for the previous year, are the EP’s communication and information policies, notable three major projects which should be operational in 2009: a visitors’ centre, an audiovisual media centre and the web TV project. MEPs in the committee also want to see the rapid adoption of a statute for MEPs’ assistants. A proposal in this regards should be sent to the Council, which is responsible for legislation in this area, during the French Presidency (the second half of 2008) so that the statute could come into force at the same time as the new Members’ Statute – after the June 2009 elections.
MEPs also stress environmental matters as a key element of managing Parliament as an organisation, notably when it comes to buildings. They want to see the use of environmentally friendly vehicles and solar panels on roofs of EP buildings, among other points.
This report constitutes the first outline from the Budgets Committee, the estimates of Parliament's Bureau and the other institutions not being known as yet. It will be put to the vote at the Brussels plenary session in early April.
2008-03-27 Committee on Budgets In the chair Reimer BÖGE PPE-DE DE
20080326IPR24940 Web pages of the Committee on Budgets
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=BUDG
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
