Towards an EU policy on sport
Culture
2008-04-01 - 16:13
The fight against doping should be stepped up, and clearer guidelines are needed on how EU rules should apply to sport, says an own-initiative report adopted by a large majority in the Committee on Culture and Education on Tuesday. In a report that outlines the makings of an EU policy on sport, MEPs also voice concern about the possible deregulation of gambling markets.
The report, drafted by Manolis Mavromatis (PPE-ED, EL), welcomes the Commission's July 2007 White Paper on Sport, and emphasises the important role of sport in society. It notes that about 60% of EU citizens regularly participate in sporting activities within or outside some 700,000 clubs, and that sport in a broader sense generated € 407 billion in value-added in 2004 (3.4% of EU GDP) and employment for 15 million people (5.4% of the labour force).
Sport needs more certainty as to the law
The rapporteur noted that the Lisbon Reform Treaty's official recognition of sport "is a very big step towards a European policy in the field of sport", and said after the vote: "I am very happy that the Committee has adopted my report on the White Paper, which already gives basic guidelines for this policy, by underlining the need for continuing financing for professional and amateur sports, the recognition of collective selling of media rights and of course a more efficient fight against doping."
With a view to the Lisbon Treaty's ratification, the role of sport in Europe must be given a "strategic orientation", and the application of Community law must be clarified, says the committee. MEPs ask the Commission to respect sport's specificity, and to create clear guidelines as to how EU rules should be applied. MEPs also request a special budget line in the budget 2009 for preparatory actions in the field of sport, given that the Lisbon Treaty, if ratified, foresees incentive measures in the area of sport.
Self regulation
MEPs agree with the Commission that most challenges can be addressed though self regulation, provided that EU law is complied with, and believe that a structured partnership and dialogue between the Commission and sports movements is essential for good governance of sport, in order to avoid legal uncertainty and to respect the autonomy of the sports organisations.
Fight against doping
Doping is a key concern for MEPs, as it undermines transparency and fair competition. Policies to prevent and combat doping should include avoiding excessively busy sports calendars that put pressure on the athletes, say MEPs, who also call on professional clubs and sports organisations to adopt a pledge to combat doping and invite the Commission to consider treating trade in illicit doping substances in the same way as trade in illicit drugs.
Amateur sport and possible deregulation of gambling markets
The report also voices concern about the possible deregulation of lotteries and gambling markets. MEPs consider it appropriate to use lottery profits for purposes that are in the public interest, and calls on the Commission and the Member States to adopt regulatory measures to ensure that sport is protected from any improper influence relating to betting. They also underline the important role of sport in society, as an effective tool for social integration, and the importance of supporting measures for persons with disabilities.
Solidarity in the selling of TV rights
Television rights are the primary source of income for professional sport in Europe. To ensure that not only the biggest clubs will benefit from the selling of the rights, MEPs recommend that Member States and national sports federations and leagues introduce collective selling of media rights, and say that there should be an equitable redistribution of income between the clubs within and between the leagues and between professional and amateur sport.
Stop human trafficking and favour home-grown players
Immigration laws should always be respected when recruiting new talented players to the European playing fields, say MEPs, who call on the sports governing bodies to engage in the fight against human trafficking, subscribe to a European Charter for solidarity, create a solidarity fund to finance programmes in the countries most affected by human trafficking and review the FIFA rules of transfer in relation to the protection of minors. They also call on the Commission to recognise the legality of measures that favour a minimum number of locally trained players. Finally, MEPs also believe that the sports governing bodies should improve the rules concerning players' agents, and call on the Commission to support this initiative - if necessary by proposing a directive.
The Mavromatis report was adopted in committee with 31 votes in favour, 1 against and 1 abstention
Plenary vote: April II or May I
2008-03-31 Committee on Culture and Education In the Chair Katerina BATZELI PES EL
20080331IPR25314 Commission White Paper on Sport Culture and Education Committee
EN
1
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/sport/whitepaper/wp_on_sport_en.pdf
EN
2
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=CULT
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
