MEPs see devastating effect of rape in DR Congo
Human rights
2008-04-02 - 11:49
Jürgen Schröder: "the consequences are disastrous"
A recent peace agreement may have given the long suffering people of the Democratic Republic of Congo some cause for hope. Since 1998 the country has been devastated by war, invasion and disease. Over 5 million people have died. One of the most brutal weapons of war has been the rape of women. In January a parliamentary resolution condemned the use of rape and on Tuesday a group of MEPs returned from a fact finding mission to DRC. We asked its head Jürgen Schröder (EPP-ED) what they had seen.
According to the "DRC Humanitarian Action Plan 2008" more than 30,000 rape cases were reported in DR Congo last year. It is probably only a fraction of the total number. Why has rape become so widespread?
Jürgen Schröder: Rape was obviously a weapon during warfare but since the conclusion of the peace agreements (in January 2008), the situation has changed. It is no longer a weapon of warfare; it has become a weapon of ordinary criminality done unfortunately by rebels, by members of the regular Congolese army and even civilians.
One of the factors is the general role of females in the society. Unfortunately the role of females is subordinated to the role of males. The whole country is not well-governed. And in those parts where we were in North Kivu and South Kivu, there is bad governance or absence of governance, chaos dominates. Males of this society have lost their dignity and now use their "male weapons" to also destroy the dignity of those who are weaker - namely the females and children. It is an expression of the chaotic and desolate situation of the whole society.
What consequences does rape have for victims and their families?
JS: The consequences are disastrous. On the one hand women and girls, even small children down to three years are rejected in general by their husbands, by their families, by their villages, because according to the standard of morality or ethics the reputation of the family is affected. On the other hand they suffer physical pain. The perpetrators know that they do not affect only the dignity of the woman but that they also destroy the structure of the society.
In its Resolution Parliament called for the allocation of funds to help the victims. What else can Parliament and the wider European Union do?
JS: I am convinced that this issue of human rights violations in the form of rape must be seen in the context of violation of human rights. There is an absence of a judiciary - which means chaos and impunity. People who do these things rarely see trial. We should go on working to find means whereby a judicial system can be established.
The other thing is that we help women of that country, not only to be free from those human rights violations but to be able to play the leading role of the society. This is what we have drawn as one of the major conclusions. That we should make up projects that are meant to help women in DRC to play a leading role in the society.
The human beings who are the most active in renewing the society are women. I have visited Indonesia and Afghanistan. If you look into the eyes of the female members of the Parliament, you have a feeling that you can talk to them and they understand you. If you look into the eyes of men, you see nothing - I am sorry that I am being so frank. Males in such societies are taught in childhood what to do to be a boy, that the boys are superior to the girls. They are victims of their education whereas women are always being told that they are the lowest level of the society - they have nothing to lose.
We support the peace process and the pacification in this part of the world. Also we can help improve the situation by improving relations with Rwanda and China who are both key players.
20080331STO25211 Jürgen Schröder UN mission in DR Congo Explanation of EP resolution on DRC EP Resolution on sexual violence in DR Congo
EN
1
PHOTO
20080401PHT25437.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/members/public/geoSearch/view.do?country=DE&partNumber=2&language=EN&id=1858
EN
3
LINK
http://www.monuc.org/Home.aspx?lang=en
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080117IPR19103 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0022 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
