Post-Briefing - 10-13 March 2008 - Strasbourg plenary session
2008-03-17 - 10:43
50th anniversary of the European Parliament celebrated in Strasbourg
To celebrate the European Parliament's 50th anniversary on 19 March 2008, the presidents of the EP, the Council and the Commission each addressed the House in a special sitting in Strasbourg. The speeches were preceded and followed by performances by the European Youth Orchestra.
Pöttering on European Day of the Victims of Terrorism "We will honour all victims"
Addressing the European Parliament in Strasbourg, President Hans-Gert Pöttering said: "Today we are commemorating the fourth European Day of the Victims of Terrorism. This is a day that we must keep in our memory in order to remember all those who have suffered the barbarities of terrorism. The terrorist attacks in Madrid on 11 March 2004 and in London on 7 July 2005 claimed many victims and left many families in ruins.
President Pöttering calls for immediate release of hostages held in Columbia including Ingrid Betancourt
Six years after the abduction of Ingrid Betancourt, more than 700 hostages are still being held by guerrilla organisations in Columbia, President of the European Parliament Hans-Gert PÖTTERING called for the immediate release of Ingrid Betancourt and her fellow hostages for humanitarian reasons. Speaking on behalf of the European Parliament, President Pöttering expressed concern about the worrying state of health of many of the hostages and called for an international medical mission to be sent to Columbia immediately to address their medical needs.
European Parliament debates the Spring Summit on growth and jobs
MEPs held a debate with the Council and Commission on Spring Summit (13-14 March, Brussels) - the two-day European Council meeting of EU Heads of State or Government which focused on economic issues. The meeting of the European Council was preceded by an speech from the EP President, Hans-Gert Pöttering, followed by an exchange of views. The Presidency Conclusions of the Brussels European Council are now available and a link to same is given under our European Council article.
Estonian President Ilves on Europe's past and future
A speech to the European Parliament on Tuesday (11 March) by Estonian President Toomas Hendrik Ilves ranged across Europe's recent past as well as its prospects for the next ten years and beyond. Among the key issues facing the EU, Mr Ilves highlighted competitiveness, energy security and the Union's relations with its neighbours. But he also stressed the need for Europeans to remember "where we came from and how we got here".
MEPs approve €162.4 million for the UK in EU Solidarity Fund following floods last summer
The European Parliament adopted reports from the Budgets Committee on the mobilisation of the EU Solidarity Fund for an amount of €162.4 million in commitment and payment appropriations, relating to the major storms in the United Kingdom in June and July 2007. The grant will go towards reimbursing part of the cost of emergency measures such as rescue services, cleaning up after flood damage, and restoring basic infrastructure.
New technologies for active ageing and longer independent living
Helping older people to stay healthier and to live independently for longer is the aim of a new research programme on "Ambient Assisted Living" (AAL) says the co-decision report by Neena GILL (PES, UK). It will develop new information and communication technology (ICT), to enable more elderly people to access public services more easily, but these services must nonetheless respect their privacy and dignity, say MEPs.
Common rules for safeguarding civil aviation - sky marshals must be "specially selected and trained"
The European Parliament adopted a new regulation that aims to ensure a high level of aviation security throughout the EU. It lays down common rules and standards, such as screening of passengers and cabin baggage, access control and aircraft security checks. The regulation also deals with in-flight-security measures, such as the deployment of "sky marshals" and the carriage of weapons on board an aircraft. The conciliation was approved with 583 votes in favour, 21 against and 35 abstentions.
MEPs debate the situation in Gaza and Israel
Opening a debate on the situation in Gaza and Israel, President Pöttering asked "What can Europeans do? In his view, the answer was that Europe must help push forward the peace talks between Israelis and Palestinians. "The peace process launched at Annapolis must not founder on violence and terror", he stressed.
Support democratic governance in Iraq, and increase EU presence on the ground, say MEPs
The Council should become more actively engaged in assistance to Iraq and also improve the transparency of its aid to the country, says a report by Ana Gomes (PES, PT) on the EU's role in Iraq adopted with 506 votes in favour, 25 against and 26 abstentions. It calls on the Council to "step up the quantity, but especially the quality, of EU support for UN efforts to build a safe, stable, unified, prosperous and democratic Iraq."
Congestion charges and road-pricing supported by the European Parliament
Parliament adopted an own-initiative report by 539 votes in favour, 78 against and 25 abstentions on sustainable European transport policy, which says that the problem of urban congestion, which causes 40% of CO2 emissions and 70% of other pollutant emissions from vehicles, needs to be tackled more ambitiously, by applying a Europe-wide cooperation and coordination strategy.
Minimum taxes for diesel should rise to equal petrol tax minimums
The current EU-wide minimum rate of tax on diesel should be increased to match the current minimum rate for unleaded petrol, but no further, say MEPs. They also want to set a limit on further petrol and diesel tax increases in the Member States which already have the highest taxes.
Women in rural areas
Parliament adopted an own-initiative report on the situation of women in rural areas of the EU, Christa KLAß (EPP-ED, DE) for the Women's Rights committee which calls on the Member States to develop strategies aimed at curbing the out-migration of women in rural areas, especially those who are highly educated. The European Parliament is convinced that mainstreaming gender into the rural sector is a key strategy not only for the promotion of equality between women and men but also for economic growth and sustainable rural development.
Taking account of the special needs of women in prisons
The European Parliament adopted an own-initiative report on the situation of women in prison, a minority of the prison population but a fast-growing one. The report focuses on prison conditions, the preservation of family ties and reintegration into society and the workplace. Women account for a small percentage of the prison population in the European Union - around 5% - with Spain and Portugal having the largest numbers at 8% and 10% respectively, but most European countries have experienced a significant increase. The female prison population grew by 410% in Cyprus between 1994 and 2003 and by 173% in England and Wales from 1992 to 2002.
CAP health check: MEPs' first response
Parliament adopted a report on the Commission's proposals for further reform of the CAP, known as the "CAP health check". The European Parliament recommends broad approval of the proposals, although it has reservations about certain points, including the amount of funds to be switched from the "first pillar" of the CAP (market support) to the "second pillar" (rural development) as well as the capping of direct aid.
Dairy quotas: MEPs favour 2% voluntary increase
The European Parliament believes the dairy quotas of the Member States should be increased on a voluntary basis by 2% from 1 April 2008, with a mechanism for "balancing out" between states that exceed their quotas and those that under-use them, to avoid penalising any state that has a surplus. This should provide a solution to growing demand on world markets, while taking account of differing situations among EU producers.
Biogas - a need for a review of EU legislation say MEPs
Parliament adopted an own-initiative report by 610 votes in favour to 23 against and 13 abstentions on sustainable agriculture and biogas: a need for a review of EU legislation. The report stresses that, in the long term, renewable energy sources such as biogas and biofuels, together with solar power and wind energy, subject to further intensified research efforts, can bring about a higher degree of independence from fossil-fuel energy sources.
EP gives green light for European Institute of Innovation and Technology
The European Institute of Innovation and Technology (EIT) will be able to start operating this summer, after the Council's common position on its establishment was officially approved by the European Parliament. The common position was reached after negotiations with the Parliaments' rapporteur Reino Paasilinna (PES, FI), who was satisfied with the compromise, which took on board most of the points raised by Parliament in first reading.
Fisheries agreement EC - Guinea-Bissau
The European Parliament adopted by 556 votes in favour to 62 against and 15 abstentions a report by Luís CAPOULAS SANTOS (PES, PT) on the conclusion of a fisheries agreement between the European Community and Guinea-Bissau. The Protocol to the agreement, which will apply until 15 June 2011, grants fishing possibilities for 23 tuna seiners and surface longliners from Spain, France and Portugal and for 14 pole-and-line vessels from Spain and France, subject to a total of 37 licences.
Fisheries Partnership Agreement EC - Côte d’Ivoire
The EP adopted a report by 566 votes in favour to 63 against and 18 abstentions on the conclusion of a Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the European Community and Côte d’Ivoire. As regards fishing opportunities, the agreement lays down that authorisation to fish will be granted to 25 freezer tuna seiners (10 vessels from France and 15 from Spain) and 15 surface longliners (10 vessels from Spain and 5 vessels from Portugal), subject to a total of 40 licences.
Human rights: Armenia, Russia, Afghan journalist and Iranian homosexual
In four human rights resolutions adopted at the end of this week's Strasbourg session, MEPs deplored the violence used by the authorities against opposition demonstrators following presidential elections in both Armenia and Russia, and demanded reprieves for a journalist condemned to death in Afghanistan and for a gay Iranian who could be in grave danger if forced to return to his home country.
EU development policy and the new Member States
Parliament adopted an own-initiative report on the challenge of EU development cooperation policy for the new Member States, all of which must take part in this well-established policy, although each has its own priorities. The report, by Danute Budreikaite (ALDE, LT) and adopted with 378 votes in favour, 11 against and 16 abstentions, looks at how the new Member States implement their development policy.
Empowering women: the key to development
Parliament backed an own-initiative report on gender equality and women's empowerment in development cooperation. The report calls for measures to promote women's rights in areas such as responsible governance, employment, education, health and violence against women, arguing that these rights are essential to economic and social development.
Global energy efficiency and renewable energy
Parliament adopted a report which welcomes the Commission's proposal for a Global Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Fund (GEEREF). The report stresses that the key objectives of the fund should be the promotion of energy efficiency, energy saving and renewable energies, the reduction of emissions of greenhouse gases and of other risks, the improvement of access to energy services in the poorest countries and the diversification of energy sources in the developing world.
EP repeats its call for making the Code of Conduct on Arms Exports legally binding
In the context of the upcoming 10th anniversary of the EU's Code of Conduct on Arms Transfers this year, the EP adopted a resolution calling on the Slovenian Presidency to make it "a permanent item on the agenda of each General Affairs Council meeting until the issue has been resolved."
Extraordinary plenary in Brussels on Wednesday, 26 March 2008
An extraordinary plenary sitting will be held on Wednesday 26 March 2008 in Brussels from 2-4.30pm so that the Slovenian Presidency can report on the results of the European Council's meeting of 13-14 March in Brussels. The next Brussels plenary will be held on 9-10 April 2008. Agendas are now available (links to same are given at the end of this publication). 20080307BRI23279
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
50th anniversary of the European Parliament celebrated in Strasbourg
2008-03-17 - 10:43
To celebrate the European Parliament's 50th anniversary on 19 March 2008, the presidents of the EP, the Council and the Commission each addressed the House in a special sitting in Strasbourg. The speeches were preceded and followed by performances by the European Youth Orchestra. In his opening address, European Parliament President Hans-Gert Pöttering first welcomed several former presidents of the European Parliament, the president of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, speakers of national parliaments and numerous other dignitaries.
Mr Pöttering stressed that "step by step, the European Parliament has fought to secure more and more rights and has become ever more aware of its responsibility and of what it can do; and today it does credit to its name".
"Today, we are 785 Members from 27 European nations; we represent seven political groups and more than 150 national political parties; we are both a legislative and a budgetary authority, on an equal footing with the Council of Ministers; we exercise oversight over the European Commission and elect its President; we are the representatives of close to 500 million Union citizens; we reflect all political tendencies in the European Union; we have become self-assured and a major player in European politics", he said.
Talking about the Reform Treaty President Pöttering said "The Treaty of Lisbon will further strengthen our rights. In future, decisions on important issues now of concern to citizens in the European Union can be taken only if the European Parliament gives its consent".
"The Treaty of Lisbon and the Charter of Fundamental Rights will make a decisive contribution towards making democracy and parliamentarianism in the European Union a reality at all levels. We can be proud of our consistent support for the Reform Treaty and for the Charter of Fundamental Rights."
To applause from the House, he stressed the role of national parliaments, saying "the cooperation between the European Parliament and national parliaments is of special concern to us. We must endeavour, in future, to maintain that cooperation".
"An achievement worth embracing and celebrating"
The president-in-office of the Council, Janez Janša, prime minister of Slovenia, began by saying “Ce n’est pas sans émotion que je prends la parole", echoing the words spoken by Robert Schuman, the first President of the European Parliamentary Assembly, in his inaugural address on 19 March 1958.
Mr Janša recalled that, in the aftermath of two wars and in a world dominated by East-West tensions, "six Member States of the European Communities brought together 168 million Europeans, healed the wounds of the war, made economic progress and, together with the Euro-Atlantic alliance, safeguarded an area of freedom and democracy" - although "most of the remaining part of Europe, regrettably, existed in a totalitarian Communist environment".
But now, he said, an "entirely different image presents itself". With the "elimination of the borders that once divided Europe", "practically all of wider Europe now also lives in freedom and democracy. This is an achievement worth embracing and celebrating."
The existence and the operation of the European Parliament from 1958 is "a direct reflection of the progress achieved in the process of integration over the past fifty years", he added.
However, "if the first fifty years of the EU have been dedicated to the European agenda – to our own political and economic development and reform – the next fifty years will also put the global agenda at the forefront of our attention." Apart from economic issues, energy and climate change, Mr Janša highlighted human rights and intercultural dialogue as areas in which the European Parliament plays a key role.
The range of EU activities is increasing all the time but a single rule applies to them all: "success is directly proportional to unity". In the words of Jean Monnet, “Each man begins the world afresh. Only institutions grow wiser; they accumulate collective experience.” "Our joint task is therefore to promote the European collective experience. From this experience, we can draw the strength to address current challenges", argued Mr Janša.
On a personal note, the prime minister told the House "I know what this time represents for our generation, being born myself in the same year as the European Parliament" and he looked forward to "the next major anniversary of this home of European democracy".
European Commission President José Manuel Barroso
It has been 50 years since Schuman brought together the three European communities in a new single assembly, but the political choice outlining a European representative democracy has been confirmed at every subsequent stage of the European construction, said Commission President José Manuel Barroso.
The founding fathers foresaw that Europe needed lasting and strong institutions to enshrine the ever-deeper links among the Six. These institutions also had to be able to evolve, he continued, noting that Europe's "unique institutional triangle" has since proven its vitality by adapting to vast growth in the tasks entrusted to the Union and to the dynamics of enlargement.
"We owe this success to the ingenuity and balance of our institutional construction, which does not follow the usual distribution of powers. We owe it also to the way we work, which respects both the Community method and subsidiarity", he added.
Fifty years on, Europe, living in peace and spanning the continent, still needs strong institutions to tackle the challenge of our time: globalisation. Its experience of opening markets, accompanied by rules that reflect its values of freedom, solidarity and sustainable development, mean that "Europe alone has the dimensions, institutions and instruments necessary to shape globalisation", said the President.
Mr Barroso saluted Parliament's contribution to the European project, in every field of daily life. In 50 years, Parliament has gained many powers and prerogatives. Some of this power derives from the peoples' votes. Some is formal, such as co-decision and budgetary powers. And some derives from political influence - Parliament has become a co-legislator and an influential partner in the institutional triangle, but has also developed close links with national parliaments, he said.
Parliament's power has strengthened Europe as a whole. A strong European Parliament is an indispensable partner for other institutions, and in particular the European Commission, said the President, adding that the Lisbon Treaty, once ratified, will extend Parliament's powers, and also strengthen the Commission's dual democratic legitimacy through stronger links with Parliament and the Council.
Mr Barroso concluded with a quote from Portuguese writer Agustina Bessa Luis: "At 15 years old you have a future; at 25, a problem; at 40, experience; but before 50 years old, you have no history".
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Estonian President Ilves on Europe's past and future
2008-03-17 - 10:43
A speech to the European Parliament on Tuesday (11 March) by Estonian President Toomas Hendrik Ilves ranged across Europe's recent past as well as its prospects for the next ten years and beyond. Among the key issues facing the EU, Mr Ilves highlighted competitiveness, energy security and the Union's relations with its neighbours. But he also stressed the need for Europeans to remember "where we came from and how we got here". In his welcoming speech to Mr Ilves, EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering emphasised "how far we have come" in recent years. After the communist period, we now had a president of Estonia - and former MEP - freely chosen by his people addressing a European Parliament which included freely representatives of all three Baltic states.
At the start of his address, President Ilves first pointed out that "as Estonia is about to enter its fifth year as a member of our Union, we no longer are 'new members' ". Indeed, he stressed, to applause from the House, that "it is time now to put aside the term „new member“ as an anachronism".
Looking to the future
He then turned to the challenges facing the EU, saying "Here and today I want to look ahead when we are all old or older members, ten years into the future". He pointed to two external issues, "global warming and declining availability of fossil fuels" as well as an internal one: "the competitiveness of the European Union".
On the latter question, he said "we need to be grateful to Jean Monnet and later Jacques Delors for creating the Single Market" for "it is the Single Market that allows individual European nations to keep themselves competitive on the global arena". However, "Current thinking in the EU is not a cause for optimism" for two reasons: "the lack-lustre fulfilment" of the Lisbon Agenda and "the EU’s increasing turn to protectionism".
Europe was falling behind its competitors in innovation, research and development. The underlying reasons, according to Mr Ilves, are that "We are averse to immigration, our children increasingly choose not to study maths, science and engineering, and we are choosing to close ourselves off from competition within the EU in one of the most competitive sectors of the world economy: services."
Energy security
Competition or its lack within the EU has security implications as well. A clear threat was that "Europe’s single largest source of energy is a country that has proclaimed itself 'energy superpower' and which states on its foreign ministry home page that energy is a foreign policy tool". Mr Ilves argued that "a common Energy Policy with an energy commissioner with the negotiating heft of the trade commissioner is an absolute must" along with internal liberalization.
What to do
As to solutions, the first step, for Estonia, is the Reform Treaty. For "without expanding Qualified Majority Voting we will founder in paralysis, without a President and a Foreign Minister we simply will punch far below our weight".
Turning to EU enlargement and the European Neighbourhood Policy, the president asked "How large will our Union be in 2018?". His answer: "It is clear that we will not be as large as some of us want, but almost certainly larger than today. To our East and our South lie countries that certainly will never join". However, "It seems to me that one of our fundamental concerns should be that differences in economic well-being and political liberty between the EU and its neighbours not be so great that we be faced with a high level of illegal immigration or with political refugees."
A Europe of European citizens
Mr Ilves than pointed out that "qualified majority voting will do little if we do not develop a more fundamental understanding of European interests". He went on to say "We need to return to the fundamental understanding that has made the EU successful: national interests are best served when we all give up a little so that the Union as a whole is successful".
The president then highlighted the need "to upgrade our education in the languages of the Union", saying "Certainly in ten years time we should be able to look upon a Union where every student knows another member state language, other than English".
The need "to think more in terms of regions" was also important. "Here the Parliament has shown that it can play a larger role than ever imagined", said Mr Ilves, adding "I am proud that an initiative I was associated with when I was here, the Baltic Sea Strategy is one of the first EU policies that actually started here, right here in the European Parliament". "The Parliament is precisely that link between the EU institutions and the citizen that makes the EU work", he emphasised.
History
Finally, the president stressed the importance of history. "No less important for citizens Europe, a Europe of European citizens, is that we know who we are, where we came from and how we got here", he said. "Our task, my dear colleagues, is to know our Europe", he continued, and cited "one of the greatest Europeans of the 20th century", Salvador de Madariaga, who when in exile from the Franco regime had said:
" This Europe must be born. And she will be born when Spaniards say “our Chartres”, Englishmen “our Cracow”, Italians “our Copenhagen” and Germans “our Bruges”…. Then Europe will live. For then it will be that the spirit which leads Europe will have uttered the creative words: Fiat Europa ”
Mr Ilves' closing words were "Europe is far from complete, we still have so much to do. In my homeland, Estonia, when we have a great task to fulfil, we say: may we have the strength to do it". Briefing article 6.3.08 + related links
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080219BRI21798 ITEM-002-EN NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
European Council
European Parliament debates the Spring Summit on growth and jobs
2008-03-17 - 10:43
MEPs held a debate with the Council and Commission on the upcoming spring summit, the two-day European Council meeting of EU Heads of State or Government will focus on economic issues. The summit will begin with an address from the EP President, Hans-Gert Pöttering, followed by a discussion. Opening the debate for the Council, Janez Lenarčič, Slovenia's State Secretary for European Affairs, gave an overview of the three broad areas on the summit agenda: the need for further progress on the Lisbon Agenda; energy and climate change; and instability on the financial markets. Among specific issues to be addressed by the EU leaders he pointed to the third internal market package for gas and electricity and the question of how to deal with sovereign wealth funds.
Commission President José Manuel Barroso stressed the economic successes of the EU, arguing that the Lisbon Strategy is working. He also warned against the dangers of protectionism and, indeed, saw a renewed Lisbon Strategy as the only way forward for the EU, with the emphasis on higher standards of education and training, more research and innovation and completion of the internal market.
Political group speakers
This is no time to change tack", said Joseph DAUL (FR) for the EPP-ED group. Pursuing the Lisbon strategy for growth and jobs, and redoubling our efforts to make it work in 2008-2010, is the best way to address the challenges of globalisation, population ageing, and climate change, he stressed.
Stepping up R&D investment, supporting entrepreneurs, and making the labour market more flexible, is the right way to enable Europe's firms, and especially SMEs, to add value, quality and innovation, win market share, and create jobs, he continued.
Mr Daul agreed that Europe needs a small business act, and stressed that training, education and lifelong learning are the key to making workers more mobile and flexible. Investing in training and adaptability would also help to relieve the economic pressures of population ageing, he said.
On climate change, Mr Daul stressed that Europe must invest in green technology, but must also enjoin its trading partners to do likewise.
On social policy, he said that the public must be told the truth - i.e. there will no social progress without economic growth.
For the Socialist group, Martin SCHULZ (DE) noted that Ministers were to discuss the idea of a "Mediterranean Union" over dinner, reportedly at France's suggestion. The PES group would welcome this idea, provided that it aims to upgrade the Barcelona process within the EU policy context. However, if the EU were divided over the idea, then it would send a very bad message, and this should be made clear to France, he said.
Mr Schulz thanked President Barroso for taking up Parliament's ideas on the economic policy guidelines, and called on him to urge Member States to put their substance into practice.
"There is progress", he said, acknowledging that "unemployment is down and productivity is up". However, "many new jobs are precarious, wages are not keeping pace with profits, and social imbalances remain. We need more social welfare and protection".
If "economic progress is uncoupled from social responsibility", then "the spirit of the past 50 years will be jeopardised", he continued, adding that corporate relocations, which benefit companies, rather than workers are "a blow to confidence in the EU".
"Of course we need to harness the potential of our young people, by investing in training", he continued, but if funding for this depends on their parents' wealth, then "this does not amount to a social policy", he concluded.
This Council is taking place somewhere on the road between despair and hope" said Graham WATSON (UK)for the ALDE group, citing uncertainties about Turkey, Russia and the Middle East, slowing growth and banking sector crises.
Mr Watson stressed the urgent need to act on climate change, security and stability, noting that in some quarters, "NATO is viewed as an instrument of energy security". "Some Member States are already seeking to limit their commitment to the climate change plan", he said, citing paragraph 18 of the draft Council conclusions. In fact, "only by extending solidarity beyond our borders can we enjoy security around the Caspian and the Mediterranean", he said.
"Despite strong headwinds, economic fundamentals are getting stronger", he noted, adding that some MEPs' concerns about corporate relocation "ignore what's happening in the global economy".
"Half our income comes from trade", he continued, stressing that the world economy is "not a zero-sum game" and that "6.5 million jobs have been created in the past 2 years".
The Council must boost the budget for research, and improve transparency in banking, but in the end, "markets are the most important tool we have to improve living standards", he concluded.
Brian CROWLEY (UEN, IE) began by pointing out that the reality is that one proposal will not lead to the required solution. It will be a combination of all. He spoke of the need to 'try to drag the best ideas out of all the proposals'. As an example, he pointed out that unemployment can't be solved 'simply by saying we want more jobs'. He said that 'only so much can be done by public services ..[..].. ultimately it comes down to businessmen and businesswomen ..[..].. investing more money in creating more jobs'.
Mr Crowley spoke of the challenges ahead - the lack of investment in proper research and development for example and the relocation of European industry and business outside the EU. He went on to say that we need 'to ensure that the foundations that we put down today will be as strong [in the future] as they are today.' Finally, Mr Crowley stated that 'our best and most valuable assets are our young people'. Without proper investment in education and training, 'we risk losing them'.
Rebecca HARMS (Greens/EFA, DE) pointed out that the Lisbon Strategy 'has not solved the problem of the working poor.' She emphasised the need for profits to be distributed equally and spoke of the EP resolution which included 'a special request on central minimum wages' and which had asked the Council and the Commission to take this request on board. Ms Harms went on to say that the Council and the Commission 'need to be aware of marginalisation and tackle this problem ..[..].. particularly in light of the Lisbon Strategy'. She pointed out that it is 'a great pity that neither institution has addressed that suggestion from the EP'.
Ms Harms referred to comments made by a representative of the German Federal Government who had inferred that environmental policy should not interfere with industrial policy. Ms Harms commented that 'it seems to me that they don't understand what sustainability means'.
She concluded by speaking about the Mediterranean union which she claimed demonstrated that 'the EU has no unified policy, either on energy or security of energy supply'.
Gabriele ZIMMER (GUE/NGL, DE) began by stating that 'today we celebrate 50 years of the EP' and commenting that 'I think that what it tells us is that in future neither the Council or the Commission are going to have a docile or patient EP because it will be incumbent on us to give a voice to those who are neglected'.
Referring to the Lisbon Strategy, Ms Zimmer suggested that the summit conclusions should 'spare a line for those who have been the subject of social exclusion'. She emphasised that it is 'not just a matter of us protesting against aggressive globalisation'. Ms Zimmer pointed out that combating poverty, social exclusion and divisions in society 'is not being put high enough on the agenda'.
In conclusion, Ms Zimmer asked how the social dimension of the Lisbon strategy was being put into effect?; what practical steps will be taken to ensure its implementation?; and how can we ensure that the energy crisis will not damage social cohesion?
Jens-Peter BONDE (IND/DEM, DK)spoke of the proposal he has drafted, together with his Irish colleagues, Kathy Sinnott, to add a new protocol to the Lisbon Treaty which would address the issues which arose during the Laval case and 'outlaw ..[..].. the revolutionary decision by the European Court from 18 December last year'. Mr Bonde referred to the reality which now exists in Ireland and in Denmark and the importance of addressing these issues. He urged the Slovenian Presidency 'to raise the question in the summit'.
Mr Bonde concluded by asking "when will we have a consolidated Treaty so that we can understand what the content is?"
Jana BOBOŠÍKOVÁ (NI, CZ) for the non-attached MEPs said that the Heads of States' intentions to reduce CO2 emissions by 20% and increase renewable energy use by 20% in a few years time is utopian and could have a negative effect on jobs and industry. She also stated that the EU should focus on attracting the "migration of brains" and concentrate on improving energy efficiency and research and development into nuclear energy. Council of the European Union - Presidency Conclusions of the Brussels European Council 13/14 March 2008)
EN
1
LINK
http://www.consilium.europa.eu/ueDocs/cms_Data/docs/pressData/en/ec/99410.pdf
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Justice and home affairs
Pöttering on European Day of the Victims of Terrorism "We will honour all victims"
2008-03-17 - 10:43
Addressing the European Parliament in Strasbourg, President Hans-Gert Pöttering said: "Today we are commemorating the fourth European Day of the Victims of Terrorism. This is a day that we must keep in our memory in order to remember all those who have suffered the barbarities of terrorism. The terrorist attacks in Madrid on 11 March 2004 and in London on 7 July 2005 claimed many victims and left many families in ruins. Unfortunately, just last Friday terrorist organization ETA assassinated again. Isaias Carrasco, a former Socialist councillor, was shot when he left his home in Mondragon. I wish to express on behalf of the European Parliament our deep sadness and profound sympathy to his family and friends.
As President of the European Parliament and on my own behalf, I can say that their recollection will never be erased from our memories. Today, we will honour him and all victims with a moment of silence, in order to show, once again, our respect and our commitment to them. Always, they are and will remain present in our hearts and in our work. It is a duty for all of us.
I will never cease to repeat, there is no justification for terrorism. Therefore, we must work united in our fight on the basis of the Rule of Law and with all the force of the law."
The European Parliament then held a minute of silence.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External relations
MEPs debate the situation in Gaza and Israel
2008-03-17 - 10:43
Opening a debate on the situation in Gaza and Israel, President Pöttering asked "What can Europeans do? In his view, the answer was that Europe must help push forward the peace talks between Israelis and Palestinians. "The peace process launched at Annapolis must not founder on violence and terror", he stressed. On behalf of the EP, President Pöttering voiced "dismay and indignation" at the daily TV images from the region, referring both to the "disproportionate military force" deployed against Palestinians and the "murderous attack" on a Jerusalem school. He condemned the violence by Hamas and other Palestinian extremists and called on the Israeli government to listen to those Palestinian voices that were calling for peace.
The European Parliament intends to play a role, using "an even-handed approach". After highlighting the €540 million to support the Annapolis peace support pledged by the EU at the Paris Donors' Conference in December, Mr Pöttering said the EP would put itself forward as "an honest broker". In two weeks' time, a new working group on the Middle East will discuss how EU aid is being used, with French foreign minister Bernard Kouchner, Norwegian foreign minister Jonas Gahr Støre, Commissioner Benita Ferrero-Waldner and Quartet special representative Tony Blair.
Mr Pöttering also stressed that, while security has a military dimension, mutual responsibility and a willingness to seek reconciliation are crucial. "Hamas must change its ways and work with moderate Palestinians towards peace", he said, and reiterated the EP's support for Palestinian president Abbas and prime minister Fayyad. He concluded by reiterating the need for Europe "to do everything in its power" to give political backing to peace as well as support to the inhabitants of the Middle East.
Political group speakers
For the EPP-ED group, Joseph DAUL (FR) said that, at Annapolis, the Israelis and Palestinians "had a dream" . In Paris, "the international community pledged to support this with resources". He believed the international community "should not judge the parties" but to lead them back to reason and the negotiating table.
He also drew three conclusions from a recent visit by the EPP to the Middle East. Firstly, Europe must be more active politically in the region. Secondly, "we must encourage the moderates in Israel and Palestine". Thirdly, we need to make it clear to both sides that they must stop building walls, firing rockets and constantly humiliating each other.
Socialist Group leader Martin SCHULTZ (DE) said "we are all agreed on what is needed". And pointing to the destruction in the region, he said it was unacceptable "that what EU money builds is destroyed unnecessarily".
It was essential, he said, that violence should stop - so why do negotiations always fail? His answer was that, on both sides, "there are those who have an interest in continuing the violence" . Above all, "the radicals need this conflict to legitimise their existence, and this has been the case for decades". It is up to Europe to tell them they cannot achieve their goals this way.
The situation in Gaza is a humanitarian disaster which "no amount of condemnation will solve", stressed Graham WATSON (ALDE, UK). Gaza is "besieged", and the trapping of 1.5 million people there, without power, water or sewage treatment, "has made matters worse than at any point since 1967", he continued, adding that he believed that a further 11,000 Palestinians are being held in Israeli jails.
On strategy, "the EU follows the USA", even though EU investments in Palestinian infrastructure "are being destroyed by the Israeli army using American weapons", he said.
Mr Watson welcomed the informal truce reached at lunchtime on Monday, and wished Egypt every success with its mediation efforts. But he stressed that the cycle of deaths would not be broken by further violence - it would continue so long as Israel seeks to "destabilise every interlocutor, and Hamas continues to fire rockets, knowing that the response will be disproportionate", he said. "As a democracy, Israel has a duty to be more just than its disposable power implies" stressed Mr Watson, urging all parties to look again urgently at the issues and to find a way to live together.
"The reality is that every day, innocent lives are lost, families lose members, and the forces of moderation are driven further apart" said Brian CROWLEY (UEN, IE). The cynicism of Israel's attempt to "starve people into submission" is matched by that of the brutal killing of 8 people in a school, he continued, urging that every species of terrorism - "official, state, or state or state-sponsored" need to be fought with respect for all human life. A two-state solution will work only if both states are viable, he stressed, adding that "when they are recognised, then their leaders must be recognised too".
"What we need is not dialogue, but negotiations, underlined Daniel COHN-BENDIT (Greens/EFA, DE), agreeing with Mr Watson that what the EU needs is its own strategy. "Negotiations" worthy of the name would begin by organizing a ceasefire, and then aid supplies, he said, adding that Israel should be told that unless it immediately halts the building of settlements, then "the EU will no longer support you".
The EU needs to convey the political message that "this cannot go on" - the colonial policy of Israel is a danger to the state of Israel, and Palestinian attacks work against Palestinian interests", he concluded.
Francis WURTZ (GUE/NGL, FR) said: "We had scarcely decided on this Solemn Declaration after 110 Palestinians were killed by bombs in Gaza when further killings took place, this time in Jerusalem, with Israeli victims. We have all condemned these crimes each time. But everyone can see that something else is necessary to be able to hope to break this infernal cycle forever".
What is needed is the courage - over and above the necessary condemnations of all crimes committed, whoever commits them - to name THE main cause of all this evil: the occupation. "And with it, this sinister display of cruelty and humiliation, which are never-ending sources of hatred, despair and desire for vengeance. Nothing can therefore justify this continued occupation.
A distinguished Israeli peace activist, Mrs Nurit Peled, Sakharov Prizewinner, said as much when she lost her child in an attack by a Palestinian. Speaking to the then Prime Minister, Mr Netanyahu, she said: "You killed my daughter!"
Speaking on behalf of the IND/DEM group, Bastiaan BELDER claimed that the number of rocket attacks from the Palestinians increased by 500% since 2001 and that the Israeli activities are justified by its need to safeguard the security and safety of its citizens under international law. He also said that "the claim that Israel is acting with disproportionate violence is a tactic used by Hamas and other Palestinian organisations perpetrating the rocket attacks".
Jim ALLISTER (NI, UK) said that he deplored the recent violence in the Middle East and the ongoing humanitarian tragedy. He said that it was necessary to draw a distinction between the orchestrated and continued attacks from Gaza and Israel's right to defend itself. Israel, he recalled, was an internationally recognised country that accepts a two-state solution. Israel was subjected to "the most horrendous violence and Israel has the right and the necessity to defend itself, he said". Hamas, had to make the most basic of concessions which was to accept the right of Israel to exist. There was no balance between terrorist attacks and the right of a legitimate country to defend itself.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
External relations
Support democratic governance in Iraq, and increase EU presence on the ground, say MEPs
2008-03-17 - 10:43
The Council should become more actively engaged in assistance to Iraq and also improve the transparency of its aid to the country, says a report by Ana Gomes (PES, PT) on the EU's role in Iraq adopted with 506 votes in favour, 25 against and 26 abstentions. It calls on the Council to "step up the quantity, but especially the quality, of EU support for UN efforts to build a safe, stable, unified, prosperous and democratic Iraq." The report urges the Council to concentrate the EU's support for democratic governance towards three goals in particular: "enhancing coordination between the Government and the Council of Representatives," "strengthening electoral procedures at the local level," and "reinforcing local democracy." It also asks it to "urge the Commission to alleviate the plight of Iraqi refugees in Jordan and Syria and in other countries in the region" and to "improve the possibilities for Iraqi refugees to find refuge in EU Member States through resettlement programmes agreed with the UNHCR (25,000 cases) or through individual asylum requests."
Speaking in the debate in Strasbourg, Baroness Emma Nicholson of Winterbourne (South East, Liberal Democrat, UK), on behalf of the ALDE Group said: "Iraq today has a true parliament and a wholly secular constitution. Iraq is one of the very few nations in this region to have a democracy – a secular democracy – despite its flaws. We therefore must do all we can to help the Iraqis strengthen the democratic process. I believe strengthening ties between our respective parliaments is one of the key ways in which we can assist. I am most honoured to be the new chairman of the delegation that the Conference of Presidents has recently created."
Caroline Lucas, (Greens/EFA, South East, UK) said: "The report before us welcomes Iraq’s observer status at the WTO as a key step towards driving Iraq’s integration in the international economy and it looks forward to the EU-Iraq trade and cooperation agreement. I just want to make sure that Iraq has sufficiently built up its own capacities for negotiation and evaluation. Otherwise we risk that country becoming once again prey to outside interests."
Transparency of EU funding
The European Parliament also asks the Council to "urge the Commission to ensure the transparency and efficiency of EU assistance for Iraq" by operating on the ground wherever possible, and by ensuring that "substantive EU assistance is directed towards improving public finance management and budgetary control, with the aim of ensuring that the Iraqi government is better able to disburse the substantial and increasing public funds now available to it." It also encourages the use of the "European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights (EIDHR) in providing technical and financial assistance to civil society organisations," especially with the view to improving the rights of women, children and minorities, and fighting against torture and the death penalty.
Security questions
The report repeats a long-standing demand of the Parliament (which is also expressed in a separate resolution on the topic voted on the same day) to make "the EU Code of Conduct on Arms Exports legally binding." It also urges the Council to improve "EUFOR Althea's oversight of stockpiles in Bosnia-Herzegovina, by accelerating the destruction of stockpiles in the Balkans, and by helping the Iraqi authorities to 'mop up' surplus SALW [Small Arms and Light Weapons] through a large-scale disarmament, demobilisation and integration."
MEPs call for engagement in "a dialogue with the USA" to seek "enhanced multilateralisation of the role played by the international community in the country, by using the UN framework." They also call on the "Multi-National Force - Iraq (MNF-I) to engage with the Government of Iraq and account for the situation of the over 24 000 detainees held in MNF-I custody, so as to ensure respect for due process and their basic human rights." MEPs also demand "clear guidelines for the use of private military and security companies by EU institutions," and "urge Turkey to respect the territorial integrity of Iraq and not react to terrorist actions through military actions on Iraqi territory."
EU-Iraq relations
MEPs call on the Council to "foster the renewal of bilateral political, diplomatic, cultural and economic relations and exchanges between Member States and Iraq," for instance by enlarging the financial envelope of the Erasmus Mundus programme for Iraq. Members also called for increasing "the size, responsibilities and resources of the Commission's delegation in Baghdad." Text adopted by the EP on the European Union's role in Iraq
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0100 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Transport
Common rules for safeguarding civil aviation - sky marshals must be "specially selected and trained"
2008-03-17 - 10:43
The European Parliament adopted a new regulation that aims to ensure a high level of aviation security throughout the EU. It lays down common rules and standards, such as screening of passengers and cabin baggage, access control and aircraft security checks. The regulation also deals with in-flight-security measures, such as the deployment of "sky marshals" and the carriage of weapons on board an aircraft. The conciliation was approved with 583 votes in favour, 21 against and 35 abstentions. European Parliament and Council representatives were able to strike a deal in conciliation on civil aviation security beginning of January after long and extensive negotiations.
Speaking in the debate on Monday 10 March 2008, Paolo COSTA (ALDE, IT), Chairman on the Transport Committee and rapporteur on the new regulation, welcomed the agreement. "The new regulation allow us to react more flexibly. Security is a clear priority for us. Controls must be strict and efficient, but must not lead to excessive inconveniences for the passengers. Also, controls must not lead to useless costs as regards the application. New control measures must not be introduced without democratic control and verification". Mr Costa said. He also stressed, that the principles of the financing and transparency will be addressed in an upcoming report by the European Commission, which will "safeguard undistorted competition between airports and air carriers".
Philip Bradbourn (West Midlands, Conservative, EPP-ED, UK), on behalf of the his group said: "In the light of the ongoing terrorist threat, we believe that clear rules for security and, importantly, common implementation across Europe’s airports and airlines are absolutely necessary, and this proposal delivers on both counts.
Timothy Kirkhope (Yorkshire and the Humber, Conservative, EPP-ED, UK) said "EU cooperation is needed to provide consistency on this so that passengers are better informed. As I said late last year, mutual recognition of our differing legal traditions is the way forward in an EU of 27 Member States, but basic security standards should be established in the EU. When the Commission outlines the principle of financing later this year, I will argue strongly that Member States should be allowed to go above and beyond these, should they feel the need, as long as they are prepared to pay the costs.
The EU should be proactive rather than reactive with regard to all these security issues. We must be one step ahead of the threat by developing more sophisticated technology and by sharing best practice and pooling intelligence. I believe that this report certainly takes us somewhat in that direction."
Security programmes at national airport and air carrier level
Common basic security standards include, inter alia, screening of passengers and cabin baggage, access control, screening of hold baggage, aircraft security checks, security controls for cargo and mail, staff recruitment and training as well as patrols and other physical controls.
Security programmes at national airport and air carrier level shall assure that the common rules are applied and maintained.
Member States are free to apply more stringent measures. However, those measures must be "relevant, objective, non-discriminatory and proportional" to the risk that is being addressed.
Sky marshals
For the first time, in-flight security measures such as access to the cockpit, unruly passengers and in-flight security officers ('sky marshals') are addressed at European level.
The new regulation doesn't oblige Member States to deploy in-flight security officers. Each Member State retains the competence to do or not to do so.
Parliament and Council agreed that those Member States that decide to deploy sky marshals must ensure that they are "specially selected and trained". Strict rules concerning sky marshals were a crucial point for Parliament at the first and second readings.
As regards the carriage of weapons, those must not be carried on board an aircraft (with the exception of those carried in the hold), unless the required security conditions in accordance with national laws have been fulfilled and authorisation has been given by the States involved.
Financing security measures
Each Member State determines the shares of the cost of security measures to be borne respectively by the state, the airport entities, air carriers, other responsible agencies or users. Additionally, the Commission will, no later than 31 December 2008, present a report which will consider what steps need to be taken in order to ensure that security charges are used exclusively to meet security costs, and to "improve the transparency of such charges". If appropriate, this report will be accompanied by a legislative proposal.
According to Mr Costa, modern-day transport security activities are an answer both to a “private (passenger) fear” and to a “public concern”. It is virtually impossible not to burden the passenger. But, at the same time, Mr Costa underlined, it would have been unfair to keep governments away from any financial responsibility in the matter and to burden all citizens without any distinction between users and not users.
One-stop security checks
Passengers and/or their baggage arriving on flights from third countries that have aviation security standards equivalent to the EU law need not be re-screened. Therefore, agreements between the EU and third countries, which recognise that the security standards applied in the third country are equivalent to the EU standards, should be encouraged.
Entry into force
The regulation enters into force on the twentieth day after publication in the Official Journal and will be applied not later than 24 months after this date. Adopted text (11.03.08) on common rules in the field of civil aviation security
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0080 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Transport
Congestion charges and road-pricing supported by the European Parliament
2008-03-17 - 10:43
Parliament adopted an own-initiative report by 539 votes in favour, 78 against and 25 abstentions on sustainable European transport policy, which says that the problem of urban congestion, which causes 40% of CO2 emissions and 70% of other pollutant emissions from vehicles, needs to be tackled more ambitiously, by applying a Europe-wide cooperation and coordination strategy. MEPs say better exploitation of existing infrastructure, especially by means of demand management measures such as congestion charges and road pricing is needed.
The European Parliament estimates that urban traffic generates 40% of CO2 emissions and 70% of other pollutant emissions from vehicles and whereas road congestion, concentrated mainly in the big cities, entails a cost to the EU equivalent to about 1% of GDP.
Working from home, carpooling and car-sharing suggested
Parliament is of the opinion that an effective urban mobility policy should take into account the transport of persons as well as of freight and must therefore be based on as fully integrated an approach as possible, bringing together the solutions best suited to each individual problem.
The House firmly believes that urban areas have economically sound potential to offer for further modal shift policies in favour of public transport, walking, and cycling and for a new approach to urban logistics.
MEPs consider it essential in this connection to focus on technological innovation (wider use of Intelligent Transport Systems (ITS's)), better exploitation of existing infrastructure, especially by means of demand management measures (congestion charges and road pricing), and innovative solutions for the optimum integration of urban freight flows; and, lastly, new ways to optimise the use of private cars such as car-sharing, carpooling and arrangements for working at home.
To achieve the aim of making European transport sustainable in energy and environmental terms, MEPs consider it necessary to combine different policies with the involvement of more and more stakeholders representing the transport sector, government and citizens. This combination of measures should encompass the following in particular:
(a) technological developments (measures to increase energy efficiency; new standards/regulations for engines and fuels, use of new technologies and alternative fuels);
(b) market-based instruments (charges/fares based on environmental impact or congestion, tax incentives, Emissions Trading Scheme (ETS) allowing for the specific features of the different modes of transport); and
(c) flanking measures to enable means of transport and infrastructure to be used as efficiently as possible.
The report maintains that the EU and the Member States need to focus their efforts on the key elements of the system, namely congested large cities and urban areas, the main European intercity corridors and environmentally sensitive areas.
The Council and the Member States are called upon to step up their investment in infrastructure and ITSs, in particular with a view to:
(a) completing the trans-European network priority projects as soon as possible;
(b) tackling congestion in urban areas and along corridors in sensitive areas; and
(c) improving intermodal transport.
MEPs urge the Commission to submit by June 2008 at the latest, a comprehensible, transparent, generally applicable model for assessing the external costs of all modes of transport, on which to base future calculation of the charges to be paid for the use of infrastructure.
Rail transport: emphasising that this is the mode of transport which consumes the least energy and produces the lowest level of CO2 emissions, MEPs call on the Commission, the Member States, and the rail industry to:
(a) complete a single European railway area or rail market as soon as possible;
(b) with that end in view, eliminate the technical obstacles and move towards a single European Rail Traffic Management System (ERTMS) and interoperable solutions; and
(c) improve freight and passenger transport services and the quality of service.
Civil aviation: although airlines have cut their fuel consumption per passenger-kilometre in the last ten years, the overall environmental impact of civil aviation has risen on account of the substantial expansion in traffic. Therefore, MEPs call for:
(a) air transport to be included in the ETS;
(b) emissions-based differential take-off and landing charges at airports;
(c) the establishment of the'Clean Sky a Joint Technology Initiative' that aims at reducing CO2 and NOx emissions and noise pollution;
(d) the creation of a real Single European Sky;
(e) practical steps to relieve airport congestion; and
(f) the improvement of access to airports by rail.
Shipping: given the fact that emissions from shipping are continuing to increase, the report recommends that:
(a) CO2, SO2, nitrogen oxide, and other emissions from ships be reduced;
(b) the use of renewable energy sources such as solar and wind power be encouraged;
(c) vessels that come to anchor be fuelled from land-based sources;
(d) the use of emission allowance trading to contain emissions be treated as a possibility deserving careful consideration;
(e) an integrated European rivers policy be agreed.
Finally, MEPs stress that the transport sector must also meet the EU goals of reducing oil consumption and greenhouse gas emissions by at least 20% over 1990 levels by 2020. Text adopted (11.03.08) on sustainable European transport policy
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0087 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Budget
MEPs approve €162.4 million for the UK in EU Solidarity Fund following floods last summer
2008-03-17 - 10:43
The European Parliament adopted reports from the Budgets Committee on the mobilisation of the EU Solidarity Fund for an amount of €162.4 million in commitment and payment appropriations, relating to the major storms in the United Kingdom in June and July 2007. The grant will go towards reimbursing part of the cost of emergency measures such as rescue services, cleaning up after flood damage, and restoring basic infrastructure. Unusually heavy rainfall in June and July 2007 caused disastrous floods in several UK regions, resulting in severe damage to infrastructure, businesses and private households. Direct damage is estimated to amount to over €4.6 billion, the third highest total caused by a natural disaster since the EU Solidarity Fund was launched in 2002. This is the first application from the UK for financial assistance after a major natural disaster.
The report approving the funding from the EU Solidarity Fund was adopted by 613 votes in favour, 11 against and 17 abstentions.
The UK application indicates the regions that were affected by the floods. These are: East Midlands, West Midlands, Yorkshire/Humber, South West England, Wales, Northern Ireland. Projects from all of these regions would be eligible for a share of the funding.
Speaking in the debate in Strasbourg on Monday 10 March 2008: Richard ASHWORTH (South East, Conservative, EPP-ED, UK) said: "Much of this flooding happened in my region, and I can testify to the appalling damage and hardship which it brought on many residents of my area . I am aware that my friend and colleague Reimer Böge said that, of course, in the grand order of things it is not a great deal of money. Perhaps it is not, but as a gesture of solidarity, please believe me that it is well and truly appreciated, and on behalf of the people of that region."
Linda McAVAN (Yorkshire and the Humber, Labour, PES, UK) said: "It is a small grant towards covering the huge costs of the damage done by the floods in the UK, but we are appreciative to our colleagues in the Committee on Budgets, who voted unanimously, and also to the Commission. I understand it was the quickest payment ever made: within seven months. Therefore, although many people have been suffering for a long time, it is progress compared with previous funds. We also understand that it is one of the largest payments ever made, and we are appreciative of that."
Diana WALLIS (Yorkshire and the Humber, Liberal Democrat, ALDE, UK) said: "A sum of EUR 162 million: it seems to be uncontentious, but it is hugely important on several levels. As an MEP, I represent the area of Yorkshire and the Humber, hit, as Ms McAvan said, by floods last summer – cities, villages across our region devastated. Many individuals, even in the village down the road from me, are still out of their homes. Whilst we know that this payment may not change their situation overnight, it will go indirectly towards helping by relieving pressure on our Government’s own budget. The British people, my constituents, will now understand that European solidarity has a tangible and practical meaning. And that will apply, I think, to all of us in this House. As climate change does bite, we may all be in the situation of representing those who are victims of such natural disasters and may have, therefore, to lay claim to European solidarity."
John WHITTAKER (North West, UKIP, IND/DEM) said: "I am pleased to know that Britain should receive money to help us with the cost of last year’s floods. We are all very happy that the EU has generously come to the aid of a Member State in difficulty. But it is not quite like that: first, the grant is only 3.5% of the cost of the damage – a gesture, as Mr Ashworth says – and, secondly, it is nine months after the event – and that is fast, they say! It would have been more helpful if we had known it would be forthcoming, and then reconstruction could have been planned accordingly. If there is one thing that gets up the nose of the British – when we realise that we are getting back a little of the cash we have paid into the European Union – is that we are obliged to beg for it and then advertise the EU’s generosity. Please, can we not rather keep our own money and then decide how to spend it ourselves? That way, it could be paid out more quickly."
The amount of damage and the aid proposed by the Commission is summarised as follows:
DIRECT DAMAGE
AID PROPOSED
€
€
UK , Floods June/July 2007
4 612 000 000
162,387,985
Total
4 612 000 000
162,387,985
Text adopted (11.03.08) on Mobilisation of the EU's Solidarity Fund
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0082 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Taxation
Minimum taxes for diesel should rise to equal petrol tax minimums
2008-03-17 - 10:43
The current EU-wide minimum rate of tax on diesel should be increased to match the current minimum rate for unleaded petrol, but no further, say MEPs. They also want to set a limit on further petrol and diesel tax increases in the Member States which already have the highest taxes. The European Commission says the wide variation in rates of diesel (officially known as gas oil) taxes creates distortions in the road haulage market – and also increases environmental damage by encouraging “fuel tourism” by hauliers (i.e. making special journeys or using longer routes in order to fill up in a country with low taxes). Also, since diesel and petrol have similar impacts, especially from the point of view of CO2 emissions, there is no environmental reason for the two minimum rates to differ. The Commission is therefore proposing to raise the minimum rate on diesel up to the minimum rate on petrol.
Slower pace of increase
Adopting by 447 votes in favour to 64 against with 39 abstentions a report based on a draft by Olle Schmidt (ALDE, SE), MEPs agreed with this in principle, but said the minimum taxes on diesel should rise more slowly, from the current level of €302/1000 litres to the current petrol level of €359/1000 litres by 2015 rather than 2012. Latvia, Lithuania, Poland, Bulgaria and Romania should have until 2016 to reach the target. On the other hand, contrary to the Commission proposal, MEPs said Spain, Austria, Belgium, Luxembourg, Portugal and Greece did not need a transitional period.
No to further rises
Furthermore, the committee opposes the Commission’s plan to increase both minimum rates to €380/1000 litres in 2014. In addition, still with a view to avoiding divergence between tax rates getting worse, MEPs say those countries with current tax rates over €400/1000 litres on diesel and €500/1000 litres on unleaded petrol should not increase their taxes further until 2015.
As usual with taxation matters, Parliament’s role is consultative. Once the plenary has voted, the final decision is for the Council, which can act only if it can reach unanimity.
Impact on UK and Ireland
In the UK, current tax levels are well above the minimum EU levels, and this would still be true after the increases proposed by the Commission, so these changes would have little practical impact. If the Council were to adopt MEPs’ proposal of a moratorium on further rises, this would affect the UK.
The increases proposed by MEPs would make little difference in Ireland for the same reason, but an increase would be needed in the tax on diesel to if this was to reach the Commission’s goal of €380/1000 litres (the current rate is €368/1000 litres). Text adopted by the EP on taxation of unleaded petrol and gas oil
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0099 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Research and innovation
EP gives green light for European Institute of Innovation and Technology
2008-03-17 - 10:43
The European Institute of Innovation and Technology (EIIT) will be able to start operating this summer, after the Council's common position on its establishment was officially approved by the European Parliament. The common position was reached after negotiations with the Parliaments' rapporteur Reino Paasilinna (PES, FI), who was satisfied with the compromise, which took on board most of the points raised by Parliament in first reading. The European Parliament voted by a large majority against an amendment to reject the Council Common Position from the Greens/EFA group.
"The agreement with Council represents a success for Parliament", said Mr Paasilinna, adding that "the compromise stresses the role of innovation. Innovation is where we really have to catch up: too often, our brilliant students and researchers do not reap the rewards of their work simply because there is no one to help them turn research results into commercial products."
"Knowledge and Innovation Communities" of universities, research organisations and businesses
The EIT will have a two-tier structure, in which a Governing Board selects higher education institutions, research organisations, companies and other stakeholders to form autonomous partnerships called "Knowledge and Innovation Communities" (KICs). Every KIC should consist of at least three partner organisations, situated in at least two different Member States and including at least one higher education institution and one private company. Universities which take part in a KIC are encouraged to add an EIT label to the degrees and diplomas they awarded.
First KICs on climate change, renewable energy and next-generation ICTs
Within eighteen months after the EIT is established, a first set of two or three KICs will be selected "in areas that help the European Union to face current and future challenges", such as climate change, renewable energy and the next generation of information and communication technologies.
Further KICs will then be selected after the adoption of the first "Strategic Innovation Agenda" (SIA), which is the "policy document outlining the priority fields of the EIT for future initiatives". The EIT must draw up an SIA by mid-2011 at the latest and every seven years thereafter. Parliament and the Council shall then adopt this agenda, acting on a proposal from the Commission.
Community to contribute €308.7 million
The Commission estimates that the institute will need an overall budget of €2.4 billion for the first six years, to be funded from a combination of private and public sources. On 18 December 2007 the EP and the Council agreed to revise the Multi-Annual Financial Framework 2007-2013 in order to ensure funding for Galileo and the EIT and to provide €308.7 million from the Community budget for the EIT.
Next steps
The Commission set up a four-strong identification committee early in February which is to nominate the 18 experts for the EIT's first Governing Board within about four months.
The European Council will then take a decision on where the EIT's governing body will be located. During the debate in Parliament some MEPs proposed Strasbourg, the Polish city of Wroclaw, the Hungarian capital Budapest or the Austrian capital Vienna as possible seats for the EIT's governing board. Text adopted (11.03.08) - European Institute of Innovation and Technology
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0081 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Fisheries
Fisheries agreement EC - Guinea-Bissau
2008-03-17 - 10:43
The European Parliament adopted by 556 votes in favour to 62 against and 15 abstentions a report by Luís CAPOULAS SANTOS (PES, PT) on the conclusion of a fisheries agreement between the European Community and Guinea-Bissau. The Protocol to the agreement, which will apply until 15 June 2011, grants fishing possibilities for 23 tuna seiners and surface longliners from Spain, France and Portugal and for 14 pole-and-line vessels from Spain and France, subject to a total of 37 licences. This fisheries agreement with Guinea-Bissau repeals and replaces the agreement which entered into force in 1980 and was one of the oldest agreements signed by the Community. The new Protocol covers the period from 16 June 2007 to 15 June 2011.
MEPs approved, under consultation, the proposal for a regulation on the conclusion of the agreement with some amendments, which are intended to highlight the importance of enhancing Parliament’s role and the information supplied to it.
The fishing opportunities set out in the Protocol to the agreement are allocated among the Member States as follows:
(a) shrimp fishing: Spain - 1421 GRT; Italy - 1776 GRT; Greece - 137 GRT; Portugal - 1066 GRT
(b) fin-fish/cephalopods: Spain - 3143 GRT; Italy - 786 GRT; Greece - 471 GRT
(c) tuna seiners and surface longliners:
Spain - 10 vessels; France - 9 vessels; Portugal - 4 vessels.
(d) pole-and-line vessels:
Spain - 10 vessels
France - 4 vessels.
The financial contribution is fixed at €7 million per year. 35% of this financial contribution (€2,450 million) will be allocated each year to the support and implementation of initiatives taken in the context of the sectoral fisheries policy drawn up by the Government of Guinea-Bissau. An additional specific contribution of €500,000 per year will also be targeted at improving the health and hygiene conditions of fishery products. However, this contribution could also be used to support control and surveillance measures. The Protocol will also contain a financial mechanism, with a maximum allocation of €1 million per year, aiming to improve the use of fishing opportunities by ship owners, and support for setting up joint ventures. Text adopted (11.03.08) - EC-Guinea-Bissau Fisheries Partnership Agreement
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0085 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Fisheries
Fisheries Partnership Agreement EC - Côte d’Ivoire
2008-03-17 - 10:43
The EP adopted a report by 566 votes in favour to 63 against and 18 abstentions on the conclusion of a Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the European Community and Côte d’Ivoire. As regards fishing opportunities, the agreement lays down that authorisation to fish will be granted to 25 freezer tuna seiners (10 vessels from France and 15 from Spain) and 15 surface longliners (10 vessels from Spain and 5 vessels from Portugal), subject to a total of 40 licences. The rapporteur, Daniel VARELA SUANZES-CARPEGNA (EPP-ED, ES), stresses in the amendments that Parliament needs to be supplied with proper information so that it can evaluate the agreement.
The agreement is to apply for a period of six years from 1 July 2007 to 30 June 2013. It repeals and replaces the fisheries agreement between the European Economic Community and Côte d’Ivoire which entered into force on 19 December 1990.
The fishing opportunities negotiated by the Community are restricted to highly migratory species: tuna, mainly albacore, skipjack and bigeye, and to a lesser extent swordfish.
At the request of the Community, exploratory fishing trips may be carried out under the agreement. If they are conclusive and the sustainable management of Côte d’Ivoire’s fishery resources is not jeopardised, the two parties may decide by common agreement to award new fishing opportunities to Community vessels.
The financial contribution is fixed at €595,000 per year, with payment being due on 30 March 2008 at the latest for the first year and on 1 July for the following years. This contribution will be allocated in full to the support and implementation of initiatives taken in the context of the sectoral fisheries policy drawn up by the Government of Côte d’Ivoire. The annual reference tonnage is 7,000 tonnes.
The number of ACP nationals signed on by tuna seiners and surface longliners has been set at 20% of the seamen signed on during the corresponding fishing season. Text adopted (11.03.08) - EC-Côte d'Ivoire Fisheries Partnership Agreement
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0086 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Women's rights/Equal opportunities
Women in rural areas
2008-03-17 - 10:43
Parliament adopted an own-initiative report on the situation of women in rural areas of the EU, Christa KLAß (EPP-ED, DE) for the Women's Rights committee which calls on the Member States to develop strategies aimed at curbing the out-migration of women in rural areas, especially those who are highly educated. The European Parliament is convinced that mainstreaming gender into the rural sector is a key strategy not only for the promotion of equality between women and men but also for economic growth and sustainable rural development;
The report calls on the Commission to improve statistical data and information as regards this phenomenon and to analyse the patterns of, main reasons for and consequences of the out-migration from rural areas in the EU . The report also calls on the Member States to develop strategies aimed at curbing the out-migration of women in rural areas, especially those who are highly educated.
MEPs call on the Member States, in collaboration with local government and business, to create incentives for the participation of women in the labour force. These incentives could particularly focus on getting rid of any discrimination against women in the labour market, with the aim of addressing the problem of poverty and social exclusion in rural areas. The Committee notes that poverty is widespread in rural communities, especially in the new Member States.
Sexual violence
The report draws attention to the strong taboos surrounding sexual and/or domestic violence against women and girls in rural areas, and calls on the Member States to take appropriate measures to ensure better protection and support of victims and those at risk of becoming victims of such violence.
The report refers to the fact that women are under-represented in formal rural or regional leadership positions, despite the fact that they play an important role in the ‘informal’ community, where women often play an essential role in the community’s social life by influencing the emergence of social capital through their involvement in informal local networks (e.g. in the framework of voluntary community work or various thematic associations).
Recognition of work
MEPs also call on the Member States to develop the legal construct of shared ownership, in order to ensure that women’s rights in the agricultural sector are fully recognised, appropriate protection in the field of social security and recognition of their work.
Finally, the House calls on the relevant national, regional and local authorities to encourage the participation of women in local action groups and the development of local partnerships under the Leader axis as well as to ensure gender-balanced participation on their management boards. Text adopted by the EP on the situation of women in rural areas of the EU
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0094 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Women's rights/Equal opportunities
Taking account of the special needs of women in prisons
2008-03-17 - 10:43
The European Parliament adopted an own-initiative report on the situation of women in prison, a minority of the prison population but a fast-growing one. The report focuses on prison conditions, the preservation of family ties and reintegration into society and the workplace. Women account for a small percentage of the prison population in the European Union - around 5% - with Spain and Portugal having the largest numbers at 8% and 10% respectively, but most European countries have experienced a significant increase. The female prison population grew by 410% in Cyprus between 1994 and 2003 and by 173% in England and Wales from 1992 to 2002.
Due to the lack of resources for prisons, "women in prison are a minority whose special needs are not sufficiently taken into account in EU countries", according to Ms Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou (PPE-DE, EL) who drafted the report.
As unskilled female workers, those women also often suffer poor labour-market integration. For instance, in the UK, only 3% of women in prison were in work prior to coming to prison and over half said they were living on state benefits.
The report was adopted by 492 votes in favour, 24 votes against and 37 abstentions.
Prison conditions
Women's needs differ from those of men, notably in health and maternity care. MEPs call on the Commission and Council to adopt a framework decision on minimum standards for prisoners' rights based on Article 6 of the EU Treaty, to reflect the special needs of women.
As a high proportion of female prisoners have been victims of violence, sexual abuse or ill treatment, Member States are urged to provide psychological support, especially to women prisoners who have suffered such violence, to mothers with family responsibilities and to minors.
On the maternity front, MEPs say pregnant women should have access to prenatal and postnatal care.
The European Parliament also wants special arrangements for foreign prisoners, who it says should be able to contact their consulates and have access to prison resources and programmes. The House also stresses the need to end the detention of girls aged 18 and under in adult prisons.
Preserving social and family ties
If imprisoning women is likely to seriously disrupt family life (e.g. in cases of lone parent families or responsibility for dependants) the report suggests greater use of non-custodial punishments if the sentence is minor and the risk to public safety is low.
MEPs also call for judicial systems to guarantee the rights of children and for Member States and penal institutions to set up separate mother-and-child units with qualified staff to help prisoners who are mothers to meet their educational and care responsibilities.
Family planning
The House calls on each Member State to facilitate access for women prisoners to prevention campaigns targeting the general public, dealing with issues such as the early detection of breast cancer and cervical cancer, and to ensure that they have the same access to national programmes concerning family planning.
MEPs call on Member States to respect fully the development of sexual orientation and the different forms of family life, provided they are in conformity with the law.
Social reintegration
To encourage their reintegration into society, the report stresses the need for women prisoners to have access, without encountering discrimination, to jobs and voluntary work as well as to varied vocational and civic training courses adapted to job market requirements.
MEPs also want every detention centre to have monitoring and individual support programmes available to all prisoners on a voluntary basis, to devise and implement personal reintegration plans.
Lastly, the report calls on Member States to invest more in resources for prisons to develop literacy, life-long learning and vocational training programmes, partly by using financing instruments such as the European Social Fund and PROGRESS. Text adopted by the EP on the particular situation of women in prison and the impact of the imprisonment of parents on social and family life
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0102 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Agriculture
CAP health check: MEPs' first response
2008-03-17 - 10:43
Parliament adopted a report on the Commission's proposals for further reform of the CAP, known as the "CAP health check". The European Parliament recommends broad approval of the proposals, although it has reservations about certain points, including the amount of funds to be switched from the "first pillar" of the CAP (market support) to the "second pillar" (rural development) as well as the capping of direct aid. At this stage, the own-initiative report t constitutes Parliament's initial response to the Commission's general ideas on further CAP reform. At the next stage, the Commission will submit draft legislation, on which Parliament will have to be consulted.
Major shift in European agricultural policy in recent decades
Since 1992 the CAP has undergone three major overhauls, all designed to:
improve the efficiency and transparency of the CAP;
make farming more market-oriented;
better integrate new features – especially environmental and animal protection – into agriculture policy;
boost rural areas.
The earlier system of price support, which proved unable to solve the problem of farmers’ low incomes and also led to large surpluses that could only be disposed of on world markets with the aid of further subsidies, has been gradually replaced by a system of direct payments. The new reform plans (or "health check") must be seen against this background.
The main Commission proposals in the "health check" are:
further decoupling of aid from production,
a faster move to an area-based flat rate for direct payments,
the abolition of smaller, production-based measures or their integration into the system of decoupled direct payments,
further modulation (the shifting of funds from the first to the second pillars),
the capping of direct aid and an increase in minimum thresholds for payments, and
a commitment to end the milk quota and pave the way for a "soft landing".
Parliament's main demands
In the own-initiative report drafted by Lutz Goepel (EPP-ED, DE) and approved, as amended, by 510 votes to 88 with 80 abstentions, the European Parliament argues that the "health check" should enable the last round of reforms to be consolidated without reducing further the funding available under the "first pillar" nor applying discriminatory capping to direct aid. Account must also be taken of the special needs of regions in difficulty and of sensitive sectors such as stockfarming, while further simplifying the rules for farmers.
Direct aid, decoupling
The House rs giving Member States more flexibility to separate direct payments more from historical reference values at national level. MEPs want a study of the potential impact of an area-based premium, notably with regard to farms with high livestock densities.
The European Parliament approves the principle of faster decoupling of production aid (which has been broadly successful in making European farming more market-oriented). However, it believes special animal premiums should not be altered for the time being, given the difficulties in the stockfarming sector following the exceptional rise in feed prices. It calls on the Commission to devise a global strategy to safeguard stockfarming in the EU over the long term.
MEPs also stress that direct payments will still be needed after 2013, not only in the event of market failures but also to pay for the provision of public benefits by farmers and for Europe's high environmental, food safety and animal welfare standards.
Set-aside and cross-compliance
The House argues that the set-aside obligation, as well as direct payments without cross-compliance, should be abolished. However, it rejects the idea of broadening the scope of cross-compliance until substantial progress is made towards simplifying and harmonising monitoring rules. The environmental goals of set-aside could be achieved via rural development measures.
Market intervention, risk management
MEPs favour reducing intervention for market crops and, more broadly, replacing the current system by a safety net for crises, which are likely to occur more often as a result of global warming. They also believe that private sector or mixed insurance schemes must be developed urgently, with public financial support, while not affecting the level-playing-field between different Member States. The Commission is urged to consider backing a Community-wide reinsurance system for climate-related or environmental disasters.
No capping of payments to large farms
The House rejects, in its present form, the Commission proposal for capping direct aid for large farms, saying there is no clear link between the size and wealth of a farm. It stresses that the proposal does not factor in the workforce needed for larger farms and that it would put such farms at an unfair disadvantage.
Call for modulation to be made "progressive" as well as compulsory for all
The House also opposes further "modulation" of funding from the first to the second pillar, as this would be equivalent to a reduction of 8% in direct payments to farmers up to 2013. Instead, MEPs argue for "progressive modulation", based on an impact assessment of the consequences for farms. The funds thus generated would be distributed according to the prevailing rules on modulation and would remain in the regions or States in which they accrued. This progressive modulation, applicable over the period 2009-2013, would consist of a reduction of 1% of the total of direct aid from €10,000 to €100,000, 2% for €100,000 to €200,000, 3% for €200,000 to €300,000 and 4% for payments over €300,000.
The House would also prefer modulation to be compulsory for all Member States rather than voluntary for some (namely the UK and Portugal) as at present.
No re-nationalisation of the CAP
Parliament say modulation should not lead to re-nationalisation of the CAP and the level-playing-field between Member States should be respected as much as possible.
Article 69 revised, a key to new types of support ?
The European Parliament believes that the current "Article 69" mechanism, which enables Member States to keep and reallocate up to 10% of direct aid to their farmers under the first pillar, should be reviewed so that funds are devoted as a priority to the preservation of livestock farming in mountain areas, those with water shortages, wetlands or disadvantaged areas, the restructuring of key agricultural sectors (e.g. the dairy and sheep sectors), area‑based environmental measures (e.g. organic farming) and risk management.
Preparing for the end of the dairy quota system
Aware that the current system of milk quotas is unlikely to be continued after 2015 in its present form, the European Parliament asks the Commission to put forward a convincing plan for the dairy sector for the period after 2015. MEPs argue for a 2% increase in dairy quotas in the milk year 2008/2009 on a voluntary basis for each Member State (see our separate article on milk quotas).
European Quality Mark
MEPs call on the Commission to introduce a 'European mark' to identify the quality of EU agricultural and food production on the European market as well as international markets, and identifying the strict standards, in relation to the environment, animal welfare and food safety under which production takes place.
Concern over supply
Finally, the House considers the scrapping of all form of regulation within the CMOs to be politically undesirable since, as the current situation shows, European and global reserves stand at dramatically low levels, which is having negative repercussions on consumer purchasing power and farmers’ incomes while at the same time encouraging speculation. The House emphasises that, besides this, instruments are needed to combat a potential economic downturn and the risks posed by health incidents and increasingly frequent natural disasters arising from the unsettled climate. Text adopted on the CAP 'Health Check'
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0093 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Agriculture
Dairy quotas: MEPs favour 2% voluntary increase
2008-03-17 - 10:43
The European Parliament believes the dairy quotas of the Member States should be increased on a voluntary basis by 2% from 1 April 2008, with a mechanism for "balancing out" between states that exceed their quotas and those that under-use them, to avoid penalising any state that has a surplus. This should provide a solution to growing demand on world markets, while taking account of differing situations among EU producers. To meet rising demand on European and world markets, the Commission recently proposed increasing dairy production quotas by 2% in all Member States from 1 April 2008, which would represent a potential of 2.84 million additional tonnes for the year 2008/2009 over the current total of 145.7 million tonnes.
During the debate ahead of the vote, a majority of MEPs backed the principle of an increase to enable the dairy sector to take advantage of new opportunities on world markets, notably those arising from Asia's economic growth. Others, including rapporteur Elisabeth Jeggle (EPP-ED, DE), feared that a uniform increase of 2% would result in lower prices paid to producers who are already in difficulty, in a context where quotas are under-used in many regions. However, a consensus had been reached in the Agriculture Committee in February.
Parliament's compromise
The compromise endorsed in today's plenary session, in Mrs Jeggle's consultation report adopted by 531 votes in favour 104 against and 22 abstentions, consists of allowing Member States to increase their production quotas by 2% on 1 April if they so wish. However, for the year 2008/2009, levies on surpluses would only have to be paid if there were still a surplus at European level after a process of balancing out between states that had exceeded their quotas and those that had under-used them.
"Our responsibility goes beyond the mere market liberalisation", stressed Mrs Jeggle during the debate.
A broader discussion with a view to a "soft landing" for the quota system - which expires in 2015 - is under way in the debate on the "CAP health check" (see our press release on this topic).
Member States' quotas after 2% increase (figures taken from Commission proposal)
Member State
Quantities ( kilos )
Member State
Quantities ( kilos )
Belgium
3 427 288 740
Luxembourg
278 545 680
Bulgaria
998 580 000
Hungary
2 029 861 200
Czech Republic
2 792 689 620
Malta
49 671 960
Denmark
4 612 619 520
Netherlands
11 465 630 280
Germany
28 847 420 391
Austria
2 847 478 469
Estonia
659 295 360
Poland
9 567 745 860
Ireland
5 503 679 280
Portugal
1 987 521 000
Greece
836 923 260
Romania
3 118 140 000
Spain
6 239 289 000
Slovenia
588 170 760
France
25 091 321 700
Slovakia
1 061 603 760
Italy
10 740 661 200
Finland
2 491 930 710
Cyprus
148 104 000
Sweden
3 419 595 900
Latvia
743 220 960
United Kingdom
15 125 168 940
Lithuania
1 738 935 780
Text adopted by the EP: Common organisation of agricultural markets and specific provisions for certain agricultural products as regards the national quotas for milk *
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0092 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Agriculture
Biogas - a need for a review of EU legislation say MEPs
2008-03-17 - 10:43
Parliament adopted an own-initiative report by 610 votes in favour to 23 against and 13 abstentions on sustainable agriculture and biogas: a need for a review of EU legislation. The report stresses that, in the long term, renewable energy sources such as biogas and biofuels, together with solar power and wind energy, subject to further intensified research efforts, can bring about a higher degree of independence from fossil-fuel energy sources. The House recognises that biogas is a vital energy resource that contributes to sustainable economic, agricultural and rural development and environmental protection.
MEPs promote the comprehensive inclusion of the promotion of biogas in the framework of the proposed Renewable Energy Directive with special emphasis on the following elements:
a) Annual statistics and reports on agricultural biogas production in order to be able to follow up on the targets,
b) Measures for the construction and promotion of biogas-installations based on a national or regional impact assessment, promoting those installations that, nationally and/or regionally, are most beneficial to the environment and which are economically sustainable; measures for the dissemination and promotion of results gained from prior experiences or demonstration projects need to be included in all plans; if regional and rural development regulations do not allow funding of such measures, they must be amended,
c) EU Member States should engage in national and regional planning in order to limit legal and administrative impediments, for instance natural gas or other fossil fuels should not be preferred in areas in which it is feasible to sell heat from biogas to local heating providers.
Environmental guarantees
The European Parliament stresses that animal manure, municipal sewage and agro-industrial waste can contain substances (bacteria, viruses, parasites, heavy metals, harmful organic substances) that can potentially be a threat to public health or the environment.
Parliament asks the Commission to present proposals for legislation on the use of residues from biogas installations; asks the Commission to ensure that only organic material that allows residues to be used without endangering the environment may be used in biogas installations.
Banning growth enhancers
MEPs ask the Commission to consider banning growth enhancers in animal feed containing heavy metals if this should prove to be a Europe-wide problem for subsequent use of biogas residues in fields. Text adopted by the EP on Sustainable agriculture and biogas: review of EU legislation
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0095 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Human rights
President Pöttering calls for immediate release of hostages held in Columbia including Ingrid Betancourt
2008-03-17 - 10:43
Six years after the abduction of Ingrid Betancourt, more than 700 hostages are still being held by guerrilla organisations in Columbia, President of the European Parliament Hans-Gert PÖTTERING called for the immediate release of Ingrid Betancourt and her fellow hostages for humanitarian reasons. Speaking on behalf of the European Parliament, President Pöttering expressed concern about the worrying state of health of many of the hostages and called for an international medical mission to be sent to Columbia immediately to address their medical needs.
The hostages, including French-Colombian Ingrid Betancourt, have been held captive by the left-wing Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC) guerrillas since February 2002.
In his speech President Pöttering also welcomed the endeavours being made by the Columbian President Alvaro URIBE to seek dialogue to try to find an agreement to release the hostages.
Marking the anniversary of the capture of the hostages, President Pöttering reiterated the European Parliament's solidarity with their families and highlighted that the eyes and thoughts of the international community and European Parliament are turned to the "human tragedy" of their situation.
The House responded with sustained applause.
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Human rights
Human rights: Armenia, Russia, Afghan journalist and Iranian homosexual
2008-03-17 - 10:43
In four human rights resolutions adopted at the end of this week's Strasbourg session, MEPs deplored the violence used by the authorities against opposition demonstrators following presidential elections in both Armenia and Russia, and demanded reprieves for a journalist condemned to death in Afghanistan and for a gay Iranian who could be in grave danger if forced to return to his home country. Violence following the elections in Armenia
In the wake of the presidential elections in Armenia on 19 February, a police crackdown against opposition supporters who were peacefully contesting the results left eight dead and dozens injured. A state of emergency was declared on 1 March and media freedom has been restricted. Parliament's resolution, adopted by 60 votes to 1 with 2 abstentions, deplores the loss of life, urges all parties to act responsibly and calls on the authorities to investigate the violence and take other measures.
The International Election Observation Mission stated that the elections were "administered mostly in line with OSCE and Council of Europe commitments and standards" but also identified a number of concerns, in particular concerning the media’s commitment to providing impartial information.
In the resolution, Parliament "expresses its concern at recent developments in Armenia" and "calls on all parties to show openness and restraint, to tone down statements and to engage in a constructive and fruitful dialogue aimed at supporting and consolidating the country’s democratic institutions".
Call for inquiry, with punishment for perpetrators of violence
It also calls "for a prompt, thorough, transparent, independent and impartial investigation of the events of 1 March" and "for all those responsible to be brought to justice and punished for misconduct and criminal acts of violence". The Council and Commission should offer EU assistance to help with the investigation.
The Armenian authorities are asked to lift the state of emergency, restore media freedom and take all measures necessary to ensure a return to normalcy. In addition, they are urged "to release citizens detained for exercising their right of peaceful assembly".
EU support for Armenia to improve democracy and rule of law
Parliament points out that the EU's Action Plan with Armenia under the European Neighbourhood Policy covers the strengthening of democratic structures and the rule of law. In this context, it urges the Commission "to focus its assistance to Armenia on the independence of the judiciary and the training of police and security forces" and calls on the Armenian authorities "to implement swiftly all the remaining recommendations made by the International Election Observation Mission".
MEPs urge the Armenian authorities "to cooperate fully with the international community on finding an agreed solution" and they express support for the EU Special Representative to the South Caucasus and the OSCE’s Special Envoy.
Turning to Armenia's conflict with neighbouring Azerbaijan over the status of Nagorno-Karabakh, the resolution "deplores the recent loss of life on the ‘line of control’ during fighting between Armenian and Azerbaijani forces" and "calls on all sides to refrain from further violence and to return to the negotiating table".
Lastly, MEPs reiterate "the clear EU commitment to building closer ties with Armenia and the South Caucasus countries" but emphasise that "closer cooperation with the European Union must be based on real and tangible progress and reforms and a full commitment to democracy and the rule of law".
Police clampdown on opposition protests in Russia
In a resolution on Russia, MEPs condemn the use of force by the police against demonstrators protesting after the presidential elections held on 2 March, which were won by Dmitry Medvedev, and urge the Russian authorities to observe democratic values and the rule of law.
According to the resolution, democracy has been weakened in Russia through measures such as government control of the media and new restrictions on the right to organise public demonstrations. Increased pressure was put on the media, opposition groups and non-governmental organisations in the run-up to the elections.
On 3 March 2008 ‘Other Russia’, a coalition of opposition parties, organised a ‘March of Dissent’ to protest against the elections. The authorities refused to authorise the protest but ‘Other Russia’ decided to go ahead with the march. Several protesters were arrested as riot police and militias wearing helmets and carrying riot shields crushed the rally in Turgenevskaya Square in central Moscow, and opposition leaders were detained.
Use of force against demonstrators condemned
In its resolution, the European Parliament "condemns the disproportionate use of force by police and riot police and militias against the demonstrators on 3 March 2008 in Moscow, and calls on the authorities to investigate the incidents and to bring those responsible to justice".
It also "calls for the immediate release of all those demonstrators who are still detained". In addition, it deplores the "illegal" treatment of opposition candidates" and "regrets the failure to use the recent election to strengthen democracy and the rule of law in Russia".
MEPs also regret that the Russian authorities regarded the intended monitoring mission of the OSCE/ODIR as an intrusion into internal affairs. The resolution voices "strong support for the important work of these missions" and "reminds Russia of its commitments and responsibilities as a member of the OSCE and of the Council of Europe, including the right of association and the right to peaceful demonstrations".
A test for President Medvedev's commitment to the rule of law?
Parliament does welcome the stated commitment by the newly elected President of Russia to guarantee the rule of law and democracy. In this context, it calls on him to review the treatment of imprisoned public figures (among them Mihail Khodorkovsky and Platon Lebedev), "whose imprisonment has been assessed by most observers as having been politically motivated".
It also urges the Council and Member States to make Russia's full compliance with judgments of the European Court of Human Rights a key priority at all levels of dialogue with Russia.
Lastly, the EP calls on the new Russian president and government to create together with the European Union "the necessary conditions for a rapid start of the negotiations on a new Partnership and Cooperation Agreement". But it again stresses that "the rule of law, democracy and human rights must be an important part of any future agreement".
Death sentence on Afghan journalist Perwiz Kambakhsh
Perwiz Kambakhsh, a journalist in Afghanistan, is under a death sentence for circulating an article on women's rights in Islam. The European Parliament, reaffirming its opposition to the death penalty in general, calls for his execution to be prevented and also for the Afghan government to improve its judicial system and comply with the Universal Declaration on Human Rights.
On 22 January 2008 a regional court in northern Afghanistan sentenced 23-year-old Mr Kambakhsh to death for circulating an article about women’s rights in Islam which he had downloaded from the internet. The judges ruled that the article constituted 'blasphemy' and sentenced Mr Kambakhsh to death.
Mr Kambakhsh was denied legal representation, sentenced without a proper hearing, allegedly beaten and threatened with execution until he signed a confession.
The resolution notes that journalists in Afghanistan, especially women, are increasingly faced with intimidation, death threats, abduction and violence, even though Afghanistan’s Constitution clearly defends the right to freedom of expression.
EP's total opposition to death penalty
Parliament "reaffirms its unconditional opposition to the death penalty". It notes that the death sentence against Perwiz Kambakhsh comes despite the UN General Assembly’s call for a worldwide moratorium on the death penalty and at a time when a total of 135 countries have abolished the death penalty.
The resolution condemns Mr Kambakhsh's arrest and calls for him to be released. It also calls on the Afghan authorities to prevent his execution and on President Karzai, if the court of appeal upholds the death sentence, to pardon him.
In addition, MEPs call on the President and Parliament of Afghanistan "to speed up the development of a functional penal and judicial system based on international standards" and they welcome the announcement by the EU External Relations Commissioner of immediate financial support to help Afghanistan strengthen the rule of law and reform its judiciary.
Lastly, the resolution calls on the Afghan Government "to fully respect the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights and to ensure that freedom of expression is fully guaranteed and upheld for all citizens in Afghanistan".
The plight of Mehdi Kazemi
MEPs demand that a solution be found to the situation of Mehdi Kazemi, a 19-year-old gay Iranian citizen, who faces the prospect of deportation from Europe back to Iran, where he could be tortured and even executed because of his sexual orientation.
Mehdi Kazemi requested asylum in the United Kingdom but had his application turned down. Fearing deportation, he fled to the Netherlands, where he also applied for asylum. The Dutch authorities, after examining his request, have decided to send him back to Britain because, under EU rules (the Dublin Regulation), asylum applications must be processed in the first EU country in which the applicant made an application. It is feared the UK will simply deport him to Iran.
A solution for Mehdi Kazemi …
The resolution, adopted by 46 votes to 2 with 12 abstentions, points out that the Iranian authorities "routinely detain, torture and execute persons, notably homosexuals" and that "Mehdi's partner has already been executed, while his father has threatened him with death".
It adds that "the EU and its Member States cannot apply European and national laws and procedures in a way which results in the expulsion of persons to a third country where they would risk persecution, torture and death, as this would amount to a violation of European and international human rights obligations". And they stress that the EU directive on qualifying criteria for refugee status (the Qualifications Directive) "recognises persecution for sexual orientation as a ground for granting asylum".
In this particular case, therefore, Parliament "appeals to the Member States involved to find a common solution to ensure that Mehdi Kazemi is granted asylum or protection on EU soil and not sent back to Iran".
…and for others in future
More broadly, MEPs argue that "more attention should be devoted to the proper application of EU asylum law in Member States as regards sexual orientation".
They invoke the European Convention on Human Rights, which prohibits the removal of persons to countries where there is a serious risk that they would face the death penalty, torture or other inhuman treatment, as well as the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights and the Geneva Convention.
Parliament also asks EU institutions and Member States to take action to prevent similar situations in the future, while acknowledging that the Commission has announced, for 2008, amendments to the Dublin Regulation and the Qualifications Directive which will address the issues raised in this resolution. Resolutions adopted by the EP on 13 March 2008
-//EP//TEXT TA 20080313 TOC NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Development and cooperation
EU development policy and the new Member States
2008-03-17 - 10:43
Parliament adopted an own-initiative report on the challenge of EU development cooperation policy for the new Member States, all of which must take part in this well-established policy, although each has its own priorities. The report, by Danute Budreikaite (ALDE, LT) and adopted with 378 votes in favour, 11 against and 16 abstentions, looks at how the new Member States implement their development policy. The House stresses that this policy is a part of the acquis communautaire (the existing body of Community law and policy) and recalls the new Member States' international commitments in this field. It also mentions that promoting democracy and the rule of law - a key priority for the new Member States - also helps reduce poverty in developing countries.
These states have undertaken to reach an official development assistance (ODA) target of 0.17 % of gross national income (GNI) by 2010 and 0.33% by 2015. However, many are not on course to meet the target and some may even see ODA fall in line with overall budget cuts due to the need to reduce government debt.
The eastern dimension of EU external relations is highlighted in the report, which argues that a new assembly of EU and neighbouring countries (similar to the ACP-EU, Euromed and Eurolat assemblies), building on historical experience, could boost the impact of the new Member States in EU policy in this area.
Lastly, the report acknowledges that the priorities of the new Member States are largely determined by historical ties and that most of their development cooperation budgets will target their immediate neighbours and the CIS countries. The priority countries for each of the new Member States are listed, whether they are immediate neighbours or belong to the group of African-Carribean or Pacific countries (ACP), although the report also highlights cases where the new Member States are targeting aid - or planning to target it - at ACP countries.
Text adopted - The challenge of EU Development Cooperation Policy for the new Member States
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0097 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Development and cooperation
Empowering women: the key to development
2008-03-17 - 10:43
Parliament backed an own-initiative report on gender equality and women's empowerment in development cooperation. The report calls for measures to promote women's rights in areas such as responsible governance, employment, education, health and violence against women, arguing that these rights are essential to economic and social development. The report, drafted by Feleknas Uca (GUE/NGL, DE), is a response to a Commission communication (see link below). According to Feleknas Uka, gender equality and equal access to resources for men and women are crucial to sustainable development. In Africa, for example, women make up 52% of the total population but perform 75% of agricultural work and produce and market 60-80% of the food. The report was adopted with 347 votes in favour, 136 against and 44 abstentions.
Disappointment with progress so far
The European Parliament says that, although in 1995 the Council declared the gender perspective to be a principle underpinning development policy, not enough has been done in practice. It endorses the Commission’s view that funding made available for the integration of gender equality issues into development cooperation is insufficient and urges the Commission and Member States to take action, with the emphasis on amending laws, institutions and existing patriarchal patterns, increasing budgetary resources and improving social and economic conditions for women.
European envoy for Women's Rights
Parliament calls on the Council to appoint a European Envoy for Women's Rights who would strengthen the EU`s commitment to the empowerment of women in foreign and development policy, and who would promote the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals by focusing on equality between men and women worldwide, on reducing maternal mortality and on fighting poverty.
Women's role in post-war societies, violence against women
Turning to specific problems, the report calls for better understanding of the role of women in post-war societies and of their contributions to post-war reconstruction. Regarding violence against women, it acknowledges the Commission’s efforts to raise awareness of the issue but urges that more attention be paid to "trafficking in human beings, torture and harmful traditional practices, with an emphasis on female genital mutilation, honour crimes and early and forced marriage". It also calls for more female personnel in institutions that directly assist victims of these practices.
Sexual issues, reproductive and health rights
The express link between women and HIV (in terms of increasing the rate of infection) spelt out in the Commission's paper is welcomed by the committee, but MEPs believe Member States should be pressed to meet the financial commitments they have given on this matter.
The report states that "empowering women by ensuring full access to sexual and reproductive health information, services and supplies puts them in a better position to negotiate safe sex and protect themselves from sexually transmitted diseases (STDs)". It backs the Commission's proposals for protecting women from STDs, including funding for developing microbiocides and vaccines and measures on reproductive health and rights.
Status of women under Sharia law
Lastly, the report "deplores in the strongest possible terms the virtual chattel status of women trapped under Sharia Law, and regards this oppression as representing the diametric opposite of every principle this Report holds to be of paramount importance". Adopted text - Gender Equality and Women's Empowerment in Development Cooperation
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0103 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Industry
New technologies for active ageing and longer independent living
2008-03-17 - 10:43
Helping older people to stay healthier and to live independently for longer is the aim of a new research programme on "Ambient Assisted Living" (AAL) says the co-decision report by Neena GILL (PES, UK). It will develop new information and communication technology (ICT), to enable more elderly people to access public services more easily, but these services must nonetheless respect their privacy and dignity, say MEPs. Parliament approved a first-reading deal with Council on the programme with 431 votes in favour, 10 votes against and 8 abstentions. Speaking in the debate in Strasbourg, rapporteur Neena Gill (West Midlands, Labour, PES, UK) said: "This report results from initiatives by Member States under Article 169, which is co-funded by the Commission to the tune of EUR 150 million over five years. This will assist the European industry and research institutes in the development of new, cutting-edge ICT services, products and solutions to enhance the quality of life for the older persons.
Today, technologies have been developed that can help solve loss of memory, vision, hearing and mobility. Substantive work has already begun, but often there is neither awareness nor widespread use. So this initiative, I hope, will be of real use and help solve societal problems."
As the baby-boom generation retires, the number of people aged 65 and older will rise by nearly 40% between 2010 and 2030 (European Commission estimate). But "innovative solutions are emerging to help counteract problems related to memory, vision, hearing, mobility, loss of independence which are more prevalent with age", noted EP rapporteur Neena GILL (PES, UK), adding that since "Ageing is a global phenomenon, a strong base of ICT-enabled solutions in Europe could be the start of export opportunities worldwide".
UK and Ireland taking party in the programme
In implementing the Seventh Framework Programme of the European Community for research, technological development and demonstration activities (2007 to 2013), the Community makes a financial contribution to the Ambient Assisted Living research and development programme (hereinafter referred to as "the AAL Joint Programme") undertaken jointly by Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden and the United Kingdom (hereinafter referred to as "the participating Member States") as well as Israel, Norway and Switzerland.
Respect privacy and dignity
MEPs add several criteria that the AAL programme should taken into account when selecting projects. The new technology must be adapted to the needs of older people, such as so-called "smart homes", but at the same time, services must respect their privacy and dignity.
In order to support (near) market-ready products and services, every project should be co-financed by the private sector, and especially by small and medium-sized enterprises, says another criterion added by the European Parliament.
Equitable access for all through cost-effective solutions
The AAL programme will aim to develop cost-effective solutions that facilitate equitable and simplified access to new products services across Europe, but especially for older people in rural and peripheral areas.
MEPs propose that AAL funding be used inter alia for "conversion projects" that transform former military or industrial installations into housing projects adapted for older people.
EU to invest €150 million
The Seventh Research Framework Programme will co-finance the AAL programme to the sum of €150 million for 2008-2013. To ensure success, participating countries should jointly contribute at least the same or possibly a higher amount, says the text. Each participating country is expected to allocate at least 20% of its national research funding to AAL-related activities. MEPs say that if the programme is implemented inadequately, partially or late, the Community will reduce or terminate its financial contribution. This participation should be subject to a minimum financial contribution commensurate with the potential demand from the various national research communities and should normally be at least €0.2 million for the participation
The amended proposal also emphasises that overlaps with existing national and other Community programmes should be avoided.
Entry into force
This Decision enters into force on the third day following that of its publication in the Official Journal of the European Union. Enhancing the quality of life of older people
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0098 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-024-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Energy
Global energy efficiency and renewable energy
2008-03-17 - 10:43
Parliament adopted a report which welcomes the Commission's proposal for a Global Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Fund (GEEREF). The report stresses that the key objectives of the fund should be the promotion of energy efficiency, energy saving and renewable energies, the reduction of emissions of greenhouse gases and of other risks, the improvement of access to energy services in the poorest countries and the diversification of energy sources in the developing world. The European Parliament insists that all support for projects and choice of technology is conditional on the fulfilment of comprehensive sustainability criteria and on a contribution being made to sustainable development, among other things. The report was adopted with 343 votes in favour, 11 against and 11 abstentions.
Members call on the Commission to focus, when implementing the fund, on small-scale projects which are the most difficult to attract private sector investment. In this regard, the Commission should keep under regular review its eligibility threshold of €10 million for individual projects, while earmarking at least one third of the funds available for small-scale projects costing less than €1 million.
The European Commission is also invited to:
ensure that support for all biomass projects in developing countries is subject to the fulfilment of rigorous sustainability criteria;
ensure that the GEEREF supports photovoltaic projects and calls on it to support the development of intelligent grid technologies;
ensure that the fund supports the development of local markets, manufacturing and capacity by supporting local small and medium sized enterprises (SMEs) so that they can take on responsibility for merchandising new technologies in a particular region;
ensure that the fund will be consistent with and supplement other Member State and EU development policies and energy initiatives targeted at developing countries;
explore ways of enlarging the fund in the future context of a post-2012 regime under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change.
The European Parliament regrets the fact that the suggested minimum funding target of €100 million - with a contribution of only €15 million for each of the years 2007 and 2008 - is woefully inadequate as the GEEREF's contribution when the goal is to "boost the share of energy efficiency and renewable energy projects. It urges the Commission to increase its contribution while at the same time encouraging Member States, as well as multilateral finance institutions, to join forces in order to significantly increase the size of the fund. Global Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Fund
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0096 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-025-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Security and defence
EP repeats its call for making the Code of Conduct on Arms Exports legally binding
2008-03-17 - 10:43
In the context of the upcoming 10th anniversary of the EU's Code of Conduct on Arms Transfers this year, the EP adopted a resolution calling on the Slovenian Presidency to make it "a permanent item on the agenda of each General Affairs Council meeting until the issue has been resolved." The European Union Code of Conduct on Arms Transfers celebrates its tenth anniversary in 2008. Although a draft Common Position by Council to make this Code of Conduct legally binding has been agreed by COREPER on 30 June, 2005, the Member States have yet to adopt this at a Council meeting. The European Parliament has repeatedly called for this to go forward, and suspects that failure to do so is "evidently linked to the wish of some EU Member States to lift the current EU arms embargo on the People's Republic of China," a change which the EP has repeatedly opposed.
The Code of Conduct is a crucial issue in the current context of Commission initiatives to "harmonise national arms procurement policies and intra-Community arms transfers and sales", and with respect to the possibility that the ever-increasing ESDP military and civilian missions of the EU "might be threatened with arms previously supplied by EU Member States." European Code of Conduct on Arms Exports
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0101 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-024-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-026-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Draft Agenda for 26 March and Brussels plenary 9-10 April 2008
2008-03-17 - 10:43
An extraordinary plenary sitting will be held on Wednesday 26 March 2008 in Brussels from 2-4.30pm so that the Slovenian Presidency can report on the results of the European Council's meeting of 13-14 March in Brussels. The next Brussels plenary will be held on 9-10 April 2008. Agenda for 26 March 2008 and the draft agenda for the Brussels plenary session 9-10 April are now available via the link hereunder. Agenda for 26 March - Extraordinary plenary in Brussels Draft Agenda for 9-10 April - Brussels plenary session
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary.do?language=EN
EN
2
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?reference=2008-04&language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-025-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-027-EN DOC XML V0//EN
Institutions
Adopted texts / Verbatim debates
2008-03-17 - 10:43
All the text adopted during Strasbourg plenary session (10-13 March 2008) are now available via the link hereunder. The verbatim report of proceedings containing all the speeches made in plenary, in the original language, can be accessed via the link hereunder. Text adopted in Strasbourg plenary 11-13 March 2008 Verbatim debates from Strasbourg plenary - 10-13 March 2008
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta.do;jsessionid=9604A041057975D76C0C180A0F04AC8B.node2?language=EN
EN
2
LINK
/activities/plenary/cre.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-ITEM DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 FULL-TEXT DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-026-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-024-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-025-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-026-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-027-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-FULL DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 PBR-FULL DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-COVER-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-001-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-002-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-003-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-004-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-005-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-006-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-007-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-008-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-009-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-010-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-011-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-012-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-013-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-014-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-015-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-016-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-017-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-018-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-019-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-020-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-021-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-022-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-023-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-024-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-025-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-026-EN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080307BRI23279 ITEM-027-EN DOC XML V0//EN
