The Week Ahead - 24-30 March 2008
Institutions
2008-03-19 - 18:00
Plenary session and committee meetings - Brussels
Plenary session. The outcome of the EU Spring Summit will be the subject of a debate with President-in-office of the European Council Janez Janša and Commission President José Manuel Barroso at a special plenary session. Mr Janša will then join EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering for a press conference. (Wednesday)
Middle East. Parliament's new working group on the Middle East will hear from Quartet representative Tony Blair, French Foreign Minister Bernard Kouchner, External Relations Commissioner Benita Ferrero-Waldner and Norway's Foreign Minister Jonas Gahr Støre. (Tuesday)
Discharge 2006. The Budgetary Control Committee will vote on whether to recommend approving the financial management of the Commission, Parliament and other EU institutions and bodies in 2006. (Tuesday-Thursday)
Jean-Claude Trichet. The ECB President's regular dialogue with the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee comes at a time on increasing concerns about the impact of the financial market crisis on the real economy. (Wednesday)
Rajendra K. Pachauri. The Nobel Peace Prize winner and Chair of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change will take part in the latest thematic session of the Climate Change Committee, and then a press conference. (Wednesday)
Organ donation. A report in the Environment Committee considers how to tackle risks in organ transplants, as well as organ shortages and trafficking. (Wednesday)
Protecting pedestrians. The Transport Committee votes on legislation aimed at reducing the number of pedestrians and cyclists killed or injured in collisions with motor vehicles. (Wednesday)
EuroMed Assembly. President Pöttering will lead the EP delegation to the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly, which brings together MEPs with MPs from EU countries and their Mediterranean neighbours, as it meets in Athens. This session will focus on energy and the environment. (Thursday-Friday)
20080319IPR24678 For details of all the week's events, see The Agenda
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081300AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
