Opening of the April Brussels session
Institutions
2008-04-09 - 16:12
EP President, Hans-Gert Pöttering announced that the Anneli JÄÄTTEENMÄKI (ALDE, FI) report on the Statute of the European Ombudsman was postponed from this session to the April plenary session in Strasbourg (21-24 April 2008).
Highlights of the part-session
Wednesday 9 April 2008
The April plenary sessions opens with MEPs voting on the new Cypriot Commissioner-designate Androula Vassiliou following the hearing that took place on 1 April. "Health is wealth and I am determined to work hard towards ensuring high standards for our citizens, be they in Romania, Sweden, the UK or Cyprus" said Androula Vassiliou, the Cypriot Commissioner designate for Public Health, Food Safety, Animal Health and Welfare, at the start of her three-hour hearing before MEPs.
EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering will announce the adoption of a written declaration on the murder of the human rights activist Munir Said Thalib given that over half of all MEPs have signed it. The declaration calls on the Indonesian authorities to take all necessary action to ensure that those responsible for the murder at all levels are brought to trial and justice is delivered as quickly as possible.
EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering will announce the adoption of a written declaration on the subtitling of all public-service television programmes in the EU given that over half of all MEPs have signed the written declaration. The declaration Calls on the Commission to put forward a legislative proposal requiring public-service television broadcasters in the EU to subtitle all of their programmes.
The House will then debate the situation in Lebanon. The vote on the resolution will take place during the April Strasbourg plenary (21-24 April).
MEPs will then debate progress made by Croatia and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (FYROM) towards EU accession. The Foreign Affairs Committee stresses the need for Croatia to resolve outstanding bilateral border issues, and reiterates that the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia's bilateral name dispute with Greece should not obstruct FYROM's EU accession process, in two reports, that are generally positive about on the two countries' progress towards EU accession.
Parliament will tackle the issue of combating cancer in the enlarged EU with an oral question to the Commission. The House will vote on a resolution on Thursday (10 April) which calls on the Commission to set up an interinstitutional EU Cancer Task Force to collect and exchange best practice for prevention, screening and treatment and to provide leadership for improved cancer control in Europe.
Elspeth Attwooll (ALDE, UK, Liberal Democrat, Scotland) will be presenting her report on rights-based management tools in fisheries. The rapporteur looks upon both the advantages and disadvantages involved in rights-based management. These vary according both to the nature of the system currently in operation and the ways in which fishing rights are allocated and made transferable/tradable.
The 2009 budget guidelines will also be addressed by MEPs on Wednesday evening. This report refers to the issue of the ceiling of 20% of total EU administrative expenditure (under heading 5 - Administration) voluntarily imposed on itself by the European Parliament, given that the EP's powers and legislative activity will expand if the Lisbon Treaty enters into force.
Thursday 10 April 2008
Thursday session opens at 9am with an oral question to the Commission on the Green Paper on Adapting to climate change in Europe - options for EU action. The House will also vote on a resolution on this topic. The committee regrets that the Commission's Green Paper "does not sufficiently address the need for co-operation on adaptation between the EU and developing countries and highlights in particular the need for technology transfer and capacity building"
MEPs also debate the statute of the European Ombudsman. Proposed changes in the rules governing the European Ombudsman's access to information held by EU bodies and evidence given to him by EU civil servants, are set out in a report, proposed by the Constitutional Affairs Committee, on the Ombudsman's Statute. The key aim of these changes is to boost citizens' confidence in the Ombudsman's work.
Parliament will vote on a resolution on the situation in Tibet following the debate that was held on 26 March in Brussels. EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering has said: " The Dalai Lama has accepted our invitation to address the European Parliament during the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue. He is scheduled to do so in December. I hope you will agree that, in view of the events in Tibet, the Dalai Lama is welcome at the European Parliament at any time ."
The House will also vote on an extension of a derogation from the rules for the UK and Ireland on animal health requirements applicable to non-commercial movements of pet animals. The committee states that the proposed extension of the transitional period may not be sufficiently long to obtain agreement on a successor regime and a longer one is more appropriate given there is still no proposal on the table and the European Parliament will be dissolved for elections in 2009.
Parliament will also vote on the mobilisation of the European Global Adjustment Fund for Portugal and Malta. The EP Budgets Committee recommends approving the release of aid from the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund (EGAF) for Portugal and Malta. The aim is to help 1,549 Portuguese car industry workers and 675 Maltese textile industry workers to retrain.
20080408IPR26038 Briefing - Brussels plenary session - 9-10 April 2008 Final draft agenda - 9-10 April 2008
EN
2
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?reference=2008-04&language=EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080401BRI25389 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
