EU/ACP: Mandelson rules out renegotiation of partnership accords
External/international trade
2008-04-18 - 09:58
Any renegotiation of the economic partnership agreements (EPAs) already initialled with the countries of Africa, the Caribbean and the Pacific (ACP) would be a disaster, Trade Commissioner Peter Mandelson told members of the EP International Trade Committee on Thursday. MEPs asked about progress in the negotiations, the impact of the EPAs on the development and regional integration of the ACP and the role of the European Parliament in the negotiations.
Referring to recurrent criticisms of the EPAs, Mr Mandelson ruled out "any suggestion of renegotiating the agreements already initialled". The Commissioner was speaking during an information session on the agreements organised by the Trade Committee at which negotiators from the ACP countries were also present. Any renegotiation would constitute "a new threat of legal uncertainty to the agreements but would also be a disaster for the ACP countries", according to Mr Mandelson, who restated his goal of concluding "full EPAs with comprehensive regional coverage" in the six geographical regions.
These accords are being negotiated by the Commission with the aim of updating the partnership between the EU and the 79 ACP states and bringing it into line with WTO rules.
Defence against food price rises
Mr Mandelson stated that the EPAs, which encourage and develop regional markets and aid for trade, would make it easier to cope with current price shocks.
"The only pro-development option is to develop more dynamic markets with investment in food production capacities", he added in reply to a question by Corien Wortmann-Kool (EPP-ED, NL).
Only one full EPA signed
The only full EPA so far - which has been signed by the Caribbean - can be seen as an example, argued Federico Cuello Camillo, ambassador of the Dominican Republic and chief negotiator for services and investment. "Market access on the basis of the Cotonou agreement was not enough", he explained. With the full EPA, the Caribbean has obtained immediate access without quotas to the European market. The EU on its side benefits from "asymmetric access to the Caribbean markets which will be liberalised over the longer term", said the ambassador.
Among the six geographical regions negotiating with the Commission, CARIFORUM, the Caribbean regional organisation, is the only one to have signed, on 16 December 2007, a "full" economic partnership agreement dealing with trade in goods, liberalisation of services such as tourism, agriculture, fisheries and investment.
Erika Mann (PES, DE) and Zbigniew Zaleski (EPP-ED, PL) asked about the discrepancy between the enthusiasm of the Caribbean region for these accords and the attitude of other regions. Aamadou Koné, the Côte d'Ivoire minister in charge of African integration, pointed to the crises in Liberia, Sierra Leone and his own country as part of the answer.
In west Africa, only Côte d'Ivoire and Ghana have initialled an interim agreement. Nigeria has rejected the similar EPA it was offered. The other 13 states in the region, who are among the least developed countries (LDCs), have not signed an interim agreement either, but they already have privileged access to the European market under the arrangement "Everything but Arms".
Mr Koné also announced that a global accord for the west African region is due to be signed on 30 June 2009.
EPAs: instruments for development and regional integration?
Helmut Markov (GUE/NGL, DE), chair of the EP Trade Committee, believed the market access strategy was not sufficiently geared to development and respect for social and environmental standards.
"A narrow agreement, limited to trade in goods, does not meet all the requirements for development", answered the Commissioner. "Investment and technology transfers, which the ACP countries do not receive, will only come by opening the market in services".
There was also a discussion of the geographical breakdown chosen by the Commission for its negotiating strategy (Caribbean, Pacific, west Africa, southern Africa, east Africa and central Africa), which does not necessarily match existing regional structures among the ACP states.
Mr Koné mentioned the ties between the countries of the West African Monetary Union (WAMU), which applies a common external tariff but does not include all the west African states in the group defined by the Commission. The Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) groups together all the states in an EPA but does not have a common external tariff.
Parliament's role
The European Parliament will have a key role to play in the ratification and monitoring of the agreements, said Mr Mandelson. "All the agreements, whether full or interim, will be presented to Parliament under the assent procedure", he confirmed, adding that the text of the EPA with the Caribbean should be submitted to MEPs in "late June, early July" this year.
The accord with the Caribbean provides for the creation of a joint parliamentary committee, something called for in a report by Robert Sturdy (EPP-ED, UK) on the EPAs, which was adopted by Parliament in March 2007.
Mr Markov repeated Parliament's wish to be involved in the negotiations from the start, and even from the time the Commission's mandate was defined. "That would allow the EP's wishes to be included earlier", he said.
2008-04-17 Committee on International Trade Chair Helmuth Markov GUE/NGL DE
20080414IPR26532 Website of EP International Trade Committee
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=INTA
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
