Iraq PM tells MEPs he sees tangible progress compared to the past
External relations
2008-04-16 - 14:13
"I cannot pretend that Iraq is a stable country, but relative to a year and a half ago, we have seen significant progress," said Iraqi Prime Minister Nouri Al-Maliki in a joint meeting of the EP’s Foreign Affairs Committee and its Delegation for Relations with Iraq. MEPs questioned Mr Maliki on the law banning parties with links to armed militias from upcoming provincial elections, on the security situation in the country, and on the status of the roughly 4 million Iraqi refugees.
Foreign Affairs Committee Chairman Jacek Saryusz-Wolski (EPP-ED, PL) welcomed the Prime Minister on his first visit to the European Parliament, and asked about the forthcoming provincial elections in October. Iraq Delegation Chair Emma Nicholson (ALDE, UK) noted the increased attention Parliament is paying to Iraq, including via the report adopted on 13 March and the newly created Iraq Delegation. She announced plans to visit Iraq at the end of the month with some members of the Delegation.
"Militias will not interfere" with provincial elections
On the question of the provincial elections, Mr Maliki said his government will "ensure that militias will not interfere." He noted that "Iraqis are tired of militias and terrorist actions," adding that "refusing the presence of militias at the elections is agreed upon by all parties." Libor Roucek (PES, CZ) asked under what conditions internally displaced people (IDPs) and refugees can vote. Mr Maliki replied that IDPs will be able to vote, but that the technicalities for enabling this have yet to be addressed.
Sudden withdrawal of coalition forces "would lead to confusion"
Tobias Pflüger (GUE/NGL, DE) asked whether the Prime Minister was in agreement with US General David Petraeus that a withdrawal of coalition forces was not advisable at present. EP rapporteur on Iraq Ana Gomes (PES, PT) also asked about the Iraqi perspective on troop withdrawals. Mr Maliki replied that a sudden withdrawal of coalition troops would "lead to confusion," and that an "organised withdrawal is foreseen."
Iraq "not a playground for regional power games"
Janusz Onyszkiewicz (ALDE, PL) asked about Iraq's relations with its neighbours, especially Turkey and Iran, and several MEPs raised the question of outside interference in Iraq's affairs. Mr Maliki replied that "Iraq refuses to be a playground for regional power games," and added that he had told neighbouring countries that "we want them to stop their territory from being a training place for terrorists."
Refugees' competences needed at home
Cem Özdemir (Greens/EFA, DE) asked about the approximately 4 million Iraqi refugees and IDPs, asking what plans for resettlement had been made. Inger Segelström (PES, SV) also inquired whether Iraq planned first to facilitate the return of refugees from its neighbours and then from EU countries. Mr Maliki thanked all countries hosting refugees from Iraq, and noted that "we have provided money to help Iraqis abroad, but we have to bring them back." "We need their competences to return to the country," he said.
2008-04-16 Committee on Foreign Affairs In the Chair Jacek Saryusz-Wolski EPP-ED PL In the Chair Baroness Nicholson of Winterbourne ALDE UK
Permanent Ad-Hoc Delegation for relations with Iraq
20080414IPR26460 Committee on Foreign Affairs website EP report on Iraq
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=AFET
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0100 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
