The week @ the European Parliament online
Institutions
2008-04-15 - 16:52
Starting Monday 14 April political groups will be coordinating their positions for the Strasbourg plenary next week. Among the discussions in committee this week are trade relations with developing countries and women in Islam. A delegation of MEPs will meet newly-elected leaders of Kosovo. Follow these topics as well as issues directly affecting European consumers and the appearance of a top Iraqi politician and of a world famous trophy in Brussels, here on the website.
Committees and Delegations
Iraq:
Prime Minister Nouri al-Maliki is due to meet MEPs on the foreign affairs committee on Wednesday.
Kosovo:
A delegation of 6 MEPs headed by Doris Pack (EPP-ED) will go to Pristina (17-19 April) to meet Kosovo's President Fatmir Sejdiu, Prime Minister Hacim Thaci and President of the National Assembly Jakup Krasniqi. Trade:
Thursday morning the International Trade Committee will hold a workshop on Economic Partnership Agreements with African, Caribbean and Pacific states, currently under negotiation. These Agreements are meant to put the trade terms between the EU and the ACP countries on a new footing to comply with WTO rules. Trade Commissioner Peter Mandelson will attend the meeting.
Women:
On Monday the Women's Rights Committee is expected to adopt a report on the under representation of women in the scientific world by Danish Socialist Britta Thomsen and discuss prostitution and health in the EU as well as the situation in Turkey. On Thursday a public hearing will be devoted to the situation of Muslim women. Watch the hearing live 0930-1230 CET, via the link below.
For more information check out the committees and delegations sections under Activities!
On the Europarl homepage
This week on the headlines page, read a roundup of last week's plenary. During the week we will bring you snapshots from a visit by the Civil Liberties Committee to Denmark’s centres for immigrants and asylum seekers.
On Tuesday you can take a look at the EP's take on package holidays, particularly travel insurance, while we will take a look at retail banking on Thursday.
Besides Iraq, Burma will feature on the homepage this week, one month ahead of a referendum on a new constitution.
Ice Hockey: On Tuesday the NHL Stanley Cup will make a special appearance in Brussels, celebrating 100 years of international ice hockey. Don’t miss our coverage on Wednesday.
20080414STO26471 Live streaming
EP Committees Press Service: Week ahead (EN& FR)
EN
1
PHOTO
20080409PHT26265.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/faces/live/live-video.jsp?language=en
EN
3
LINK
/activities/committees/committeesList.do?language=EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081600AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
