Package holidays - EP study looks at insurance coverage
Free movement of persons
2008-04-15 - 18:48
Broken bones - not the return flight one would like…
Package holidays are incredibly popular for millions of people around Europe. For most it is a week away in the sun, a time to relax and be with family and friends. However, for a minority it can be ruined by an accident or injury. A study for Parliament's Internal Market committee has just looked into the state of insurance liability for such holidays. It found that the existing "Package Travel Directive" from 1990 is insufficient and need revising. We look at its main findings.
Package holiday market changing
The study - "safety and liability issues relating to package travel" - is supposed to help MEPs in the upcoming review of the Package Travel Directive and in ongoing discussions over the review of the EU consumer law.
The survey, compiled by leading academics and experts in the field, identifies an industry that is changing rapidly due to low cost airlines, the internet and more and more people assembling their own holidays - so called "dynamic packaging"
There's no question about the popularity of package holidays - in particular in Germany, the UK, France, the Netherlands and Italy. In 2004 in Germany 24.5 million package holidays were sold while in the UK the figure was 10.1 million.
Main causes of injuries?
The report identified a number of factors that led to people being injured. The following were found to be the most common:
Injuries in road traffic accidents (either in hire cars or when tour buses crash).
Poor hygiene standards (the most common problem is diarrhoea)
Poor equipment i.e. poor quality skis.
Accidents caused by poor signs, steps and a lack of light
Excessive alcohol consumption
Current situation in the EU
The study found that despite issues of safety and liability covered by the Package Travel Directive in 1990, there is no specific legal instrument at EU level for tourist safety. It also says that current safety regulations are "piecemeal" and "not comprehensive".
In addition, the study also identified a certain amount of legal confusion as the burden of proof for negligence differs across the EU - for example some courts place it on customers, some on organisers. In November last year, MEPs adopted a resolution on tourism policy in which they "regretted that there is no explicit safety provision in existing legislation".
What can be done?
It calls for new EU road safety rules to ensure tour operators are liable for all services supplied and trips booked at a resort.
On hotel safety the study says that any EU legislation should define basic safety standards for hotels. It also says current EU recommendations on fire safety in hotels should be updated and included in binding legislation.
Regarding air transport it calls for the "Package Travel Directive" to be amended to make the organisers liable for injuries to a consumer if an airline breaches safety regulations whilst working for a tour operator.
Finally, in the unlikely event of terrorism or of a natural disaster it says a tour operator and customer should also have the right to cancel but that the operator should monitor general risks and inform customers.
Any legislative proposals the Commission does eventually produce will have to be approved by the Council of Ministers and the European Parliament.
20080415STO26610 "Safety and liability issues relating to package travel" Resolution - November 07
EN
1
PHOTO
20080414PHT26522.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/meetdocs/2004_2009/documents/dv/999/999000/999000en.pdf
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A6-2007-0399 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
