Higher food prices, 2006 budget discharge, US visas on plenary agenda
Institutions
2008-04-21 - 11:07
Debates aim to bridge divisions this week
Soaring global food prices, how to encourage and regulate organ donation and China's policy in Africa are all on the agenda during the 21-24 April Strasbourg plenary session. MEPs will also decide whether to sign off on the 2006 accounts for the EU's institutions. They will also discuss the outcome of recent EU-US talks on visa restrictions for people from certain EU states and the situation in Zimbabwe.
Monday 21 April Parliament will debate and vote on a report on organ donation and transplantation. Reducing the organ and donor shortage is “the main challenge that EU Member States face with regard to organ transplantation”, said the Committee for Environment, Public Health and Food Safety. MEPs in the committee propose a wide range of measures, including a European donor card, to tackle problems like organ shortage, transplantation risks and organ trafficking.
MEPs will also debate the outcome of an 8 April Commission hearing on "crimes on genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes committed by totalitarian regimes, which focused on recognition of the crimes and reconciliation.
Also under discussion will be rules for Belarusian and Ukrainian citizens to obtain visas to enter the EU/Schengen area and a report on the role of volunteering in contributing to economic and social cohesion. Over 100 million EU citizens volunteer, and every €1 spent on supporting them generates a return of between €3 and €8 - a contribution that should appear in national accounts, says a report by the Regional Development Committee. Tuesday 22 April Parliament will discuss protests against food price rises in the EU and developing countries. It will also examine China's policy and its effects on Africa notably "no strings attached" investments in African countries ruled by oppressive regimes. This policy helps perpetuate human rights violations, say MEPs on the Development Committee, who also highlight Beijing's role in the spread of arms and the conditions under which natural resources are being exploited.
The Budgetary Control Committee is recommending that Parliament sign off the accounts of all the EU's institutions and agencies for the financial year 2006. However, it is also calling for the creation of a joint Parliament-Commission group to monitor the Commission's supervision of the structural funds. On Tuesday afternoon, MEPs will debate the establishment of the European satellite navigation system Galileo. The Industry Committee is recommending approval of a first-reading compromise on Galileo's deployment which would pave the way for the system to be operational by 2013. Wednesday 23 April The key debate this week is on the EU - Latin America and Caribbean Summit and negotiations between the EU and US on visa waiver rules. The EU-LAC summit (between Latin America, the Caribbean and the European Union), is due to take place on 16-17 May in Lima, Peru, and is the subject of a plenary debate with the Council and Commission.
The outcome of talks held on 12-13 March between the EU and the US on the US visa waiver program will be debated with the Council and Commission. The visa waiver program allows citizens of countries deemed by the US authorities to present a low security risk to travel to the USA for up to 90 days without having to obtain a visa. The countries include all those that were EU Member States before 2004 (except Greece) plus Slovenia. All the other "new" Member States are excluded from the program. However, some of these states (Czech Republic, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Hungary and Slovakia) have recently signed bilateral agreements with the US enabling them to be admitted to the program. The Slovenian President Dr Danilo Türk will address the European Parliament on Wednesday 23 April at midday. Slovenia currently holds the six-month rotating presidency of the EU. The House will vote on proposals to promote the use of mediation as a faster and cheaper alternative to going to court in civil and commercial cross-border disputes.
At 1500 CET, MEPs will debate the situation in Burma. This will be followed by a debate on illegal immigration, the EU's external action and the role of Frontex - the body tasked with coordinating operational cooperation between Member States in the field of border security. Thursday 24 April The International Accounting Standards Board lacks transparency, legitimacy and accountability. It is not under the control of any democratically elected parliament or government. So says a report from the Economics Committee to be discussed by the full Parliament – the IASB’s governing body has already made proposals for change. As usual the session ends with three debates and votes on human rights issues in the world. On this occasion the topics are: Zimbabwe, Iran, the case of Khadijeh Moghaddam (imprisoned women's rights activist in Iran) and Chad.
20080418STO27004 More about the week Day by day Agenda Live from 5 on Monday
EN
1
PHOTO
20080421PHT27102.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/news/expert/default_en.htm
EN
3
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?language=EN&reference=2008-04-2
EN
4
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/faces/live/live-video.jsp?language=en
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
