EP delegation to Kosovo welcomes new constitution
External relations
2008-04-21 - 16:10
A Foreign Affairs Committee delegation visiting Kosovo for the first time since it declared independence welcomed its new constitution, urged it to step up the fight against corruption, and stressed that convening local elections in Kosovo's Serb municipalities is a prerogative of the UN Mission in Kosovo, not Belgrade
“We congratulated the leaders and the people of Kosovo on their maturity. We have encouraged them to continue to show understanding in dealing with the problems and needs of other communities” said delegation leader Doris Pack (EPP-ED, DE). Constitution for a multi-ethnic Kosovo The delegation also welcomed the new Constitution, which enters into force in June, and is based on a plan by former UN Envoy Marti Ahtisaari. “This constitution is a model in terms of protection of minorities’ rights. It proves that the Kosovar government and Assembly understand the importance of maintaining and even strengthening the multi-ethnic character of Kosovo”, said Hannes Swoboda (PES, AT), adding that “they must now implement rigorously its provisions”. Fight corruption In talks the delegation stressed the need to pursue the fight against corruption and organised crime by taking legislative measures and providing the police and the judiciary with the necessary means and expertise. They also urged the government to come up with a comprehensive action plan to relaunch the country's economy, which could provide the basis for the forthcoming Donors’ Conference. Convening local elections is an UNMIK prerogative The delegation backed the view of the head of UN Mission in Kosovo (UNMIK) chief Joachim Ruecker, that Belgrade's request to hold local elections in Kosovo’s Serb municipalities on 11 May is totally unacceptable. “Belgrade cannot invoke Resolution 1244 only when it suits its purposes. 1244 clearly states that the convening of elections is a prerogative of UNMIK. This prerogative must be respected” commented Ms Pack, adding that “the Serb community should open its eyes. They are the victims of political posturing in Belgrade. They should think about their future instead and recognise that the EU stands by their side and is committed to helping them lead a dignified life in Kosovo”. The delegation met President Fatmir Sejidiu, Prime Minister Hasim Thaci, National Assembly Speaker Jakup Krasniqi, Head of the UN Mission in Kosovo Joachim Ruecker, and representatives of the main political parties, minorities and the Serb Community.
The delegation, led by Ms Pack, also included David Hammerstein (Greens/EFA, ES), Marian-Jean Marinescu (EPP-ED, RO), Ria Oomen-Ruijten (EPP-ED, NL) and Hannes Swoboda (PES, AT).
2008-04-17 Committee on Foreign Affairs In the Chair Jacek Saryusz-Wolski EPP-ED PL
20080421IPR27171 Committee on Foreign Affairs website
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=AFET
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
