Forward movement the best medicine against stagnation, says Slovenian President
Institutions
2008-04-23 - 13:20
In a speech to MEPs on Wednesday, Danilo Türk, the President of Slovenia, the current holder of the EU presidency, described the EU as a great historic achievement but stressed that it must keep moving forward and play more of a role as global leader. In particular, Europe would have to use all its creativity to tackle the issues of global warming, human rights, immigration and enlargement.
Introducing Mr Türk , EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering said that Slovenia, the first of the group of states that joined the EU in 2004 to take on the EU presidency, had a number of responsibilities. These included not just leading the current European Union but also acting as a model to the countries of the western Balkans, showing them that EU membership with all its benefits is a possibility for them too.
President Türk opened by saying "This Parliament, and indeed the European Union as a whole, is a magnificent embodiment of a great vision – a vision of durable peace and prosperity brought to the peoples of Europe by the spirit of cooperation and ever stronger integration."
He added "The European Union will continue to face complicated questions in an increasingly globalised world" but will continue to be a great success story "if it retains its dynamism".
Global warming
The president then moved on to two areas where leadership is particularly needed: global warming and human rights. Of the former, after referring to the EU's target of reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 20% by 2020, he said "the task ahead is likely to be difficult" but "difficult moments like this represent real tests of leadership". Indeed, "the international community is facing a stark choice: either to continue with incremental methods and face a disaster, or to try to muster a transformative approach". Ultimately, "Incrementalism will not do. Transformation - even though hard to achieve - is the order of the day".
Human rights
Turning to human rights, Mr Türk said "Massive and systematic violations persist in may parts of the world". He stressed that "EU leadership is particularly necessary at this stage when global action in the field of human rights is lagging behind". Indeed, "the overwhelming concerns with terrorism and other security challenges, coupled with responses to those challenges which are ill-advised or not well thought through seem to have reduced the level of sensitivity for human rights. The EU has to fill the gap." He stressed the need for the EU to help make the UN Human Rights Council and the International Criminal Court more effective and "to look at new ways of engaging with the UN Security Council".
Immigration and integration "the next testing ground for Europe's creativity "
Within the EU, the rights of asylum seekers and of immigrants in general must not be overlooked. Mr Türk stressed that "international action for human rights in its various forms can be effective if it proceeds from a solid platform, from scrupulous respect for human rights at home. This includes protection of human rights of migrants and asylum seekers and careful application of law in the cases involving allegations of terrorism."
He added "creativity is required with regard to the integration of immigrants and their communities. Economic prosperity and upward social mobility of immigrants are key to successful policy in this domain". To achieve this, "integration has to include effective access to good quality education, including linguistic education, and access to universities." And "success has to be made visible. Persons of immigrant origin who have succeeded should appear on TV and in other media and be seen as examples of success." These issues "represent the next testing ground for Europe's creativity", he argued.
Enlargement: Turkey, western Balkans, Ukraine, Moldova
Turning to enlargement, Mr Türk said "While it is obvious that all those aspiring for membership will have to fulfil the membership criteria, none of them should be precluded from membership only for reasons of political inconvenience or cultural prejudice".
For example, "the EU needs Turkey" and "should not deprive Turkey of the perspective of membership as this has already been granted. The credibility of the EU is at stake."
In addition, "the European Union cannot accept a 'black hole' in the Western Balkans". The region needs a framework to help these countries discuss their common problems and move towards meeting the EU membership criteria. Ukraine and Moldova also need the prospect of EU membership. They must not be denied that opportunity, said Mr Türk, and this will require a pragmatic approach from the EU.
Forward movement through leadership, creativity and pragmatism
Summing up, the Slovenian president said "The European Union would be well advised to exert global leadership in such matters as global warming and human rights. Creativity will continue to be central in the search for effective policies of immigration and integration. The value of pragmatism will remain undiminished in all matters related to further expansion, which is needed to ensure the role of the EU as a global leader."
"All this may sound ambitious", he acknowledged. "But forward movement has always been the best medicine against stagnation. Our time is no different in that regard".
20080422IPR27276 Official website of the President of Slovenia Biography of the President of Slovenia Audio, 22:38 - speech of Slovenian President Danilo Türk Audio, 20:46 - EP Press Hans-Gert Pöttering and Slovenian President Danilo Türk - EN
EN
1
LINK
http://www.up-rs.si/up-rs/uprs-eng.nsf
EN
2
LINK
http://www.up-rs.si/up-rs/uprs-eng.nsf/dokumentiweb/Zivljenjepis?OpenDocument
EN
3
MULTIMEDIA
20080423MLT27495.asf
EN
4
MULTIMEDIA
20080423MLT27503.asf
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
