2009 EU budget: Parliament's priorities
Budget
2008-04-24 - 12:20
Among issues already influencing the debate on next year's EU budget are the European Parliament's new legislative and budgetary powers if the Lisbon Treaty is ratified and the membership of the next Commission and EP. A report by Jutta HAUG (PES, DE) on the budget framework and priorities for 2009 is the first programming text adopted by MEPs as part of preparations for the EU's next annual budget.
It takes account of the changes set to take place in 2009 that will have a major impact on the budget. Some are linked to the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty: the shift in the EP-Council balance of budgetary power in Parliament's favour and the scrapping of the distinction between compulsory and non-compulsory spending. Others will follow from the 2009 European elections and the end of the present Commission's mandate. The MEPs elected in 2009 must be ready to use the new budget procedure in time for the 2010 budget.
Reduced budget margins
In contrast to previous years, the report does not refer directly to the Commission's Annual Policy Strategy (APS). MEPs nevertheless take note of the priorities proposed by the Commission for 2009, namely climate change and sustainable development. But they are surprised that at this early stage the Commission "has already embarked on a reprioritisation exercise", including in those headings of the multiannual financial framework which have "a particularly small margin". MEPs call on the Commission to present a "clear and transparent" preliminary draft budget that can be understood by the public, is realistic and enables Parliament and Council to "thoroughly scrutinise" the implementation of the different EU programmes and policies.
MEPs say they are concerned that it is now more difficult to distinguish operational from administrative expenditure by the Commission, as well as by the Commission’s practice of outsourcing spending on staff, which they say reduces the transparency of the administrative expenditure in the budget.
In their negotiations with the Council, Parliament expects to make use of all the powers conferred on it under the interinstitutional agreement, including the flexibility instrument if necessary. The report stresses the importance of the solidarity principle, arguing that it must remain one of the EU's guiding principles, particularly for regional and development policy.
Later in the year, the Budgets Committee will make an initial assessment of the 2009 preliminary draft budget, which will be presented at the July plenary session.
20080418IPR27070 2009 budget: Section III, Commission: budgetary framework and priorities for 2009 Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 22 April)
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5592492
EN
2
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
