Interview: Slovenia's President T端rk on the UN, food and biofuel
Institutions
2008-04-24 - 15:37
Face to face with former UN diplomat turned Slovene President, Danilo T端rk
Prior to being elected Slovenia's president in November last year, Danilo T端rk had a distinguished career at the United Nations culminating in his appointment as Assistant Secretary General for Political Affairs. On Wednesday he was in Strasbourg to address MEPs. In an exclusive interview, we asked him about the role the UN and the European Union can play in the modern world, especially in promoting human rights and alleviating crises such as present rise in food prices.
Today in the European Parliament you spoke as the head of the country holding the EU presidency. In 1998 and 1999 as Slovenia's ambassador to the UN you presided over the UN Security Council. Could you compare these two experiences?
The two are completely different. The Security Council is a body that deals with crises and crisis management, the EU is a community of countries, which builds effective common institutions and has an ambitious program and political goals. Experience of the Security Council can however help as the EU has also faced and will have to face crises in different parts of the world. We need to have knowledge about how to approach these issues.
Could these two organisations contribute to tackling the problem of rising food prices, one of the main topics of yesterday's plenary session?
From a short-term point of view I'm not optimistic. I think that these two organisations are not well prepared for increased food prices. Preparing effective measures requires time. The EU has a common agriculture policy where a solution for the food market can be found.
I would say that the EU is better prepared than the UN. The role of the UN is more long-term through the Food and Agriculture Organisation, which has already done a lot for the improvement of agriculture and food production. Also the World Food Programme can not master the more general crisis which is due to the lack of food globally.
You have just returned from Latin America, where production of biofuels is growing. especially in Brazil,. Today many people link biofuels to rising food prices and even suggest they add to global warming. What is your opinion?
The situation is different across Latin America. One cannot compare Peru and Argentina. Each country has it own problems and advantages. Brazil has a special position because of its experience with biofuels and the amount it produces..
The level of biofuels produced in Brazil is already high. However, now they are thinking about alternatives. New oil fields at great depth have been found which has brought new hope that it may slow the growing production of biofuels.
The increase in food prices puts more people below the poverty threshold and falling living standards leads to the erosion of human rights. Do you think Europe's efforts to protect human rights are up to the task?
The Lisbon Treaty includes the Charter of Fundamental Rights, which will create new possibilities. In short, there are reasons for optimism. However innovations are needed. The European Parliament could have deeper debates on human rights, organise hearings and thus contribute to the strengthening of the policy of human rights as EU common policy.
In addition, the EU should appear more active in the UN - although for that to happen the decision mechanisms need to be adjusted. Searching for consensus and at any price can lead to the dilution of the final position and less effective action.
Financial turbulence and an apparent worldwide economic turndown are preoccupying leaders across the world. The EU presidency places Slovenia at the forefront of international efforts to tackle these problems. How do Slovenians react to this global role? Are you optimistic that Europe can make a difference for them?
In the EU, especially in the eurozone, one can feel a certain protection because of our common currency. In Europe and for example in Japan the anxiety is not as present as it is in the US.
I think that this European self-confidence helped Slovenes to maintain a certain stability regarding the problems we are facing. Anxiety because of ups and downs on the Ljubljana stock exchange can be understood as something typical for Slovenes more than the movement of the world's financial markets.
20080418STO27016 Slovenian president homepage Slovenian Presidency of the EU Danilo T端rk's speech in plenary
EN
1
PHOTO
20080424PHT27623.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.up-rs.si/up-rs/uprs-eng.nsf
EN
3
LINK
http://www.eu2008.si/en/index.html
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080422IPR27276 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
