Communicating the EU through the media: Are you up to the challenge?
Institutions
Ireland
2008-04-28 - 13:14
Irish students participating in a workshop on communicating Europe
On Friday 18 April, the offices of the European Parliament and the European Commission in Ireland organised a special workshop for third level media students entitled 'Communicating the EU through the media - Are you up to the challenge?'
Participants were joined by Mairéad McGuinness MEP (and former journalist), Jamie Smyth, Irish Times European Correspondent, Peter Power, Spokesperson for European Commissioner Peter Mandelson and Dr Ben Tonra from University College Dublin to examine the challenges of communicating the European Union on television, radio and in print.
The event began with a lively introduction to the EU by Dr Ben Tonra. This was followed by Peter Power, Spokesperson for European Commissioner Peter Mandelson, Mairéad McGuinness MEP and Jamie Smyth, Irish Times European Correspondent who, based on their experiences, gave their views about the challenges associated with communicating the EU. They all agreed that contributions, whether for print or audiovisual media, should be clear, accurate and understandable. Mairead McGuinness MEP emphasised that they should also be interesting and gave some examples how she had dealt with EU stories during her time as a journalist.
The forty participating students were then separated into workshops, each with its own theme. These included the rollout of broadband throughout the EU, emissions from cars and their impact on climate change, the EU's actions relating to alleged extraordinary rendition in EU Member States, etc. Each participant in a working group was given a role - journalist, MEP, European Commission spokesperson, representative of an NGO, a broadcast assistant and a rapporteur who would report to all participants about his/her group's experiences. The challenge each group had was to create a 2-3 minute audio clip relating to the theme they had been given.
Following the time spent in the working groups, the guest speakers at the event commented on what had been achieved by each working group.
The event concluded with the launch of a competition for third-level students. The competition sets the challenge of successfully communicating an EU-related story in a piece suitable for print, internet or broadcast media. The winner of the competition will participate in a seminar for working journalists which will take place in Brussels in the autumn of this year.
20080418IPR27022 Details of the competition European Parliament Office in Ireland
EN
1
PHOTO
20080428PHT27757.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.europarl.ie/studentcompetition.html
EN
3
LINK
http://www.europarl.ie/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
