This week: Constituency week and international delegations
Institutions
2008-04-28 - 12:50
Food and biofuels will be discussed when MEPs visit Brazil
This week sees MEPs participating in delegation meetings abroad or concentrating on constituency work; no official meetings will take place in Brussels during this week of “external parliamentary activities”. Delegations of MEPs will meet counterparts in the US, Afghanistan and in Brazil. On Wednesday, the names of the three winners of the Charlemagne Prize for European Youth will be revealed in Aachen - find the results here!
Climate change, Biofuels, Afghanistan
US : Climate change will be on the agenda when MEPs on parliament's climate change committee meet representatives of the Bush Administration and members of Congress as well as NGO's from Monday to Wednesday.
Afghanistan : In a fact finding mission to see for themselves how EU-funded projects are faring, MEPs will visit Afghanistan for six days this week. During the visit they will hold talks with local government officials and UN personnel.
Brazil: As the link between biofuels and the food crisis comes under growing scrutiny, there will be no shortage of topics for discussion when MEPs visit Brazil from Monday till Thursday. They will meet Brazilian MPs and the minister of agriculture.
Peru for Eurolat : A delegation of Members will take part in a plenary session of the Euro-Latin American Parliamentary Assembly (Eurolat) in Lima, Peru. MEPs and their Latin American counterparts will debate issues such as water and energy management, poverty and social exclusion (Tuesday-Thursday). Charlemagne Prize for European youth
On Tuesday 29 April, the first Charlemagne Prize for European Youth will be awarded to three winners in Aachen, Germany. The European Parliament and the Foundation of the International Charlemagne Prize of Aachen will award projects which serve as a role model for young people living in Europe and offer practical examples of Europeans living together as one community.
This week online: A look at Europe's economy and energy situation
Prices are going up and Europeans fear for their purchasing power: on Tuesday, two MEPs will comment and explain inflation . This is the first article of a new series: MEPs are our experts and explain some of the main aspects of the economic situation in Europe.
Will the opening of Europe's gas and electricity markets bring greater efficiency and better value for consumers? Read our first article about the " 3rd energy package " and its consequences for European consumers on Wednesday.
Also on Wednesday, the rapporteur on the EU Budgetary Framework and Priorities for 2009, German Socialist Jutta Haug will explain the implications of the new Lisbon Treaty for the EP’s ability to influence the EU budget and policies in new areas.
20080428STO27743 Press Agenda
EN
1
PHOTO
20080428PHT27755.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081800AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
