The Week Ahead 5-11 May 2008
Institutions
2008-04-30 - 16:40
Plenary session and committee meetings – Brussels
Brussels plenary. MEPs will debate and vote on their annual report on human rights in the world, the rules governing lobbying in the EU institutions, and sports policy. They will also mark ten years since the decision to adopt the euro. (Wednesday-Thursday)
Hans-Gert Pöttering in Morocco. The EP President makes an official visit to Morocco, meeting the Prime Minister and Foreign Minister among others. (Monday-Tuesday)
Food additives/Water quality. Legislation on food additives comes to a second reading vote in the Environment Committee, as do water quality standards. In both cases major differences remain with Council. (Tuesday)
Electricity market. Reform of competition rules for the electricity market gets a first reading vote in the Industry Committee – ownership unbundling is the key issue at stake. (Tuesday)
Telecom package. Two committees examine the telecoms package, with draft reports due for discussion by the Industry Committee and experts giving evidence to the Internal Market Committee. (Tuesday)
Jeffrey Sachs on food crisis. UN Special Advisor Professor Jeffrey Sachs will discuss rising food prices and their impact on developing countries with the Development Committee. (Monday)
Women and War. The Development and Women’s Rights Committees hold a hearing on how women are involved in and affected by warfare. (Tuesday) Time-share protection. The Internal Market Committee votes on legislation to protect consumers who buy into time-share holiday schemes. (Tuesday) Immigration. An EP Press Service seminar for journalists on the return of illegal immigrants draft directive includes a panel discussion with MEPs. (Wednesday) Tibet. The Information and International Relations minister in the Dalai Lama’s exiled Tibetan government will meet the Human Rights Sub-Committee. (Tuesday) EU/Religious leaders. President Pöttering joins the Council and Commission Presidents, Janez Janša and José Manuel Barroso, for a meeting with religious leaders. (Monday)
20080430IPR28037 For details of all the week's events, see "The Agenda"
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081900AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
