3rd energy package: MEPs to tackle "unbundling"
Energy
2008-04-30 - 09:59
Separating supply and production is at the heart of the proposals
Draft legislation to separate the supply and production of electricity and gas was proposed by the European Commission in September. It would allow smaller companies into the market, offer more choice to consumers and boost renewables. Parliament and the Council must now debate and amend the proposals. MEPs on the Industry committee will vote on the electricity directive 6 May. We look at the key issues.
Unbundling - what is it?
One of the most important proposals of the "3rd Energy Package" is "unbundling" - separating the operation of gas pipelines and electricity networks from the business of providing gas or generating power. This would mean for example that integrated companies such as Électricité de France would not be able to generate power and own the grid.
MEPs expressed strong political support for a common energy policy, and ownership unbundling, in a resolution last July.
Supporters believe unbundling will encourage investment in energy infrastructure. The Commission points to Britain where unbundling has taken place and four new liquid natural gas (LNG) terminals have been built - compared to none in Germany where the market is still protected.
If states are unwilling to "unbundle", the Commission is also proposing an "Independent System Operator" system under which companies would retain ownership of the network, but hand over management control to an independent company, which would make commercial and investment decisions.
Rapporteur talks of "massive abuse"
British Labour MEP Eluned Morgan is parliament's rapporteur for the Electricity directive. She explained that "there is now, in theory, a duty for generation and network companies to be legally separated, in many cases this is not being implemented and there is evidence of massive abuse – evidence which has led to the biggest energy company in Europe agreeing to "unbundle".
Ms Morgan added, that "in principle, a single European market in electricity already exists in the EU, but the reality is very different". She said "some countries have easy access to competitors - for example French and German companies have secured over 40% of the UK market - companies in Spain or the UK have found it very difficult to access French and German markets".
Not universally popular
Unbundling is not entirely popular - France and Germany oppose the Commission's plans. Along with Austria, Bulgaria, Greece, Latvia and Luxembourg and Slovakia they believe that enforced unbundling is unconstitutional and could have negative social consequences.
Given such opposition the extent to which MEPs from those countries will support their government's opposition to the plans will be one of the most fascinating aspects of the debate. The full plenary of the European Parliament will debate both the gas and electricity directives in June. When the measures were first debated by MEPs in the Industry Committee on 28 February, Czech Member Jan Březina (EPP-ED) pointed out that in many countries that joined the EU after 2004 "we are dependent on one supplier" and thus unbundling doesn't make sense.
Energy costs up or down?
There can be no sure data as to whether energy costs will go up or down given the number of variables such as soaring demand from China and India and the price of a barrel of oil approaching $120. However, supporters believe that an open market will encourage more efficient energy production and keep prices at a reasonable rate. There will also be measures to protect poorer consumers.
Europe's energy market is changing rapidly, as are people's energy's needs. Some people are more interested in price, some in green energy and some in generating their own power. It is hoped that by opening up the market, people will have more choice.
Influence on emission trading scheme
The Commission believes that only with a proper market in electricity and gas can the Emissions Trading Scheme (ETS) and renewable energy be boosted. It points out that with more competition the generators of energy, the network operators, the owner and suppliers all have an incentive to invest in renewable energy and alternative sources of energy.
At present the ETS is hampered, as Europe's electricity companies include carbon costs in their prices to customers, whilst accepting free emissions permits. In a free market low emissions will become a real competitive advantage, then demand for efficient power plants, renewables and carbon capture and storage will increase.
Energy Agency and Energy Consumers Charter
Also envisaged in the Energy Package is the setting up of an Agency to coordinate National Energy Regulators to complement the existing 27 national regulators. An "Energy Consumers Charter" in 2008 should allow consumers to choose suppliers and defend their rights when buying energy.
Gas and Energy Agency Rapporteurs named
The political groups have nominated rapporteurs for the key issues. Italian MEP Romano La Russa (UEN) for the gas directive, Bulgarian Atanas Paparizov (PES) and Spanish Member Alejo Vidal-Quadras (EPP-ED) are the rapporteurs for technical aspects of the gas and electricity regulation changes. Finally, Italian Member Renato Brunetta (EPP-ED) is rapporteur for the regulation establishing an energy agency.
20080429STO27886 European Commission - 3rd Energy Package
Industry, Research and Energy Committee Euroinfo - Nabucco gas pipeline
Eluned Morgan MEP "Prospects for the internal gas and electricity market" Vote in Committee 6 may 08
EN
1
PHOTO
20080428PHT27828.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/energy/electricity/package_2007/index_en.htm
EN
3
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=ITRE
EN
4
LINK
/eplive/archive/multimediaav_page/27715-20080428MAV27714-TELEVISION/default_en.htm
EN
5
LINK
http://www.elunedmorgan.org.uk/
EN
6
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5479272
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080505IPR28142 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
