Wednesday's plenary: Human rights, election observation and Georgia
Institutions
2008-05-08 - 11:45
Parliament's President led tributes to the victims of Burma's cyclone
How do human rights fare in the world today and which countries are responsible for the most serious violations? The annual report on human rights in the world in 2007 was under the spotlight in plenary on Wednesday. MEPs discussed a report on election observation and raised concerns about the situation in Georgia. Opening the two-day session in Brussels President Hans-Gert Pöttering expressed on behalf of the EP his solidarity with the victims of the cyclone that hit Burma on Saturday.
Human rights in the world
Every year the EP takes a closer look at a range of issues related to human rights throughout the world.
This years EP- report on human rights in the world is drafted by Italian Liberal Marco Cappato. The main topics in the report are the death penalty and the rights of women and children. During the debate MEP´s especially expressed their concern over the serious human rights violations in China, Russia and Iran . Csaba Sándor Tabajdifor the PSE group said that in Russia and China hundreds of thousands of people have no accesses to proper social security, pension and basic healthcare.
The report stresses that freedom of expression and assembly, continued to deteriorate in Russia in 2007. The persecution of journalists and political prisoners and Russia's unwillingness to admit election observers was criticised.
Georgia - Russia's move criticised
The members of the main political groups expressed their concern about the recent escalation of the situation in Georgia - a topic which was added to the agenda. Most MEPs criticised the decision of the Russian Federation to strengthen links with the authorities in Abkhazia and South Ossetia and expressed support for the sovereignty and the territorial integrity of Georgia. Finally MEP´s expressed their hope that the parliamentary election in Georgia on 21 May will be free and fair.
MEPs back election observation missions
MEP´s also discussed a report by José Ignacio Salafranca (EPP-ED) and Véronique de Keyser (PES) which supports the EU's observation missions, underlining how crucial they are, especially in developing countries. The report stresses that the observation of elections in new and developing democracies should remain a priority for the Parliament, and it regrets that the EU still lacks a common strategy for promoting democracy. It urges all EU institutions and Member States to continue their efforts to adopt such a strategy.
José Ignacio Salafranca stressed during the debate the need to "speak with one voice" on the global arena and described the EU-missions as a "good tool" to reinforce the Unions global leadership in this field. External Relations Commissioner Benita Ferrero-Waldner underlined on behalf of the Commission, that democracy is a vital pre-condition for human rights. She described the EU´s observations missions as a "big success for The European Union" and added that these missions contribute to the Union's ability to speak with one voice globally.
The euro turns 10
On the 10th anniversary of the decision to introduce the euro, MEPs also discussed Economic and Monetary Union. The Commissioner for Economic and Monetary Affairs Joaquin Almunia said that the euro is "an undisputed economic and political success", but at the same time confirmed that much still remains to be done: "we must now work to achieve a more solid economic and monetary union, one which is more efficient internally and projects itself more uniformly to the outside world" he said.
20080505STO28115 Burma Georgia Watch plenary live Agenda report on human rights
EN
1
PHOTO
20080506PHT28309.jpg
EN
4
LINK
/eplive/public/livebroadcast_en.htm
EN
5
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?reference=2008-05&language=EN
EN
6
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5571032#
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080423IPR27459 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080507IPR28481 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
