EU-US economic ties should be strengthened says MEPs
External relations
2008-05-08 - 11:45
Creating uniform standards for trade and investment and removing non-tariff barriers are among the suggestions of MEPs to strengthen ties between the two trade blocs. On the ban on imported hormone-treated beef, MEPs say it is fully justified "on the basis of scientific evidence" in a resolution adopted this Thursday by the House. A single authorisation procedure for all food and feed containing GMOs is also suggested.
A close transatlantic partnership is a vital instrument to shape globalisation, says the resolution, which supports strengthening transatlantic economic integration which started at the 2007 EU-US Summit. The Summit adopted a 'Framework for advancing transatlantic economic integration between the EU and the US' and established the Transatlantic Economic Council (TEC).
The results achieved by the TEC demonstrate that the transatlantic market cannot be built on administrative work only, but that strong and continuous political guidance is needed.
Regulatory alignment and safety of products
Mutual recognition of securities markets between the US and the EU would be an important step forward, as well as the adoption of the IFRS (International Financial Reporting Standards) by the US side, says the resolution.
When creating uniform standards for trade and investment -future roadmap for achieving mutual recognition in 2009 of EU-US trade partnership agreements - a high level of social, environmental and health standards must be guaranteed.
The safety of imported products should also become a priority within the TEC, according to the resolution. MEPs underline the need for close EU-US cooperation to ensure that China and other third countries raise their production standards to meet EU/US safety requirements, in particular for toys.
MEPs point out the crucial role of the European Parliament and the US Congress in controlling the process of standard alignment and the removal of barriers to trade and investment.
Agricultural issues
An urgent solution with regard to the ongoing discussions on the ban on imports into the EU of US poultry which has undergone pathogen reduction treatments should be found.
MEPs acknowledge also the considerable investments made by the European poultry sector, in accordance with European legislation, to reduce salmonella contamination. According to the House, the Community's decision to prohibit the import of hormone-treated beef has been "fully justified on the basis of scientific evidence". MEPs call on the US to lift its sanctions on European goods without further delay. The importance of a single authorisation procedure for all food and feed containing GMOs is emphasised.
Doha Development Agenda
MEPs recommend that greater coherence between bilateral trade agreements and the WTO multilateral rules should be discussed within the TEC. The resolution calls on the TEC to support the Doha declaration on the TRIPS Agreement, facilitating access to life-saving medicines for those countries which have no production capacity for pharmaceutical products.
The Future TLD agenda should include a discussion on the US cargo scanning regulation. T he proposal to inspect 100% of shipping containers coming from overseas as a measure to avert terrorist threats is " unnecessary and unrealistic " . A WTO post-Doha agenda, including a WTO reform, human rights, and environmental and social rights clauses in bilateral trade agreements should also discussed.
20080505IPR28209 Transatlantic Economic Council homepage
EN
1
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/enterprise/enterprise_policy/inter_rel/tec/index_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
