Brussels 2-day Plenary: Human rights, lobbying, sport
Institutions
2008-05-13 - 11:31
Hans-Gert Pöttering expressed his condolences to the people of Burma Meeting in Brussels for 2 days of debates and votes MEPs turned their attention to human rights around the world, election observation, lobbying and sport in education to name a few. Adopting the EU's annual human rights report MEPs singled out China, Iran and Russia for special criticism. Also approved was a set of new recommendations which aim to make the lobbying of the EU's institutions more open and accountable.
The aim is to make lobbyists divulge their clients and for each piece of European legislation to have a "footprint" to show who was involved at what stage. A public list of all lobbyists accredited to all institutions is also envisaged. The week also saw the House support a report that aims to expand the role of sport both in keeping people fit and in using it to improve educational skills. Parliament's President also led the tributes to those who perished when cyclone Nargis hit Burma the weekend before the session.
MEPs will convene again on 19 May for a plenary session in Strasbourg.
20080506FCS28248
Wednesday's plenary: Human rights, election observation and Georgia
Parliament's President led tributes to the victims of Burma's cyclone How do human rights fare in the world today and which countries are responsible for the most serious violations? The annual report on human rights in the world in 2007 was under the spotlight in plenary on Wednesday. MEPs discussed a report on election observation and raised concerns about the situation in Georgia. Opening the two-day session in Brussels President Hans-Gert Pöttering expressed on behalf of the EP his solidarity with the victims of the cyclone that hit Burma on Saturday.
Human rights in the world Every year the EP takes a closer look at a range of issues related to human rights throughout the world. This years EP-report on human rights in the world is drafted by Italian Liberal Marco Cappato. The main topics in the report are the death penalty and the rights of women and children. During the debate MEP´s especially expressed their concern over the serious human rights violations in China, Russia and Iran . Csaba Sándor Tabajdifor the PSE group said that in Russia and China hundreds of thousands of people have no accesses to proper social security, pension and basic healthcare. The report stresses that freedom of expression and assembly, continued to deteriorate in Russia in 2007. The persecution of journalists and political prisoners and Russia's unwillingness to admit election observers was criticised. Georgia - Russia's move criticised The members of the main political groups expressed their concern about the recent escalation of the situation in Georgia - a topic which was added to the agenda. Most MEPs criticised the decision of the Russian Federation to strengthen links with the authorities in Abkhazia and South Ossetia and expressed support for the sovereignty and the territorial integrity of Georgia. Finally MEP´s expressed their hope that the parliamentary election in Georgia on 21 May will be free and fair. MEPs back election observation missions MEP´s also discussed a report by José Ignacio Salafranca (EPP-ED) and Véronique de Keyser (PES) which supports the EU's observation missions, underlining how crucial they are, especially in developing countries. The report stresses that the observation of elections in new and developing democracies should remain a priority for the Parliament, and it regrets that the EU still lacks a common strategy for promoting democracy. It urges all EU institutions and Member States to continue their efforts to adopt such a strategy. José Ignacio Salafranca stressed during the debate the need to "speak with one voice" on the global arena and described the EU-missions as a "good tool" to reinforce the Unions global leadership in this field. External Relations Commissioner Benita Ferrero-Waldner underlined on behalf of the Commission, that democracy is a vital pre-condition for human rights. She described the EU´s observations missions as a "big success for The European Union" and added that these missions contribute to the Union's ability to speak with one voice globally. The euro turns 10 On the 10th anniversary of the decision to introduce the euro, MEPs also discussed Economic and Monetary Union. The Commissioner for Economic and Monetary Affairs Joaquin Almunia said that the euro is "an undisputed economic and political success", but at the same time confirmed that much still remains to be done: "we must now work to achieve a more solid economic and monetary union, one which is more efficient internally and projects itself more uniformly to the outside world" he said Burma Georgia Human rights report
Thursday's plenary: Rules on lobbying parliament, sport in education
MEPs backed new rules to put the work of lobbyists on, not under, the table Lobbyists would have to register and provide full financial disclosure of their clients under new lobbying proposals backed by MEPs during the May 8 Brussels plenary session. This could radically alter the relationship between EU institutions and the 15,000 lobbyists who seek to influence them. MEPs also backed a text about the white paper on sport launched by the Commission.
New rules shed more transparency on lobbying
MEPs adopted the report on new lobbying rules with an overwhelming majority. Among the proposals are a mandatory public register for lobbyists, common to the Council, Commission and Parliament and providing for "full financial disclosure". Lobbyists would also have to comply with a code of conduct and face sanctions if they infringed it. The report proposes that rapporteurs be permitted to attach to their reports an indicative list of lobbyists ("legislative footprint") who were consulted and had a "significant input" during the preparation of the text.
Initially drafted by former MEP Alexander Stubb, now Finland's Foreign Minister, the report has been taken over by his EPP-ED colleague Ingo Friedrich.
There was general support for the report, although Mr Friedrich, commenting on the liberal group's proposal to include churches in the list of lobbying organisations, said: "churches are partners according to the treaties, not lobbyists".
The Socialists and Greens called for the register to be in force before the 2009 EP elections. Sylvia-Yvonne Kaufmann from the GUE/NGL group, said having clear rules on lobbying is "crucial for the credibility of EU legislation".
The European Parliament has had a voluntary register of lobbyists and a code of lobbying conduct in place for the past 10 years. It is estimated that there are about 2,500 lobby organisations and 15,000 lobbyists in Brussels, of which approximately 5,000 operate in the EP.
Sport - focus on health and educational aspects
MEPs also debated and approved a report by Manolis Mavrommatis (EPP-ED) about the Commission's White paper on sport. The report recalls the importance of sport in society: it generated an added value of €407 billion in 2004 (3.7% of EU GDP) and employment for 15 million people.
During the debate Mr Mavrommatis welcomed the fact that the Lisbon Treaty includes "a clear reference to the European dimension of sport". "We need to protect the specific nature of sport and it is good that the European Union will now push forward a policy in the sport area".
The majority of the speakers welcomed the report and underlined the positive effects of sport on health and education, but pointed out that some negative phenomenon like racism, violence, human trafficking or doping are often linked to sport. They also regretted the commercialisation of sports, mainly though television.
Other votes included:
- Marco Cappato- Human Rights in the World 2007
- Véronique De Keyser, José Ignacio Salafranca - EU Election Observation Missions
- Rosa Miguélez Ramos - Management of deep-sea fish stocks
Press info on lobbying Press info on sport Procedure file: White Paper on sport
EN
1
PHOTO
20080506PHT28305.jpg
EN
2
PHOTO
20080506PHT28309.jpg
EN
3
LINK
//news/expert/infopress_page/030-27565-112-04-17-903-20080423IPR27459-21-04-2008-2008-false/default_en.htm
EN
4
LINK
//news/expert/infopress_page/030-28501-128-05-19-903-20080507IPR28481-07-05-2008-2008-false/default_en.htm
EN
5
LINK
//oeil/file.jsp?id=5571032#
EN
6
PHOTO
20080513PHT28736.jpg
EN
9
LINK
/oeil/FindByProcnum.do?lang=2&procnum=INI/2007/2261
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080430IPR28012 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080430IPR28013 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
