MEPs call for new voluntary ethos
Vocational training
2008-05-15 - 14:10
Berlin, 99-year-old Elli Heinrich voluntarily sorts books at an Oxfam shop
More than 100 million Europeans are currently engaged in voluntary activities. Even if volunteering is done for free, it is a surprisingly significant economic factor in our society – the voluntary sector accounts for between 3-5% of GDP. MEPs want the EU to benefit more from this sector and boost its potential. On 22 April parliament approved a report designed to recognise and support volunteers in all relevant EU programmes and polices.
The report, prepared by Irish Liberal Marian Harkin, is called "The role of volunteering in contributing to economic and social cohesion" and suggests the following:
EU members, regional and local authorities and voluntary organisations should be encouraged to develop plans to recognise, value, support, facilitate and encourage volunteering, and to work in partnership to do so. It also urges help to voluntary bodies to access sufficient and sustainable funding, without excessive red tape or bureaucracy, while maintaining controls on public expenditure.
Private sector can play a role
The report seeks to encourage companies and other private-sector operators, as part of their corporate social responsibility strategy, to financially support initiatives promoting and enhancing volunteering. Finally it recommends that 2011 be declared the European Year of Volunteering.
Speaking about her report, Marian Harkin said that "we need to ensure European policies recognise and support volunteers in their valuable work. Furthermore for every €1 organisations spent on supporting volunteers they received an average return worth between €3 and €8". Stressing the wider benefits she said that "there is a strong link between volunteering and active citizenship...involvement in voluntary activities is a tangible expression of participatory democracy".
European Voluntary Service
There are many different options for voluntary work. The European Voluntary Service project is fully funded by the EU. It is open to young people aged 18 to 30 and allows them to do voluntary work for up to 12 months almost anywhere in the world. Participation is free for the volunteers who get board and lodging, insurance cover and an allowance for the duration of the project.
In 2008, the European Voluntary Service budget is €38 million, covering expenses for around 4000 young people. The biggest volunteer flows are generally seen in Germany, France, Spain, the UK, Italy, Poland and Hungary. Volunteers can work in a wide range of areas, such as culture, youth, sports, social care, cultural heritage, the arts, civil protection, the environment and development co-operation.
"Lucky to have a programme like that"
Estonian volunteer Liis Kängsepp (27) participated in an EVS programme. She quit her job as a journalist and went to outskirts of Buenos Aires, Argentina, to help with coordination in a community centre for a year: "After working as a volunteer I have realised how special it is when somebody actually supports you financially and emotionally while doing it. EVS provides the opportunity to do something good and to get an amazing experience to people who otherwise couldn't do it. I think EVS should get more attention...we are very lucky to have a programme like that."
What happens next?
Ms Harkin's report will be sent to the European Commission, which will examine its recommendations and could come up with proposals.
20080513STO28756 EP press service EP report on volunteering About EVS: European Commission website EVS national agencies
EN
1
PHOTO
20080514PHT28938.jpg
EN
4
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/youth/youth-in-action-programme/doc82_en.htm
EN
5
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/youth/youth/doc152_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080410BRI26349 ITEM-018-EN NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0131 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
