Highlights of May Strasbourg plenary session
Institutions
2008-05-19 - 17:34
Climate change interim report criticises unsubstantiated research denying climate change, resolutions on China following earthquake, Myanmar following cyclone, rising food prices, US visa exemptions and the situation in Lebanon, Turkey's progress towards the EU, evaluation of the Peace Programme, 20 May to be European Maritime Day, road transport package nears its end, animal health strategy, dates of plenary sessions for 2009 are among the highlights of the Strasbourg plenary session.
Monday 19 May 2008
The session starts with a legislative report on the protection of the environment through criminal law. Seriously damaging the environment should be made a criminal offence in all EU Member States, so as to ensure that EU legislation is properly enforced, says the Legal Affairs Committee.
The second report on Monday's agenda deals the 2009 budget - Parliament's estimates. MEPs in the Committee on Budgets endorse the draft estimates and agree with the principle of establishing a "Lisbon reserve".
Bairbre de Brún (GUE/NGL, UK, Northern Ireland, Sinn Féin) presents a report on the evaluation of the Peace Programme (in Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland) and strategies for the future. The experience gained from the PEACE programmes in Ireland, positive results and best practice, what may be improved, challenges still to be faced and lessons to be learned are set out in an own-initiative report. Lessons from these programmes could help elsewhere, within and beyond EU borders. The possibility of creating a Europe-wide network of regions and cities living with, or emerging from, conflict and exclusion is now under discussion, notes the report.
MEPs will debate a report on the EU consumer strategy (2007-2013) which says that since the greatest obstacles to the development of an internal market in retailing include uncertainties regarding consumer contracts, supports the Commission in its efforts to introduce standard contracts and conditions for contracts concluded on-line which would have the same force in all the Member States.
Tuesday 20 May 2008
Tuesday starts with a debate on the guidelines for employment policies of the Member States. Tax-benefit structures should not discriminate against women, and workers should be encouraged to prolong their working lives, says the Employment Committee's report on the EU's guidelines for employment policies that will be debated by MEPs. The report also mentions of the targets to be reached by 2010, such as an average rate of early school leavers of no more than 10% or a raise in the effective retirement age by five years.
Liz Lynne (ALDE, UK, Liberal Democrat, West Midlands) will outline her report on the progress made in equal-opportunities and non-discrimination in the EU. The report calls for a "comprehensive directive" to combat any discrimination on grounds of sex, racial or ethnic origin, religion or belief, disability, age or sexual orientation. It also demands effective sanctions and support for victims.
20 May will be designated European Maritime Day with a key event in Strasbourg. The President of the European Parliament Hans-Gert Pöttering, Council President Janez Janša, and Commission President José Manuel Barroso will officially launch the first European Maritime Day by signing the Joint Tripartite Declaration establishing a "European Maritime Day". A photo opportunity/press point will be organised at the EP.
MEPs will vote on the dates of the Strasbourg and Brussels plenary sessions for 2009. 2009 is European election year with elections taking place the first week of June 2009 in the 27 Member States.
On Tuesday afternoon, Arlene McCarthy (North West Labour, PES, UK) for the Internal Market and Consumer Protection Committee will be asking questions of the Council on misleading 'Directory companies' (e.g. 'European City Guides') Over the past years, a number of so-called 'Directory companies' (for instance 'European City Guides') have been operating cross-border in several EU Member States applying misleading and fraudulent business practices.
Parliament is to debate and vote on three legislative reports on proposals aimed at modernising the rules governing admission to the occupation of transport operator and access to the road transport market. The Commission proposals provide for compulsory training for transport managers, an enforceable definition of cabotage which can be carried out within a Member State and mechanisms for imposing sanctions across the national borders. MEPs are negotiating a first-reading deal with the Council.
The House will debate the situation of the Roma in the EU.
Fiona Hall (ALDE, UK, Liberal Democrat North East) will present her legislative report on the selection and authorisation of systems providing mobile satellite services. Draft rules providing for systems providing mobile satellite services - such as broadband internet or mobile TV - to be selected at EU level in the future are backed by the Industry Committee. Parliament will vote on a first-reading compromise package, negotiated with Council, which lays down that each system has to provide services in at least 60% of the EU's total area when it starts operating and should cover at least half of each Member States' population after seven years at the latest.
Tuesday evening sees MEPs debating a second-reading agreement on metallic mercury (exports and storage). The export of mercury and mercury compounds from the EU shall be prohibited from 15 March 2011, according to a second reading compromise which is being proposed by the Environment Committee and negotiated between representatives of the EP and the Council.
The House will also debate a report on a better ship dismantling. Acting on environmentally damaging practices and on dangerous working conditions under which cargo ships are dismantled, primarily in Bangladesh, India and Pakistan, is the key point of the report. MEPs in the committee also ask the Commission to set up a list to register and monitor 'pre-waste ships', and a list of preferred ship recycling facilities in an own-initiative report.
Wednesday 21 May 2008
The key topic of the week is a report on the scientific facts of climate change: findings and recommendations for decision making. Climate Change Committee MEPs criticise “scientifically unsubstantiated efforts” to discredit studies on the causes and effects of climate change, call for additional research on the impact of biofuels, and warn that current policies will not suffice to stem global warming in the long term, in an interim report.
The House will then debate a report on Turkey's 2007 progress. "Transform priorities and time-lines into reform plans," the Foreign Affairs Committee urged Turkey, in its latest progress report. The committee welcomes several recent legislative activities of Turkey, while insisting that the speed of reforms must pick up. The report "welcomes the commitment of Prime Minister Erdogan that 2008 is going to be the year of reforms" and "urges the Turkish government to fulfil its promises" by implementing them.
Parliament will then debate the recent tragic cyclone Myanmar and devastating earthquake in central China. MEPs will vote on two separate resolutions on these topics.
The House will debate a new animal health strategy for the EU (2007-2013) MEPs in the Agriculture Committee support the objectives of the Commission's Animal Health Strategy for the EU, but call for more ambition and stress that such objectives can only be achieved with a sufficient and clearly defined budget. They also strongly support vaccination, which according to them should be recognised as one of the more important methods to prevent diseases.
Thursday 22 May 2008
MEPs will debate the follow up of the Paris declaration of 2005 on aid effectiveness. Simplifying aid procedures and phasing out economic policy conditionality are among the demands of the EP Committee on Development in a report on aid effectiveness to developing countries. To be more efficient, aid should also be disbursed according to partners´ own priorities and timetables, says the report. The report also underlines the necessary fight against corruption.
Parliament votes on a resolution on rising food prices in the EU and developing countries following the debate that was held on 22 April In Strasbourg.
The House will also vote on a resolution on negotiations between the EU and the United States with regards to visa exemptions following the debate that was held on 23 April in Strasbourg.
The European Parliament will vote on a resolution on the situation in Lebanon given the latest political clashes.
As usual the session ends with three debates and votes on human rights issues in the world. On this occasion the topics are: Sudan and the International Criminal Court, detention of political opponents in Belarus and increasing tensions in Burundi.
20080516IPR29015 Briefing for Strasbourg plenary session 19-22 May 2008 Final draft agenda 19-22 May 2008
EN
2
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?reference=2008-05-2&language=EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080430BRI28007 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
