Increasing the number of women scientists - gender parity implies at least 40 % female representation
Women's rights/Equal opportunities
2008-05-21 - 13:26
In adopting a report on the under-representation of women in the world of science, Parliament calls for gender balance on decision-making bodies, mainstreaming of the male-female dimension in research programmes and support for scientific careers for women to increase the number of women scientists in the EU. MEPs criticise the unambitious and insufficient EU target of 25 % and remind the Commission and the Member States that gender parity implies at least 40 % female representation.
Research is a key sector for the EU's economic development: Europe needs to recruit 700,000 additional researchers under the Lisbon strategy for growth and employment.
However, women researchers are in a minority within the EU, comprising of only 35% of researchers in government and the public sector and only 18% of researchers in the private sector. The higher up the academic ladder one goes, the fewer women there are. Although women account for over 50% of European students and 43% of PhDs, they only hold 15% of senior university posts, which sharply reduces their influence over research decisions.
The report by Britta THOMSEN (PES, DK) seeks to address the low number of women in decision-making bodies and a lack of transparency in recruitment procedures and the persistence of stereotypes in Europe's teaching systems. " The subject of women and science is related to the objectives of the Lisbon Strategy. Positive actions are needed to quickly improve the situation", said the rapporteur. It was adopted by 416 votes for, 75 against and 164 abstentions.
Gender balance in decision-making bodies
To bring more women into science, MEPs call on the Commission and the Member States to opt for more transparent recruitment processes and to require a gender balance in evaluation panels and selection committees, ensuring they consist of at least 40% women and at least 40% men.
Moreover, notes the report, one of the priority areas for EU action in the Roadmap for Gender Equality is equal representation in decision-making, including a target of 25% of women in leading positions in public sector research.
Fighting stereotypes and mainstreaming the male-female dimension in EU programmes
Universities, research institutes and private businesses are encouraged to adopt and enforce equality strategies in the organisation, including more "gender neutral" approaches to evaluating performance.
The report considers that Gender Action Plans within the proposal and evaluation stage of the EU's Seventh Framework Programme (FP7) is an essential part of the EU's gender equality programme and therefore should remain an integral part of European research funding.
Encouraging scientific careers for women
The report calls on the commission and the Member States to take positive action to encourage female researchers, such as setting up support programmes for young women scientists and strengthening networking among female scientists at national, regional and EU level.
20080520IPR29483 Women and science Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 21 May)
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5531842
EN
2
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
