Wednesday in Strasbourg: Turkey, crisis in Burma, China
Institutions
2008-05-22 - 15:21
China - the people of Beichuan mourn
Turkey's EU aspirations were debated by MEPs on Wednesday morning. Parliament's rapporteur on Turkey, Ria Oomen-Ruijten (EPP-ED), called for 2008 to be "a year of reforms". Later the House voted to support criminal sanctions for offences against the environment. MEPs also debated recent natural disasters in Burma and China - deploring the obstruction of Rangoon and praising the reaction and transparency of China. A treaty to ban uranium shells was also on the agenda.
Turkey progress in 2007 - " We have a mixed picture"
Speaking about Turkey's 2007 progress towards EU accession, Mrs Oomen-Ruijten, said that only the new Turkish constitution will guarantee the separation between the state and religion and safeguard the protection of religious and ethnic minorities - namely Kurds. "We have a mixed picture, a lot more needs to be done, in order for Turkey to keep their promises to the EU and to their own people."
Women's and children's rights, trades unions and cultural and linguistic freedoms were quoted in the report as among the areas where Turkish authorities still have serious backlogs. In addition, so-called "honour killings" and a failure by Ankara to acknowledge the Armenian genocide as well as bans on political parties were all matters cited by members in the debate as indicators of Turkey's continued need to reform.
The adopted report says recent changes to the controversial Article 301 of the Turkish Penal Code is a "first step towards a fundamental reform of that article as well as other articles of the Penal Code, and looks forward to further moves in this respect." Parliament adds that in its view "the repeal of Article 301 and other legal provisions representing an illegitimate restriction on freedom of expression as guaranteed by international law would be the best solution."
In her speech Ms Oomen-Ruijten welcomed the fact that in 2007 the country stood up to the military and said she wanted Turkey to remain a "lay state".
Criminal measures to protect the environment
In adopting a report by German Christian Democrat Hartmut Nassauer,MEPs agreed on the principle that governments should apply criminal measures to punish any illegal behaviour likely to seriously injure people or damage the environment. The entry into force of this legislation would oblige national government to apply "effective, proportionate and dissuasive" criminal penalties to specific cases.
Burma cyclone and its generals - "dialogue of the deaf"
As the situation continues to deteriorate in Burma following dramatically cyclone Nargis, MEPs were united in denouncing the ruling military Junta for its reluctance to accept international aid and in urging, the international community to work through the UN to pressurise Burma's Generals.
Speakers from the Socialist, Liberal, Green and Union of Nation's groups said the Burmese military's behaviour was a "crime against humanity" and said the Generals should face international justice.
The speaker for the largest group in parliament, the EPP-ED group, said they wanted other Asian countries to put more pressure on the regime in Rangoon.
Earlier EU Aid Commissioner Louis Michel called his fact-finding trip to Burma a "dialogue of the deaf" with Burmese officials. He said epidemics such as diarrhoea and malnutrition affected hundreds of thousand of people.
China quake - Beijing praised for openness to help
In contrast, China was praised for way it had reacted to the 12 May quake in Sichuan province and its willingness to accept international aid. Many MEPs expressed condolences to Chinese people. Speaking for the Slovene Presidency Janez Lenarčič told MEPs that 10 million had been affected and that 50,000 were dead. Louis Michel said the EU has funded Red Cross blankets, tents, food and drinking water.
All groups praised the transparency of Beijing and the willingness to allow media access. The Speaker for the Socialist group said that the EU should help China with reconstruction The EPP-ED and Green speakers voiced concerns over construction of buildings, especially schools.
Depleted uranium weapons
A group of MEPs tabled oral questions to the Commission and the Council on the Global treaty to ban uranium weapons. In November 2006, the Parliament called for a moratorium on uranium weapons in a resolution on ‘biological weapons and inhumane conventional weapons. The oral question urges Commission and The Council to follow up the document. In December 2007, the UN General Assembly passed a resolution highlighting concerns over the military use of uranium that urges UN member states to re-examine the health hazards posed by the use of uranium weapons.
Dutch Green Eli de Groen said that of EU/NATO members only Germany, Italy and Ireland supported the UN resolution. "World storage of depleted uranium weapons is estimated at 1.3 million tons, while far less then one microgram of the material in the body can be fatal to humans," she told fellow MEPs. Italian MEP Stefano Zappalà (EPP-ED) underlined that uranium "pollutes water, soil and agricultural crops".
20080520STO29282 Weds votes Turkey's 2007 progress report EU criminal law to protect the environment Current mitigation efforts on climate change “insufficient”, say MEPs in interim report Oral question to the Council - uranium
EN
1
PHOTO
20080522PHT29672.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/news/expert/tous_les_epvotes/default/default_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A6-2008-0168 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080520IPR29449 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080520IPR29460 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT OQ O-2008-0029 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
