European Parliament calls for a political solution in Lebanese crisis
External relations
2008-05-22 - 13:21
In the aftermath of the recent wave of violent clashes in Beirut, and the recent agreement on power-sharing in Doha, the European Parliament adopted a resolution on Lebanon. The House welcomes the Doha agreement, and calls on all forces in the country to respect the Lebanese army and disarm. The resolution notes that "the security of the country and of all Lebanese people is dependent on the disarmament of all armed groups, especially Hezbollah."
The Parliament's resolution, adopted by 520 votes in favour, 6 against and 13 abstentions, "welcomes the Doha Agreement reached by the parties on the election of General Sleiman as President of the Republic in the coming days, the creation of a new National Unity government and the adoption of the electoral law." The House "invites all the parties involved to support the Lebanese army so that it can guarantee fully the functioning, security, law and order, sovereignty and stability of Lebanon," noting that "the security of the country and of all Lebanese people is dependent on the disarmament of all armed groups, especially Hezbollah."
The House reiterates its support for the UN forces in the country (UNIFIL), the international tribunal to try those who assassinated former Prime Minister Rafik Hariri, and Commission and Council efforts to support reconstruction in Lebanon. The resolution also calls on Syria to "refrain from all interference that can have a negative impact on Lebanese internal affairs and to play a constructive role in seeking to establish stability in the country."
EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering made a declaration at the beginning of the voting session, saying: "It is with great relief as well as hopeful and sustained encouragements that we very warmly welcome, as the European Parliament is about to adopt a resolution on the matter, the solid and comprehensive agreement reached by the Lebanese political leaders in Doha. Stressing the positive reactions expressed by neighbouring states and other countries concerned, the European Parliament calls on all the parties to fully implement the agreement. We reiterate our unfading support to the legitimate and constitutional Lebanese political institutions and to the Lebanese army, as well as to their efforts in ensuring Lebanon's stability, sovereignty and territorial integrity."
20080521IPR29633 Debate - 9 April 2008 (Brussels plenary session) Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 22 May)
EN
2
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//TEXT CRE 20080409 ITEM-018 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
