MEPs hold 2 days of debates in Brussels Wednesday, Thursday
Institutions
2008-06-02 - 13:00
MEPs debate illegal fishing this week
Foreign policy and defence, illegal fishing and financial services are just three items being debated this week when MEPs meet in Brussels. Also under discussion will be the upcoming EU-US Summit, the deteriorating situation in Georgia and the Union's relations with Mediterranean countries - the so called Barcelona process. You can watch all of the plenary debates live here on the parliament's website - where you can also read all the news from the Chamber.
Wednesday 4 June Foreign policy: The session opens at 1500 CET with a joint debate on foreign policy, security and defence with High Representative for Foreign Affairs Javier Solana . The Foreign Affairs Committee highlights the increased effectiveness the Lisbon Treaty could give to the EU's foreign policy, while also pointing to the need for increased parliamentary scrutiny and democratic legitimacy in the Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP) and the European Security and Defence Policy (ESDP). The Committee's stance is set out in two own initiative reports. EU-US Summit: Parliament will debate the forthcoming EU-US Summit to be held in Slovenia on 9 and 10 June . The summit will centre on the following key areas: Regional and political issues, global security issues, present-day global challenges and bilateral transatlantic partnership. The House will vote on a resolution on this topic. Illegal fishing: The House then turns its attention to the EU system against illegal, unreported, and unregulated fishing . MEPs in the committee propose several amendments concerning the Community list of IUU fishing vessels, inspections, sanctions and other measures to be imposed by Member States. Financial services: MEPs will debate competition in retail and financial services . Consumers should have more choice and pay less for banking and financial services. This could be achieved in part by removing obstacles to cross-border products. One way to do this is to reduce the differences between national regulations. Two reports stress the importance of improving financial literacy among consumers. Forced prostitution: The last point on Wednesday evening is an oral question to the Commission on forced prostitution and human trafficking , especially of women for the purpose of sexual exploitation during the European football championship 2008. Within the framework of events it organised to mark International Women's Day on 8 March 2006, the European Parliament's Committee on Women's Rights and Gender Equality launched a campaign to alert the public to the need to prevent and combat trafficking and forced prostitution during the FIFA World Cup 2006 championship. Thursday 5 June Barcelona process: The session opens on Thursday with MEPs debating the Barcelona Process: Union for the Mediterranean after hearing statements from the Council and Commission. The European Commission adopted proposals on 20 May for upgrading relations with its Mediterranean partners through this process. The relationship is likely to be a priority of the French Presidency during the second half of 2008. MEPs
Georgia: MEPs will vote on a resolution on the deteriorating situation in Georgia following a previous plenary debate held on 7 May in Brussels.
20080530STO30439 Parliament's press service
EN
1
PHOTO
20080602PHT30506.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/news/expert/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
