Co-operation with the Mediterranean: Fresh impetus and concrete projects needed for Barcelona process
Institutions
2008-06-05 - 13:36
MEPs support the "fresh political and practical impetus" given to the revised Barcelona process in order to raise its profile and highlight its tangible benefits for citizens and, in particular, for citizens on the southern shore of the Mediterranean but ask that concrete projects such as solar electricity and water desalination are promoted. The Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly (EMPA) should become the parliamentary dimension of the Barcelona Process: Union for the Mediterranean.
MEPs support the development of the Barcelona Process: Union for the Mediterranean as "a consolidation of the Euro-Mediterranean area". This process should lead to a strong partnership in foreign and security policy. On human rights, the resolution says that the Euro-Mediterranean partnership has not yet led to the expected results in this area.
The Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly (EMPA) should become an integral part of the institutional framework of the Barcelona Process: Union for the Mediterranean, as its "parliamentary dimension". EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering chairs the EMPA until March 2009.
The EMPA is the only parliamentary assembly gathering the 27 EU Member States and all the parties involved in the Middle East peace process. As a consultative body, the EMPA should have the right to make "proposals" and "evaluations".
Co-presidency and secretariat
The proposal to establish a co-presidency of the Barcelona Process at Head of States and at Foreign ministers level is welcomed.
Concerning the Southern branch of the presidency, the resolution says that it should be nominated "by consensus of the Southern partners". The country holding the presidency should invite all the states participating at the Barcelona Process.
The new secretariat should make the Barcelona Process "more visible on the ground" according to MEPs. It should be concentrated on projects such as sea motorways, the intercommunion of the Arab Maghreb motorway (AMA), the de-pollution of the Mediterranean and a Mediterranean Solar Plan.
The resolution welcomes the proposal to organise every two years, summit meetings. The EMPA should be "fully involved" in the preparation and proceedings of these summits. The proposal to establish a Joint Permanent Committee, based in Brussels, of appointed representatives from all the participants in the Barcelona Process is also supported.
The projects under the Barcelona Process should be open to all EU states and Mediterranean partners interested to participate. MEPs ask the Commission to inform on a regular basis the EP and the EMPA on the development of these regional projects and to consider the proposals and evaluations submitted at parliamentary level.
The EU Mediterranean partnership cannot focus "solely" on economic and trade issues. The third pillar meant to contribute to "peace, stability and prosperity" and the project of a Charter for Peace and Stability have not made significant progress, says MEPs.
The resolution recalls the proposal for the creation of a Euro-Mediterranean Investment and Development Bank capable of attracting direct foreign investments and reaffirms the necessity to strengthen the status of women in the Mediterranean region.
The Commission's proposals will have to be endorsed by the June European Council (19-20 June) before the official launch of the Barcelona Process: Union for the Mediterranean at the Paris Summit on 13 July. The EMPA Bureau will meet in Paris on 12 July.
20080604IPR30761 Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 5 June) Commission statement - 5 June 2008 Audio, 11:34 - Commissioner Benita Ferrero-Waldner - EN Audio, 23:00 - Political groups - EN Press release - Barcelona process
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
2
LINK
/activities/plenary/cre/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
3
MULTIMEDIA
20080605MLT30964.asf
EN
4
MULTIMEDIA
20080605MLT30962.asf
EN
5
MULTIMEDIA
20080526MLT29817.pdf
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
