More choice and lower costs for bank customers
Economic and monetary affairs
2008-06-05 - 13:36
Consumers should have more choice in, and pay less for, banking and financial services. This could be achieved in part by removing the obstacles to cross-border products, according to MEPs. One way to do this is to reduce the differences between national regulations. Parliament also stresses the importance of improving financial literacy among consumers.
Parliament adopted two own-initiative reports, one from Othmar Karas (EPP-ED, AT), reacting to a Commission green paper on retail financial services, and one from Gianni Pittella (PES, IT), which responds to the Commission’s inquiry into competition in retail banking.
The goal: tangible benefits for consumers
According to the Karas report, the aim is to deliver tangible benefits for consumers by securing greater choice and lower prices, enhancing consumer confidence and empowering consumers. Given the need for a secure environment for both bank and customer, and believing that cross border activity is crucial to increase competition 6, Parliament calls for an approach of “targeted full harmonisation” to the regulatory framework: i.e. making essential elements of the rules equal in all Member States, while applying mutual recognition to the rest. There is also the possibility of a “28th regime” of EU regulation specifically to cover cross-border products, which the report says is worth careful study.
“Same risk, same rules”
Real and fair competition can arise only if there is a level playing field, with regulators applying the “same risk, same rules” approach to different businesses, but this does not mean adopting a “one-size-fits-all” approach. What is needed is comparable transparency and disclosure requirements, especially at the point of sale.
Financial literacy
While legislation should aim for very high standards of consumer protection, all players should take steps to improve financial literacy at all levels, including the basic principle that a higher return usually means a higher risk.
Fragmented regulation a barrier to cross-border activity
Given the closely related topic, some of the same ground is covered by the Pittella report, which also highlights the obstacles caused to cross-border banking by a fragmented regulatory approach and highlights money laundering regulations as being one area that needs to be examined.
Changing banks: a seamless process?
When customers want to change banks, says the report, there should be no disruption as they close on account and open another. 6 Charges applied for closing an account should only be those which are “fully justified.” MEPs emphasise, moreover, that access to basic banking services is a right for all.
Common standards on information for –and on - customers
The report says there should be a comparable system in all Member States by which banks set out for customers opening an account the costs and charges they impose. If the industry does not act on this issue, legislation may be needed.
Banks need to have access to fraud and credit checking data across borders, but with proper safeguards for consumer data protection.
Pluralism in types of provider
MEPs stress the importance of pluralism in types of service provider in banking. They also want the Commission to check that the Single European Payments Area project does not reduce competition in payment settlement services.
Interbank charges
The report also calls for an examination of the different types of inter-bank charges, for credit cards, cash machine withdrawals and other payments. It says the Commission should establish agreed criteria on what is allowed by competition rules in this area, ensuring a level playing field.
20080604IPR30758 Competition: sector inquiry on retail banking Green Paper on retail financial services in the single market Texts, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 5 June)
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5531552
EN
2
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5572432
EN
3
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
