Frozen conflicts, uncertain membership prospects preoccupy MEPs at Neighbourhood Policy Conference
External relations
2008-06-05 - 17:53
EU membership prospects and frozen conflicts in the South Caucasus were debated by MEPs and their counterparts from Amenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia, Moldova and Ukraine, along with Belarussian opposition figures, at a "European Neighbourhood Policy East" conference in Brussels on Wednesday and Thursday.
"As parliamentarians, we are all bound to the idea of pursuing dialogue in order to solve problems", said European Parliament President Hans-Gert Pöttering, welcoming the participants. Conferences such as this will lead to more intensive relations between the EU and its neighbourhood, he predicted, stressing that "the European Neighbourhood Policy is not a tacked-on policy", but one that could "change the face of Europe."
The importance of being "neighbours"
Co-chairman Marek Siwiec (PES, PL), noted that the work of Parliament's delegations with third countries has been increasing in magnitude and importance in the past few years. "ENP is a policy for countries with a perspective towards the Union, some for full membership", he said. Deputy Speaker of the Azerbaijani Parliament Valeh Aleskerov said that the fact of calling the South Caucasus countries "neighbours" while the Central and Eastern European countries were given "partnership" agreements was a linguistic difference with "major political consequences."
Marie Anne Isler-Béguin (Greens/EFA, FR), agreed, saying that contrary to some fears in the EU, "it would be very positive to talk about the ENP as a 'waiting room' for accession, as it would not guarantee full membership, but at least give a sorely needed European perspective to these countries."
Rapporteur on the Commission's enlargement strategy Elmar Brok (EPP-ED, DE), said that alongside the positive signs of European values in rhetoric, “possible candidate countries should not only change legislation, but this legislation also has to be implemented.” Co-chairman of the EU-Ukraine Parliamentary Cooperation Committee Borys Tarasyuk said that “a membership perspective would be a good goal for us to work towards." Mr Brok suggested that Europe “needs to expand its toolbox between ENP and full membership." On Belarus, Mr Brok said the EU needs to look at it seriously, since “one is only truly free when one’s neighbours are free."
Stop managing, start solving frozen conflicts
The first working group of the conference tackled the issue of frozen conflicts in the ENP countries. Marianne Mikko (PES, ET), said "we need to use all political levers to solve the frozen conflicts in your region: we have to stop managing these problems, and start solving them." Georgian Parliament Speaker Nino Burjanadze agreed, saying that "unfortunately, these conflicts are not all frozen." She said the region needs European involvement and support in this area, but added that "it is so important to strengthen democracy as such, and democratic developments in the region, not just to solve pressing issues."
Subsequent meetings tackled the efficient use of EU funds, and the question of Belarus. On ENP and the National Action Plans, István Szent-Iványi (ALDE, HU), advised ENP countries to “focus on the efficient use of money” and said that in return for the EU's efforts, “we ask for efficiency and good performance.” Adrian Severin (PES, RO) also stressed that transparency is vital and that the EU wants to see "how the cash flow is working." On Belarus, Jacek Protasiewicz (EPP-ED, PL), said that Belarussian parliamentarians will not be invited until they are democratically elected. "If fair elections are held in Belarus, then the EU can offer a lot", he added. External Relations Commissioner Benita Ferrero-Waldner also stressed the importance of fair elections, saying "the next elections in Belarus will be very important and we will observe them."
The Polish-Swedish proposal and further parliamentary cooperation
Many MEPs and parliamentarians from the eastern countries backed the Polish-Swedish proposal for an Eastern Partnership. Mr Szent-Iványi said that the plan "brings the membership perspective closer." Mr Tarasyuk said that the "proposals from Poland and Sweden are a step in the right direction", while Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner asked "what would be the added value of these proposals to the Black Sea Synergy?"
Marie Anne Isler-Béguin (Greens/EFA, FR), said “we are not here to lecture anybody, we are here to help you in your democratic progress.” Jacek Saryusz-Wolski (EPP-ED, PL), said that “we want to create the situation in which the EU is unable to keep the door closed to you, if you wish to enter.” He also recalled an EP proposal to set up an EU-Neighbourhood-East Parliamentary Assembly (EURO-NEST), made up of 60 MEPs and 60 ENP parliamentarians, to exchange views on a twice-yearly basis.
Co-chairs Marek Siwiec (PES, PL), and Adam Bielan (UEN, PL), held a press conference at 13:30h today on the conference's conclusions. Asked about the timing of this particular conference, Mr Siwiec said it showed "the growing maturity of new Member States in the EU." He added that one of the most crucial goals is to educate ENP countries about the EU. "They need to see that the EU is not a problem-free paradise, but a history of recurring crises which require a spirit of compromise to overcome", he said.
2008-06-03 In the Chair: Marek Siwiec PES PL In the Chair: Adam Bielan UEN PL
20080605IPR30973 EP Delegation for relations with the countries of the South Caucasus EP Delegation for relations with Ukraine EP Delegation for relations with Belarus EP Delegation for relations with Moldova
EN
1
LINK
/activities/delegations/homeDel.do?body=DSCA&language=EN
EN
2
LINK
/activities/delegations/homeDel.do?body=D-UA&language=EN
EN
3
LINK
/activities/delegations/homeDel.do?body=D-BY&language=EN
EN
4
LINK
/activities/delegations/homeDel.do?language=EN&body=D-MD
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
