Euro 2008 - will it unite or divide us Europeans?
Institutions
2008-06-09 - 11:38
Larger than life footballers at a Zurich train station For the next few weeks millions of Europeans will be in the grip of Euro 2008. As well as representing a cross section of talent the teams represent a cross section of Europe politically. Of the 16 teams, 12 are already EU members and a further two - Turkey and Croatia - have ambitions to join. One of the joint hosts - Switzerland - is neutral whilst Russia straddles the geographical border of Europe. We asked several MEPs at a time like this whether football unites or divides Europeans.
Thomas Mann - a German EPP-ED member - said that "let us hope for a great football celebration as we had two years ago at the World Cup in Germany, where fans from all over the world came together to enjoy their favourite sport. And that is what unites us about football, win or lose: We all share the love of the game".
To make this point he says that "the official ball of the tournament is called "Europass" which alludes to the cooperation and team-play...It's a metaphor for our work in the European Parliament. We "pass" arguments among ourselves, exchange views and experience in order to achieve a common "goal".
Swedish Socialist MEP Jan Andersson told us that "I have a history as chairman in Högaborgs football club whose most famous player is Henrik Larsson who has played both in Holland, Scotland and Spain. Next week I will travel to Salzburg to watch him play a game for Sweden against Greece. Nobody could say anything else then that football unit and creates contacts across borders".
"A football match is not a fight"
Romanian Liberal MEP Ramona Manescu said that "sport is a mean of interaction, and hence it unites people. Of course, sport is competitive, and you will find people ready to take the confrontation out of the pitch and into the street. However, this is more likely to occur in domestic competitions, as the teams meet frequently and have a “history” of confrontations. EURO 2008 is an opportunity for Europeans to visit Austria and Switzerland, befriend people from all around Europe and support their national team".
Roberta Angelilli - an Italian MEP from the UEN group - noted "that the next European Football Championship is a reason for unity for all the European citizens. Sporting values are universal, and they are against divisions. A football match is not a fight, but an opportunity to compare each other in an honest competition. Cheering and sporty fervour must stay in a playful way.. This way European citizen could meet their opponents and find in that a reason to feel the European affiliation".
"When I hear the anthem I get emotional"
Dutch Green MEP Joost Lagendijk had this to say "I think the European championships divide and unite at the same time. Most Europeans probably do not identify themselves as much with their own country as during these kind of championships. Personally when I hear the anthem of the Netherlands before a match I still get emotional. Europe is sometimes together and sometimes separately and we must keep it this way."
Patrick Louis - a French MEP from the Independence and Democracy group said that "we have always known that football does not divide but unites in the same passion. The players and fans show healthy national pride and honour to wear the jersey or national symbols. Beyond the disappointment of defeat or the euphoria of victory, remains the memory of shared moments in the stadiums, bars or homes to vibrate, sing, scream or cry". He went on to say that "this popular roots football in almost every country in the world and the strategy of the game are apolitical but they can give us a little lesson for us Europeans".
Youth say no to racism in football
Parliament has long been involved in the fight to make football as sporting as possible. A recent example is called "Youth Voices Against Racism" - young Europeans are being invited to join a continent-wide campaign launched 2 June by UNESCO, FC Barcelona and MEPs to eradicate violence and racism in sport. They will look at ways in which sport can be used to combat racism and discrimination and to promote tolerance, mutual respect and solidarity. A Youth Forum will be held from 18 to 20 September in Bologna (Italy) with the result presented to MEPs and the European Commissioner of Sport Jan Figel.
MEPs have already passed a against racism in football - the Dutch MEP who initiated this Emine Bozkurt remarked that "sport is a mirror of society, with all its shortcomings, but it also offers possibilities for social inclusion".
20080530STO30469 Euro 2008 Culture and Education Committee
EN
1
PHOTO
20080605PHT31009.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.euro2008.uefa.com/
EN
3
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=CULT
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
