Civil society meets for climate change Agora
Environment
2008-06-11 - 12:54
Climate change Agora 12-13 June If you are worried about climate change, then a conference taking place at the European Parliament this Thursday and Friday may be of interest. Known as an "Agora" after places of assembly in Greek city-states, the meeting brings together over 500 people - NGOs, climate experts and international experts to join MEPs in debating ways to combat climate change. The issue is a crucial one for the European Parliament as it will be required to legislate on EU-wide measures to reduce CO2 emissions.
The point of the Agora is for the views and proposals of members of civil society to be fully heard as the EU attempts to set out carbon reducing measures. Opened by EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering, Thursday morning will be devoted to setting out the state of play of international negotiations in reaching a post-Kyoto agreement. In December last year the international community agreed a "road map" setting out the way forward when Kyoto expires in 2012.
Debates and workshops to determine way forward
Among the speakers will be European Commission President José Manuel Barroso who will outline the climate change package aiming to reduce Europe’s Greenhouse gases by 20% by 2020. Italian MEP Guido Sacconi (PSE) and Karl-Heinz Florenz (EPP-ED) will present the interim report of the special committee on climate change. Also speaking will be leading American intellectual Jeremy Rifkin who has long advocated policies to reduce climate change.
Thursday afternoon and Friday will see delegates divided into workshops on resources, techniques, solidarity, economics and governance.
Natural resources and biodiversity
Research, innovation and technologies
Ethical questions related to climate change in particular that of solidarity;
Economics, trade and development.
Education, political and practical participation of consumers and citizens in relation to climate protection.
On Friday afternoon the results from the working groups will be presented in a plenary of the Agora and final recommendations will be agreed. All of the debates will be available live on the EP website on Thursday and Friday - making it possible to watch the Agora live wherever you are.
20080605STO30952 Citizens’ Agora Watch live
EN
1
PHOTO
20080609PHT31128.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/parliament/public/staticDisplay.do?id=70&language=EN
EN
3
LINK
/eplive/public/livebroadcast_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
