Pöttering on the Middle East: We must support the Annapolis objectives and reach a two-state solution
Institutions
2008-06-16 - 19:08
The President of the European Parliament Hans-Gert Pöttering made a declaration in the name of the Conference of Presidents. "On the ground, six months after the Annapolis conference, concrete measures need to be taken in on order to meet the objective of a two-State solution by the end of the year.
Despite some encouraging progress, there is little reason for optimism in realising the ambitious goals of Annapolis, this is the conclusion of a delegation of 14 MEPs of the EP working group on the Middle East who were in Israel and Palestine from 30 May to 2 June 2008 led by Véronique de Keyser (PES, BE)
With the objective of reaching a two-state solution by the end of this year, the essential elements of an agreement consist of boosting security forces by the Palestinians themselves, solving the question of the expanding colonies in particular for Jerusalem and creating the conditions to allow economic development and increased freedom of movement in the West Bank, and finally tackling the humanitarian situation in the Gaza Strip given its isolation and international sanctions.
The report adopted unanimously by the delegation last week and presented to the Council and Commission and the Conference of Presidents is worrying. Some encouraging progress has taken place, but unfortunately in very limited sectors. The general evolution does not give hope to be optimistic as to the goals set out at Annapolis.
The credibility of the Palestinian Authority must be strengthened and the conditions needed for sustainable economic development must be put in place in an efficient way. It is necessary to fight the policies of constant divisions and the separation of territory which Israel is applying. In agreement with the US government and as its intermediary Condoleezza Rice explained there must be an end to the expansion of the colonies in East Jerusalem.
Israelis and Palestinians have engaged in good faith and in the spirit of reconciliation and negotiation. This engagement must be taken seriously. It is up to us Europeans to support our partners in this process. The European Parliament will carry out its role with determination.
EU relations with Israel and the Palestinian Authority must be developed in such a way as to encourage the peace process. The Barcelona Process and the Union for the Mediterranean could be a further element in the promotion of peace. The European Parliament expects to be fully consulted in developments in this field.
As we sit here, the fishermen of the Gaza Strip have left their boats in the water. On the basis of the blockage, the fishermen are protesting for their rights to fish their waters so they can live. Our delegation promised to support the fishermen. In the name of the European Parliament, I would therefore offer my support to the fishermen. "
Changes to the agenda
Tuesday 17 June 2008
The vote on the József SZÁJER (EPP-ED, HU) report on rules on aromatised wines, aromatised wine-based drinks and aromatised wine-product cocktails (recast version) is postponed to a later plenary session in order to reach agreement with the Council.
Wednesday 18 June
The title of the debate with Council and Commission statements on the preparations of the European Council is altered to add the words "after the No vote in the Irish referendum."
In order to have more time to debate measures to take in the short-and medium to combat rising oil prices, the debate is moved to Wednesday afternoon from Wednesday morning.
20080616IPR31871 Briefing - 16-19 June 2008 - Strasbourg plenary session Final draft agenda - 16-19 June 2008 - Strasbourg plenary session
EN
2
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?reference=2008-06-2&language=EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080603BRI30699 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
