Wednesday in plenary: EU Summit, oil prices, Russia, illegal immigrants
Institutions
2008-06-19 - 12:57
Thumbs up for the Return directive MEPs started Wednesday's sitting by discussing preparations for the European Council meeting following the Irish referendum. Starting on Thursday, the summit will wind up the Slovenian presidency of the EU. After a number of important votes, including on the sensitive issue of illegal immigration, attention turned to rising oil prices and the upcoming EU/Russia summit in Siberia on 26-27 June.
The UN's rapporteur for religious freedom Asma Jahangir addressed the House in a special sitting. She was there as part of a series of speakers celebrating the year of intercultural dialogue. We will publish an interview with her on Monday, 23 June
Lisbon, Dublin and Brussels
Council and Commission representatives told MEPs of their disappointment with the results of the Irish vote, underlined respect for the will of Irish voters but emphasised that the Lisbon treaty is still needed by the EU and its citizens.
For the Council, Slovenia's Janez Lenarčič presented the main topics for the European Council: a timeline for further steps after the Irish vote and long-term measures to mitigate soaring food and oil prices.
The great majority of MEPs expressed respect for the result of the Irish vote, but urged:
respect for the will of other states and a move ahead with ratification
the need to listen to ordinary people and better explain the purpose of Europe
the need to find solutions and respond to challenges at the European level
Members spoke of a crisis of confidence and reminded EU countries that their responsibility does not end with signing treaties, but also includes constant communication and explanation.
Some speakers said the text of the Lisbon treaty had been presented in a "difficult and incomprehensible" way, while a small group of MEPs implacably antagonistic to the treaty demanded an end to the ratification process.
EU-Russia summit
Next, MEPs discussed the EU-Russia summit which will take place in Siberia on 26-27 June. They expressed concerns about deteriorating human rights conditions in Russia, increasing attacks on ethnic, racial and religious minorities and Moscow's actions in Abkhazia and South Ossetia. The discussion also focused on the current negotiations with the Russian Federation on a new Partnership and Cooperation Agreement.
MEPs expressed their satisfaction "that it has finally been possible to overcome the obstacles to reaching an agreement on the mandate for negotiations with the Russian Federation on a new Partnership Agreement". They believe that it will help create "a secure and transparent framework for energy relations", deal with problems in Transnistria and human rights violations, thus helping promote the rule of law within Russia .
Oil prices
Later, MEPs debated oil prices and how to combat their rise and the crisis in the fisheries sector with the Council and Commission. The rise has given many fishermen and fishing businesses no choice but to cease activities, leading to protests that have spread throughout Europe. MEPs expressed concern about the consequences of rising oil prices in different sectors: financial industry, transport, aviation and tourism for example.
Voted on Wednesday
Three eagerly awaited votes were held on Wednesday (see our full reports on this site)
In a vote on the so-called " Energy Package ", Parliament voted new legislation according to which production and supply of electricity would be separated, signalling the end of remaining national monopolies,
A majority of MEPs backed the so-called " return directive " laying down a range of provisions on the detention and return of illegal immigrants by EU Member States.
Parliament approved by large majorities the choice of Commission Vice-President Barrot to take over the Justice, Freedom and Security portfolio, and the appointment of outgoing MEP Antonio Tajani as the new Commissioner for transport.
20080616STO31806 Parliament's press releases Pöttering hopeful reforms still achievable before 2009 Euro-elections EU-Russia relations Energy package focus
EN
1
PHOTO
20080618PHT32263.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/news/expert/default_en.htm
EN
4
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/external_relations/russia/intro/index.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080613STO31667 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080616FCS31737 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
