Towards a European Charter on the Rights of Energy Consumers
Energy
2008-06-19 - 14:33
MEPs adopted a report on "Towards a European Charter on the Rights of Energy Consumers" which underlines the potential added value of the Charter as an information tool collecting, consolidating the energy rights of consumers as already adopted in the existing EU legislation. MEPs call on Member States to invest as a priority in energy efficiency measures for low-income households, thereby addressing in a strategic manner both the problem of fuel poverty and the "20% by 2020" energy efficiency.
The report stresses that European electricity and gas consumers have the right to be connected to the networks and to be supplied with electricity and gas, at reasonable, transparent, non- discriminatory and clearly comparable tariffs and prices, including adjusted prices and tariffs resulting from their respective indexation mechanisms; non-discrimination should include a prohibition on discriminatory charges on certain methods of payment, in particular for those, often vulnerable, consumers charged by means of a prepayment meter.
Single entry point
The European Parliament calls on Member States to put in place a physical single entry point for any consumer information request, for example through national energy regulators, thus facilitating consumer access to information and at the same time ensuring that information is available as close to consumers as possible in terms of place, time, tools and thoroughness.
Renewable energy
The report considers that priority should be given to renewable energy sources, combined heat and power and other embedded generation, and that the right of consumers to make an informed choice in favour of renewable energies should be recognised in the Charter. The House considers therefore that all consumers should be informed in an objective, transparent and non-discriminatory way about the sources of energy available to them.
Parliament calls on Member States to invest as a priority in comprehensive energy efficiency measures for low-income households, thereby addressing in a strategic manner both the problem of fuel poverty and the "20% by 2020" energy efficiency target adopted at the 2007 Spring European Council.
Smart meters
MEPs considers that the Member States should be required to ensure that the roll-out of smart meters is completed with minimum disruption to consumers within 10 years after the entry into force of the Directives for the internal market in electricity and gas and should be the responsibility of energy distribution or supply companies.
NRAs should be made responsible for monitoring the process of such development and for laying down common standards for that purpose. Member States, say MEPs, should be required to ensure that standards establishing the minimum technical design and operational requirements for meters address interoperability issues to provide maximum benefit at minimum cost to consumers.
Finally, the report asks the Commission to carry out an in-depth study on the current use of smart meters in private households and, if necessary to carefully examine the possibility of developing and, after consulting Parliament, financing with a view to promoting best practices. The report underlines the importance of promoting and supporting industry in its efforts in this regard.
20080616IPR31783 Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 19 June)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
