The Week Ahead 23-29 June 2008
Institutions
2008-06-20 - 12:10
Extraordinary plenary session and committee meetings
Debate on EU summit. At a special plenary session, MEPs will assess the outcome of the European Council, particularly its conclusions on the Lisbon Treaty. Following the debate EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering will hold a press conference with Council President Janez Jansa (Tuesday).
French presidency. President Pöttering and EP political group leaders go to Paris to meet French President Nicolas Sarkozy, members of the government and the speakers of the Senate and National Assembly. Several French ministers will present their work programmes before the EP's committees in Brussels (Wednesday, Thursday).
ECB President / EMU. With inflation rising and an interest rate hike possible, Jean-Claude Trichet will appear before the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee for the quarterly monetary dialogue (Wednesday). In addition, MEPs and a panel of high-level experts will review the outcome of ten years of monetary union in Europe (Tuesday).
Legal immigration. Following Parliament's vote on the "return" directive, the focus switches, at a hearing of the Civil Liberties Committee, to legal immigration and the blue card (Wednesday).
Animal cloning. The Agriculture Committee will vote on a draft resolution, to be submitted to the July plenary, calling for a ban on the cloning of animals for food (Wednesday).
Climate change. The best ways of achieving swift reductions in CO2 emissions will be discussed at the eighth thematic session of the Temporary Committee on Climate Change (Monday). Elsewhere, the Environment Committee will discuss three reports: on emissions trading, carbon storage and reducing greenhouse gases (Monday-Wednesday).
Enlargement/Montenegro. The Foreign Affairs Committee adopts its annual report on enlargement (Tuesday) and also receives Milo Djukanovic, prime minister of Montenegro (Monday).
Toy safety. The Internal Market Committee holds a hearing with representatives of manufacturers, distributors and consumers (Monday).
20080620IPR32359 For details of all the week's events, see "The Agenda"
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20082600AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
