Guidelines urgently needed on state aid to ports, says Transport Committee
Transport
2008-06-24 - 16:44
The EP Transport Committee has urged the European Commission to adopt guidelines on state aid to ports by the end of this year. In an own-initiative report on European ports policy, adopted almost unanimously on Tuesday, MEPs urge the Commission to identify possible distortions of competition and to clarify in the state aid guidelines what types of aid to port authorities should be treated as state aid. They also look at ways to upgrade the port system to meet the EU's future transport needs.
The own-initiative report by Josu Ortuondo Larrea (ALDE, ES), on the Commission communication on European Ports Policy, points out that the EU port sector is expanding fast and that the maritime sector is particularly affected by globalisation. It highlights the need to take account of major changes in international traffic resulting from technological and economic progress, the widening of the Panama Canal and the increase and size of capacity of vessels.
Links to port hinterland
Members also stress that maritime and river transport should not be isolated from land and air transport. Given that links to a port's hinterland are of great importance to its commercial success, one aim of the 2010 mid-term review of the trans-European network should be to integrate maritime and river transport with land transport via European ports, they say.
Customs controls
The committee also recommends that Community-cleared goods should be exempt from customs controls in short-sea shipping in the Community. It advocates creating separate port zones for intra-community and international traffic, simplifying internal transport, and standardising and identifying special containers. It calls on the Commission and the sector to encourage shipping companies to reduce the number of empty containers transported, so as to reduce environmental impact, whilst at the same time taking account of the specific needs of clients.
Social dialogue in the port sector
The committee urges that a social dialogue be established on port-related subjects, including worker's rights, concessions and the 1979 International Labour Organisation Convention on the occupational safety and health of dock workers. It also stresses the importance of protecting and ensuring the highest possible standard of training for port workers.
Scanning US-bound cargo
Finally, MEPs urge the Commission to pursue its efforts to win a reform of the US regulation requiring that 100% of US-bound cargo be scanned. It urges the Commission to evaluate the potential cost of this measure to business and to the EU economy, as well as its potential impact on customs operations.
2008-06-23 Committee on Transport and Tourism In the chair Silvia-Adriana ŢICĂU PES RO
Procedure: own-initiative -- Committee vote: 41 in favour, none against, 1 abstention -- Plenary vote: September 2008, Strasbourg
20080623IPR32405 Committee on Transport and Tourism website
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=TRAN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
