Week in Parliament: debate on EU Summit, Sarkozy talks, blue card
Institutions
2008-06-23 - 12:31
Journalists at the European Council last week Tuesday sees a specially convened plenary session where the results of last week's EU Summit will be debated. Also on the agenda will be Slovenia's Presidency of the European Union which draws to a close at the end of the month. The week also sees Parliament's President Hans-Gert Pöttering and leaders of the political groups hold talks with French President Nicolas Sarkozy in Paris ahead of the French Presidency of the Union which starts in July.
In the Committees: Montenegro, cloning, Trichet
The Foreign Affairs Committee adopts its annual report on enlargement of the European Union on Tuesday and will hold talks with Milo Djukanovic, Prime Minister of Montenegro on Monday. You can read an interview of Mr Djukanovic here on the Parliament's website on Tuesday.
The fastest way to make swift reductions in CO2 will be discussed by MEPs on Parliament's temporary committee on Climate Change on Monday.
This week also sees Europe's top banker Jean-Claude Trichet hold a question and answer session with MEPs on the Economics and Monetary Affairs Committee on Wednesday.
A ban on cloning animals for food is also likely to be backed by the Agriculture Committee when they meet this Wednesday.
Immigration and toy safety discussed in hearings
Illegal immigration into the European Union and the proposed "blue card" to offer skilled immigrants chances to work in Europe will be discussed on Wednesday in a hearing held by the Civil Liberties Committee.
Also, toy safety falls under the spotlight on Monday as the Internal Market Committee invite all those involved in their manufacture to a hearing held Monday. It comes in the wake of incidents earlier this year where toys were found to have been substandard.
You can follow all of these subjects here on the Europarl website - your electronic gateway to what is going on in the European Parliament.
20080623STO32384 The week ahead
EN
1
PHOTO
20080623PHT32408.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080620IPR32359 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
