Tools for cutting emissions already in place, ex-London mayor tells MEPs
Environment
2008-06-24 - 10:02
Calling climate change "the single biggest problem humanity has faced", former London mayor Ken Livingstone told a session of the EP's Climate Change committee that the tools necessary to halve emissions are already in place. Though political will and sustainable energy consumption are key requisites, a successful EU climate change policy will have to involve the pooling of best practices across Europe.
In London, said Mr Livingstone, it would be possible to reduce carbon emissions "by 60% by 2025 and 80-90% by 2050" by using existing technologies. Through changes in consumer behaviour and locally generated power alone, "we could reduce emissions by 65%." If each city advances on every front – accumulating best practices from cities worldwide – the 60 % reduction in London "could be reproduced all over Europe." If you collect and implement best practice from each area of the world, EP climate change rapporteur Karl Heinz Florenz (EPP-ED, DE) later added, " you can advance significantly."
Even though climate change is an urgent issue, warned Bairbre de Brún (GUE/NGL, UK ), “not many of our cities and governments are sharing the information that is out there”. All sectors of society need to be involved, she stressed, and climate change targets should be developed “at the local and regional levels”.
Combining best practice in transport and waste management
Gösta Gustavsson , deputy mayor of Linköping (Sweden), outlined some of the main components of his municipality's climate policy. By ensuring that all local planning is environmentally responsible, choosing renewable energy sources for transport and energy systems, supporting green technology, and "adapting society to meet future climate changes", he noted, Linköping is contributing "locally and globally". One of his town's biggest success stories, he said, was the transition from fossil fuels to waste-produced biogas - both for transport and heating. This, coupled with other recycling measures, ensures that a mere 5% of total waste ends up in landfill sites.
"Greening up" urban transport
Prompted by a question from Committee Chair Guido Sacconi (PES, IT), Mr Livingstone discussed the issue of "greening up" urban transport. In central London's case, he said, this has been achieved by way of “the stick of congestion charge and the carrot of improved public transport”. Turning to biofuels, the ex-mayor said they had been used in London's transport system, but there was now concern about their potential impact, “which is not encouraging”. At this juncture, he added, “I'd put a stop on any [new] biofuels use”.
2008-06-23 Temporary Committee on Climate Change In the Chair Guido Sacconi PES IT
Thematic session: "Achieving significant CO 2 emission reductions in short time: Learning from best practices"
20080623IPR32421 Temporary Committee on Climate Change website
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=CLIM
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
