The strengthening Euro - is it good or bad for Europe's economy?
Euro
2008-07-02 - 15:34
The euro has shown itself to be a strong currency Turmoil in the financial markets and the rising costs of fuel and food are dominating the international headlines and creating fear in the international economy. Against this background is the strength of the euro on the international exchanges. We spoke to some MEPs from countries both with and without the euro - and asked them if the strength of the currency was helping or hurting their economies. We also asked them whether other countries - who have opted out of the euro - should now join.
Turmoil in the financial markets and the rising costs of fuel and food are dominating the international headlines and creating fear in the international economy. Against this background is the relative strength of the euro on the international exchanges. We spoke to some MEPs who represent countries both with and without the euro - and asked them if the strength of the currency was helping or hindering their economies. We also asked them whether other countries - who have opted out of the single currency - should now consider joining.
Speaking to MEPs on Monday 30 June Europe's monetary affairs commissioner Joaquín Almunia said he thought "the euro is overvalued - it is too high right now".
The Chair of Parliament's Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee - French Socialist MEP Pervenche Berès - told us that "we don't want a weak euro, we don't want a strong Euro - we just want a good rate of exchange."
For British Conservative Jonathan Evans the strong euro "is a potential disaster. I was not positive about the weak euro when it was launched. It was naive for British sceptics to be happy when the euro was weak and it is also naive to think now that the strong euro is a sign of confidence in the economy. The significant surplus in Germany is keeping the euro on the road".
Swedish Liberal Olle Schmidt told us that "it shows that Europe is doing well: better than the United States. This is astonishing, not long ago we were afraid we would have a weak Euro. After the "No" vote in Ireland the euro actually strengthened, many say Europe is in a crisis now but the market says there is no crisis".
From the Slovene angle Liberal MEP Jelko Kacin said that "if we take into consideration all the challenges this small economy - like Slovenia - would have to face alone – like high food and fuel prices and financial market crisis, then we can say that it is much more secure and stable to be in the euro zone.
Why is the Euro so strong?
J Evans: "Because the US has been pursuing a weak dollar policy, maintaining growth is more important that maintaining currency."
J Kacin: "One of the main reasons is the cheap dollar. For a long time the undervalued dollar has been the essence of the US monetary policy. Through the excessive debts on the global market and underestimate dollar they covered their financial problems."
How does the strong Euro affect international trade?
O Schmidt: "We cannot deny that the weak dollar is helping the situation. Experts say the oil price may go up to 250 dollar a barrel. The real test will be when the dollar will gain."
P Berès: "One of the reasons why the oil prices are increasing on the side of the producer - the offer side - is also because the dollar is weak. So they need to have higher price to get the added value for them."
J Kacin : "Slovenia exports enormously, but mostly on the domestic European market. Therefore for it the strong Euro is not such a big problem as for those who export into a dollar or a third zone."
P Berès: "The Euro has existed for 10 years already - and during this time there was no major discussion on the currency rates. For the EU looking at the exchange rates is becoming a bigger concern. This is why last year Trichet (ECB President, Almunia and Jean Claude Juncker (President of the euro group of countries) went together to China. This was the first illustration that they are learning to speak together on the topic. "
Could the Euro become the world's benchmark currency?
O Schmidt: "The dollar will not lose its leading role the dollar is related to a State and to military power. The euro is a currency of many countries and some of them (Spain, Italy) are causing problems."
J Evans: "It is naive to hope for that, saying that is economically an illiterate argument. The dollar is the world's leading currency because the US economy is leading the world's economy."
J Kacin: "For the global economy it is good to face the possibility, that there is not only one leading currency, but the Euro is becoming an alternative to it and can become the leading currency in the long-term perspective."
P Berès: "The global estimation is there is a 26 % of world wide reserve in euros and this is going to change since it is better to have a reserve in a strong currency: with a strong interest rate. But for the moment the dollar still plays a huge role."
What is the prognosis?
O Schmidt: "There will be a new US Administration that will cope with the deficit. Experts say that the bottom of the sub prime crisis may have been reached and the new Administration will withdraw some of the costly troops from Iraq. So there are signs for change in the US that will lead to a level playing field between the dollar and the euro."
P Berès: "There are different scenarios on the table: Either the dollar will remain the reserve currency and will not be challenged. Alternatively the Euro is becoming the reserve currency or finally some Asian currencies will come into the game. In any of the last two cases I think it is time that Europe speaks with one voice. It took us less time to build the euro than to speak with one voice."
Do the UK, Sweden and Denmark still have good reasons not to adopt the Euro?
O Schmidt: "When the Baltic countries join the Euro: the whole Baltic Sea will be surrounded by Euro coins. Then the resistance will drop. I hope for a referendum in Sweden in 2010."
J Evans: "Some people say that Sterling should be in the eurozone because of the City. I think that we should maintain Sterling so we are able to maintain our own economic policy. I would never rule anything out economically."
20080627STO32879 Economic MEPs speak on financial market turmoil IMF chief Strauss-Kahn: financial crisis will continue to hurt real economy MEPs Goebbels and Hökmark: inflation and how to curb Inflation rate “a matter of deep concern” says Almunia
EN
1
PHOTO
20080701PHT33142.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080526STO29858 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080513STO28757 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080428STO27727 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080630IPR33032 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
