Slovenia's spring Presidency - 1st of 2004 club
Institutions
2008-07-04 - 16:33
In the Chair for 6 months, Slovenia's PM Janez Janša Rising energy prices and turbulence on the financial markets were just two issues Slovenia had to deal with this spring when it held the rotating EU presidency for six months. It also passed a small milestone by becoming the first of the 2004 club of ten countries that joined the Union to do so. With just 2 million people the country is also one of the smallest in the bloc.
In practice holding the presidency means the chance to Chair meetings and oversee the agenda in the Council where EU Ministers meet. It also requires a country to come regularly to the European Parliament to debate with MEPs on the issues of the day.
The Irish No to the Lisbon treaty and tensions in the Western Balkans after Kosovo's declaration of independence from Serbia were also issues that tested the diplomacy of Prime Minister PM Janez Janša and his Ministers.
Across several issues the Slovenes can be said to have used their presidency to advance the European agenda. These include its response to the international financial turbulence - notably timetables for new measures in cross-border financial market regulation, supervision and co-operation.
There was also agreement on energy market liberalisation and on the "return directive" on immigration. Progress on EU accession negotiations with Turkey and Croatia was also made.
The Presidency saw PM Janez Janša make several visits to the parliament for debates with MEPs on how the Presidency should progress. Slovene President Danilo Türk also addressed the MEPs in Strasbourg.
You can read an interview with both men as well as other stories from the Slovenian Presidency is this feature.
20080627FCS32889
Slovenia's EU Presidency inaugurates Year of Intercultural Dialogue
Slovenia used the first day of its Presidency of the European Union to inaugurate the 2008 Year of Intercultural Dialogue. This state of 2 million is the first of the 2004 EU intake to hold the Presidency. Energy and Reform Treaty ratification are among its priorities. The year of intercultural dialogue will see Europe-wide events aimed at encouraging greater respect between cultures. EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering has made this theme central to his mandate.
The role of the media, education and the economy in relations between different EU cultures is the subject of a conference organised by the Slovene government on Monday and Tuesday this week. It was attended by Slovene Prime Minister Janez Janša as well as Mr Pöttering.
Together in diversity
It is the first of many events, debates and exhibitions being organised by national and regional authorities.
The objective of the year of intercultural dialogue (organised by the European Commission) is to promote greater understanding. With 27 countries in the Union and countless regional cultural identities, as well as non-European cultures coming to Europe through immigration - there is a great deal that can be learned by all of us.
Events and information campaigns will stress the benefits of greater cultural interchanges. The year will also see emphasis on education to target young people and encourage them to be active citizens respecting Europe-wide values of cultural diversity. A final theme is to draw attention to the rich cultural heritage that Europe has to offer.
Slovenia's PM to set out priorities in European Parliament
On 16 January Mr Janša will set out Slovenia's key priorities to MEPs in Strasbourg. You can watch his address here live online. He is expected to put energy and climate change at the top of the agenda, and will also focus on measures to improve the "EU perspective" for the Western Balkans, the promotion of intercultural dialogue and the ratification of the new Reform Treaty.
Slovenian Ministers will Chair Ministerial meetings in the Council for the first six months of this year.
European Year of Intercultural dialogue Slovenia Presidency
Janša ready to solve Kosovo impasse
A smiling Janez Janša at Parliament yesterday Wednesday morning saw Slovene Prime Minister Janez Janša outline to MEPs the key aspects for his country's 6-month Presidency of the EU. He said that job creation and resolving the impasse over the status of Kosovo would be among his main aims. He contrasted the freedom and position the people of Slovenia now enjoyed with his persecution in Communist Yugoslavia. While he was in Strasbourg, we interviewed Mr Janša exclusively for the Parliament's website.
Slovenia's Janša ready to solve Kosovo impasse
Wednesday morning saw Slovene Prime Minister Janez Janša outline to MEPs the key aspects for his country's 6-month Presidency of the EU. He said that job creation and resolving the impasse over the status of Kosovo would be among his main aims. He contrasted the freedom and position the people of Slovenia now enjoyed with his persecution in Communist Yugoslavia. While he was in Strasbourg, we interviewed Mr Janša exclusively for the Parliament's website.
What can a small and young country bring to the office of Council Presidency?
Slovenia can contribute ambition, energy and the willingness of the generation which consciously decided to live in the EU and to build a European future together. This enthusiasm - which shows also the results of the Slovene referendum in entering the EU - is very big in the new member states, especially as we are aware of the alternative to the EU. We know that it is much worse. Therefore we are ready to do a lot to maintain, strengthen and develop the EU.
There are also concrete things. Since its independence, Slovenia has developed many good practices that other countries could emulate. For example during a discussion today in which about 50 MEPs took part, I was pleased that some Slovenian good practices were mentioned. I was very happy to see that MEPs from different countries know some of our products, our anthem, our history and so forth. This fills us with a special enthusiasm right at the start of the presidency.
A priority of your Presidency is to strengthen the relationship between the EU and Western Balkans. With many eyes on that region - especially in relation to Kosovo - what are your predictions?
I believe that during the following months we will move from the deadlock, which doesn't mean we will get a final solution. But we will begin to solve this issue, especially the question of status and the internal consolidation of Kosovo as well as the consolidation of the situation in the wider region of the Western Balkans.
Slovenia can contribute a lot to this - we are ready for that what is coming and ready to solve the problems of Kosovo - which is a part of Europe. The Thessaloniki Declaration ensured the Western Balkans a "European perspective". Kosovo is part of the Western Balkans. What we need to do now is to work on the basis of these two basic principles and take the necessary steps to ensure that the region is stabilized and the EU stays united.
Slovenian Presidency of the EU Janez Janša
Interview: Slovenia's President Türk on the UN, food and biofuel
Face to face with former UN diplomat turned Slovene President, Danilo Türk Prior to being elected Slovenia's president in November last year, Danilo Türk had a distinguished career at the United Nations culminating in his appointment as Assistant Secretary General for Political Affairs. On Wednesday he was in Strasbourg to address MEPs. In an exclusive interview, we asked him about the role the UN and the European Union can play in the modern world, especially in promoting human rights and alleviating crises such as present rise in food prices.
Today in the European Parliament you spoke as the head of the country holding the EU presidency. In 1998 and 1999 as Slovenia's ambassador to the UN you presided over the UN Security Council. Could you compare these two experiences?
The two are completely different. The Security Council is a body that deals with crises and crisis management, the EU is a community of countries, which builds effective common institutions and has an ambitious program and political goals. Experience of the Security Council can however help as the EU has also faced and will have to face crises in different parts of the world. We need to have knowledge about how to approach these issues.
Could these two organisations contribute to tackling the problem of rising food prices, one of the main topics of yesterday's plenary session?
From a short-term point of view I'm not optimistic. I think that these two organisations are not well prepared for increased food prices. Preparing effective measures requires time. The EU has a common agriculture policy where a solution for the food market can be found.
I would say that the EU is better prepared than the UN. The role of the UN is more long-term through the Food and Agriculture Organisation, which has already done a lot for the improvement of agriculture and food production. Also the World Food Programme can not master the more general crisis which is due to the lack of food globally.
You have just returned from Latin America, where production of biofuels is growing. especially in Brazil,. Today many people link biofuels to rising food prices and even suggest they add to global warming. What is your opinion?
The situation is different across Latin America. One cannot compare Peru and Argentina. Each country has it own problems and advantages. Brazil has a special position because of its experience with biofuels and the amount it produces..
The level of biofuels produced in Brazil is already high. However, now they are thinking about alternatives. New oil fields at great depth have been found which has brought new hope that it may slow the growing production of biofuels.
The increase in food prices puts more people below the poverty threshold and falling living standards leads to the erosion of human rights. Do you think Europe's efforts to protect human rights are up to the task?
The Lisbon Treaty includes the Charter of Fundamental Rights, which will create new possibilities. In short, there are reasons for optimism. However innovations are needed. The European Parliament could have deeper debates on human rights, organise hearings and thus contribute to the strengthening of the policy of human rights as EU common policy.
In addition, the EU should appear more active in the UN - although for that to happen the decision mechanisms need to be adjusted. Searching for consensus and at any price can lead to the dilution of the final position and less effective action.
Financial turbulence and an apparent worldwide economic turndown are preoccupying leaders across the world. The EU presidency places Slovenia at the forefront of international efforts to tackle these problems. How do Slovenians react to this global role? Are you optimistic that Europe can make a difference for them?
In the EU, especially in the eurozone, one can feel a certain protection because of our common currency. In Europe and for example in Japan the anxiety is not as present as it is in the US. I think that this European self-confidence helped Slovenes to maintain a certain stability regarding the problems we are facing. Anxiety because of ups and downs on the Ljubljana stock exchange can be understood as something typical for Slovenes more than the movement of the world's financial markets.
Slovenian president homepage Slovenian Presidency of the EU Danilo Türk's speech in plenary
Alojz Peterle MEP on Slovenia, Kosovo and cancer
A key player - Slovenian MEP Alojz Peterle Former Slovenian Prime Minister Alojz Peterle has made a mark in the European Parliament since being elected for the centre right EPP-ED in 2004. As the Slovenian Presidency of the EU enters its third month, we ask his opinion about its performance as well as about former fellow Yugoslav nations. He talks frankly about his successful personal battle against cancer and his campaign against the disease.
Prior to the Slovene presidency of the council some critics said Slovenia was too small and too new to hold the presidency. How is the presidency doing so far?
Tell me, did anyone ever criticize Luxembourg, which is smaller than Slovenia? The size of the country does not have any direct connection with the quality of the presidency.
Slovenia started its presidency with great enthusiasm and with the right priorities. I am very happy about the conference on intercultural dialogue. We successfully introduced the legislation package on goods, which strengthens the internal market and favour SMEs. The preparations on the new Lisbon strategy are going well and it seems that we will be successful with legislation on the hydrogen vehicle. My analysis would be that the work so far has been a success.
Improving relations with the Western Balkans is a priority of the Slovenian presidency. What does the future hold for the region?
This is of interest to the whole Union. Slovenia knows the region very well because of our common history and has close economic and other ties with the Western Balkan states. Slovenian knowledge and shared experiences in the region are a big advantage for it during the presidency.
In politics we do not always choose between the good and better solution. The proclamation of Kosovo's independence had repercussions around the world. So did the unity of the EU regarding sending the EULEX mission to Kosovo and the common position of the Council, that each country would decide individually whether to recognise Kosovo.
The situation will improve when all participants adopt the same rules of the game that led to a peaceful and successful development of the EU after WW2. Respecting national identity and a willingness to reconcile and cooperate have to become the basis for living together for different nations and minorities in this part of Europe.
As the only representative of the new Member States in the Praesidium of the Convention on the Future of Europe (2002-2003) what are your thoughts on the new Lisbon Treaty?
It enables a more effective and transparent working of the EU's institutions, further enlargements and gives a more important role to the EP and national parliaments. It also establishes a strong foreign policy with the support of a common diplomatic service.
Allow me to ask you a personal question: You have openly spoken of how you beat cancer. How can the EP contribute?
Cancer is becoming the main health problem in the EU. Today already every third citizens can reckon to this unpleasant diagnosis. We have to act urgently! At the beginning of my mandate, I started MAC (Members Against Cancer), which includes 60 MEPs so far.
The EP can work on legislation for the fight against cancer. It can also strengthen the political will for better cooperation with the Council and the Commission as well as with national parliaments.
One of the key ideas is the establishment of a European Cancer Task Force. Health is in the competence of the member states but some issues can be solved successfully only at the European level. Also citizens expect European action.
Alojz Peterle Slovenia's EU Presidency inaugurates Year of Intercultural Dialogue Slovenia's Janša ready to solve Kosovo impasse The future of Serbia and Kosovo lies in the EU - Saryusz-Wolski
"Ljubljana - city of the Dragon"
Ljubljana - bridge of cultures Ljubljana, the capital of Slovenia - with around 280 000 inhabitants, ranks among the smaller European capitals - unites both the Central European and the Mediterranean spirit. Its geographical position has governed its colourful past, since it is situated on a natural passage leading from Central Europe to the Mediterranean and toward the East.
History has seen Ljubljana go from being a part of the Roman Empire, to a town in the Austro-Hungarian Empire to a city in Communist Yugoslavia and then on to where it is today, the capital city of Slovenia - a member state of the European Union.
The first records mentioning Ljubljana date to 1144 (referred to by its German name Laibach) and 1146 (by its Latin name, Luwigana).
A laidback city - coffee and reading culture
A quaint, old town, a bustling city centre, a medieval castle and a metropolitan riverside cafe culture give the city its special charm.
If the sun is shining, half of the population of the city will be occupying the cafes along the banks of the Ljubljanica river that passes the city centre, the other half will be lying on the grass in Tivoli Park and reading a book.
In June 2008 Ljubljana was chosen as the 2010 World Book Capital as part of the UN cultural agency's ongoing efforts to promote literature and reading.
Sea or ski - depending on what takes your fancy
Over their morning "Kava" in the cafes of Ljubljana many Ljubljančani - as the natives are called - discuss whether to ski, swim or hike in the afternoon. The fact that Slovenia is only 20,273 square kilometres and is barely 300 kilometres across makes this possible. The central position of Ljubljana means that skiing or hiking in the Alps is only 30 minutes away, and swimming in the Adriatic 40 minutes .
European culture and festivals in Ljubljana summertime
On January 1st 2008 Ljubljana took a helm of the EU which coincides with the year of intercultural dialogue. Slovenia is itself a good example of intercultural dialogue, since it is such a melting pot for Slavic, Germanic and Roman cultures.
The summer usually brings many jazz, cinema, music, art and design festivals. In January 2008 in Ljubljana the Arts Festivals Declaration in Intercultural dialogue was signed by major European arts and culture festivals.
Slovenia is one of the few countries in the world that celebrate a Culture Day, also known as Prešeren Day, as a national holiday on 8 February.
Famous Ljubljančani you may know
Jože Plečnik, architect (1872-1957): In the 20th century he gave Ljubljana a new character (in Ljubljana: Triple bridge, National and University Library, Križanke). His work can be found in Vienna, Prague (where the famous Castle bears his stamp) and Belgrade.
Slavoj Žižek, philosopher (born 1949)
Finally, if you wondering why this article is called "Ljubljana - city of the Dragon" this is because a dragon is the symbol of the city.
Ljubljana Arts Festivals Declaration in Intercultural dialogue I feel Slovenia
EN
1
PHOTO
20080704PHT33422.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.interculturaldialogue2008.eu/home.0.html?&no_cache=1&redirect_url=my-startpage-eyid.html
EN
3
LINK
http://www.eu2008.si/en/index.html
EN
4
PHOTO
20080115PHT18704.jpg
EN
5
LINK
http://www.eu2008.si/en/index.html?
EN
6
LINK
http://www.eu2008.si/en/The_Council_Presidency/The_Slovenian_Government/Prime_Minister/CV_Jansa.html
EN
7
PHOTO
20080424PHT27623.jpg
EN
8
LINK
http://www.up-rs.si/up-rs/uprs-eng.nsf
EN
9
LINK
http://www.eu2008.si/en/index.html
EN
11
PHOTO
20080228PHT22549.jpg
EN
12
LINK
/members/public/yourMep/view.do?name=peterle&partNumber=1&language=EN&id=23693
EN
16
PHOTO
20080701PHT33146.jpg
EN
17
LINK
http://www.ljubljana.si/
EN
18
LINK
http://new.efa-aef.eu/FestivalsDeclaration/
EN
19
LINK
http://www.eu2008.si/en/Slovenia/Tourism/index.html
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080422IPR27276 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080107STO17490 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080111STO18361 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080204STO20426 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FEA DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FEA DOC XML V0//EN
