EU actions in Afghanistan are a "test case for international development assistance", say MEPs
External relations
2008-07-08 - 14:57
EU role in Afghanistan a "test case for international development assistance" International reconstruction work in Afghanistan must be more closely harmonised among all institutions involved, says the EP in a report adopted with 423 votes in favour, 74 against and 43 abstentions. It calls for a larger political role for the EU in Afghanistan and stresses the need to maintain the distinction between military and civilian actions by all actors. The report calls on the US government to abandon its crop eradication policy and notably the use of ‘Roundup’ for aerial sprayings.
The own-initiative report (André Brie (EUL/NGL, DE) rapporteur withdrew his name from the report before the vote), notes that "in Afghanistan, the EU is primarily known as a humanitarian organisation," but considers that "there is also a need for the EU to be seen as having a stronger political influence." To achieve this, the House argues that "a major strengthening of political will and commitment is necessary," and that "this should be followed up not only by a willingness to provide additional combat troops in the most difficult areas, unrestricted by national caveats, but also by urgent and reinforced civil reconstruction efforts."
Winning the war while building the peace
The Parliament "supports the efforts of NATO forces to improve security in the country and tackle local and international terrorism, and considers the presence of these forces to be essential in order to ensure the country's future." Nevertheless, MEPs also say that "Afghanistan's security problems are more complex than just a war on terror and therefore they require more than a military solution."
The report is especially concerned about the effects of military actions on humanitarian aid and development. It notes that "although security and development are interdependent in Afghanistan, there is a clear demarcation between military and humanitarian action that should be maintained." In particular, MEPs consider "that 'Operation Enduring Freedom' could be perceived as counterproductive if the military pressure on the insurgents is not matched by a strengthened political process through which the Afghan authorities reach out to all segments of the population that recognise the Constitution and lay down their weapons."
Poppy production - US should abandon its policy
The report calls on the US government to abandon its crop eradication policy and notably the use of ‘Roundup’ for aerial sprayings, a substance which is associated with serious environmental and health hazards, inasmuch as targeting poppy farmers will only fuel resentment against the international troop presence.
Media freedom, civil society, judiciary reform
The report notes that several areas are absolutely crucial for rebuilding Afghanistan. It underlines that "in order to overcome the prevailing 'culture of violence' within Afghan society, the international donor community should lend financial and technical support to local projects aimed at reconciliation." The House also "emphasises that media freedom is essential in creating a democratic society," and "is very concerned about the rising number of attacks on journalists and calls on the Afghan authorities to seriously investigate these violations."
The report also draws attention to the fact that the mandate of the EU Police Mission (EUPOL) provides opportunities for it to support and train the Afghan Ministry of the Interior, a key priority for establishing the rule of law in Afghanistan. In this context, it strongly criticizes EU Member States for failing to contribute enough personnel to allow EUPOL to be deployed at full strength, and asks the Council to urgently examine this situation.
Pakistan relationship
The report considers that the Afghanistan-Pakistan relationship has been the source of much of the region’s instability, and therefore concludes that stabilising the region requires a comprehensive policy geared to that relationship. MEPs hope that, with the new government in Pakistan, the improvement of the bilateral relationship will receive a fresh impetus. The House believes, however, that without the active engagement and assistance of the international community the two countries will not be able to extricate themselves from their difficult bilateral relationship.
MEPs recognise that security in Afghanistan hinges to a very large extent on the democratisation of Pakistan. Parliament urges the international community to initiate and support measures that lessen tensions between Afghanistan and Pakistan, including a long-term programme to stabilise and develop the cross-border region, involving stakeholders on both sides.
20080707IPR33587 Stabilisation of Afghanistan: challenges for the EU and the international community Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 8 July)
EN
1
PHOTO
20080704PHT33487.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5531892
EN
3
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
