Europe-wide authorisation of railway rolling stock, but heritage railways exempted by MEPs
Transport
2008-07-09 - 12:44
The European Parliament approved an agreement reached with the Council on the EU-wide approval of different types of railway rolling stock. Under the new legislation, any rolling stock already approved for use in one Member State will have to be accepted in the other states. This will cut red tape and should boost the development of rail transport in Europe. Heritage, museum and tourist railways are exempted from the directive, as the result of another successful demand by Parliament.
The agreement on which the House will be voting - at second reading under the co-decision procedure - relates to two pieces of legislation. The first updates the existing Railway Safety Directive; the second amends the current European Railway Agency regulation.
Cross-border acceptance of rolling stock crucial to free movement
Under current rules, locomotives and other vehicles that can operate in one Member State are not necessarily allowed to operate in another State. Sometimes national safety rules conflict. For example, in Italy fire extinguishers on trains must contain CO2 powder and no foam, while Austria requires fire-extinguishers to be filled with foam and CO2 is not allowed.
Furthermore, rail companies wishing to operate international services have to undergo repeat approval procedures for their rolling stock in each Member State. This often requires the provision of evidence that is not mutually recognised between States and can cause delays and costs. Certification can take up to three years to complete.
The solution proposed by the European Commission - and now on the verge of being endorsed by Parliament and Council - is to introduce the principle of "cross-acceptance through mutual recognition". This means that a railway vehicle that has been approved for use in one Member State must be authorised in the other States.
Safety not to be neglected
Efficiency must not come at the expense of safety, and the Commission proposed from the outset that Member States' authorities be allowed to impose additional national safety requirements in some cases, for example to take account of "local system specifications".
However, MEPs were keen to ensure that safety issues were not used as an excuse to hinder the approval of rolling stock and the creation of new railway undertakings. They therefore proposed a clearer definition of “national safety rules”, which has been taken on board by the Council.
The Commission and Council wanted a voluntary certification system to guarantee that trains are properly maintained but MEPs successfully argued for it to be mandatory, thus creating a level-playing field in the EU. Following pressure from MEPs, this system will apply to all vehicles: for freight wagons two years after the directive enters into force and for all other vehicles no later then ten years after entry into force.
Lastly, heritage, museum and tourist railways are exempted from the directive, as the result of another successful demand by Parliament.
Speaking in the debate in Strasbourg on 8 July, Brian Simpson (PES, UK, Labour North West) said: " Finally, I must thank our rapporteur and all the Members for their support of my amendments exempting heritage and tourist railways from this directive. Had they been forced to comply, the cost burden would have been crippling, putting at risk the preservation of that rich industrial heritage that these railways undoubtedly provide. "
European Railway Agency
For the Rail Safety Directive to work, centralised procedures and data will be needed. This is the task of the European Railway Agency. Under the amended regulation on the European Railway Agency, this body is mandated to develop a reference document with information on all the national rules on the placing in service of rolling stock. It will also play a coordinating role in efforts to streamline the number of national safety rules.
A key point was the introduction of a European Railway Traffic Management System, consisting of the most advanced rail safety technology. This system will be installed on the Trans-European Transport network but, at Parliament's insistence, it will be phased in gradually.
20080708IPR33705 Debate in Strasbourg plenary (click on 8 July) Texts, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 9 July)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/cre/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
2
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
