Towards a new culture for urban mobility
Transport
2008-07-09 - 13:04
New thinking and innovative concepts on mobility on cities are urgently needed in order to tackle the negative effects of urban transport on climate change and the environment. By adopting an own-initiative report (581 votes in favour to 100 against and 33 abstentions) on a recent Commission Green Paper, the European Parliament calls for a clear definition of the EU's role in terms of urban mobility policy, with due respect to the subsidiarity principle.
MEPs said that action at EU level should only be taken when it provided a clear added value and they ask for an integrated European urban approach to urban mobility, which should serve as a common frame of reference for European cities and should encourage them to draw up Sustainable Urban Mobility Plans (SUMP). Where the EU has legislative power in the field of environment, industry, regional and cohesion policy, it should take into account the needs of urban transport.
Furthermore, the report asks for specific EU rules on standardisation and harmonisation in a number of areas, for instance in relation to the interoperability of transport modes, the mobility of people with disabilities or the introduction of green zones and road pricing. The decision on whether or not to introduce these measures should, however, be taken at local level.
The House is also in favour of facilitating the dissemination of best practices throughout the EU, such as the promotion of alternative modes of transport, multi-modality or the improvement of public transport. It is proposed to create a "European Platform for Urban Mobility", which should bring together relevant data, practices and policy information.
Financing
With regard to financing, the House emphasises that there should be a shared responsibility between the various levels of governance. It is believed that the EU could make an important contribution in this area for example via structural and cohesion funds. The report is expected to provide firm guidance to the European Commission, which is currently drawing up an EU Action Plan on urban mobility.
20080708IPR33695 Towards a new culture for urban mobility Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 9 July)
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5597882
EN
2
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
