Zimbabwe: MEPs call for a transitional administration and say elections were not legitimate
External relations
2008-07-10 - 10:54
A transitional administration should help end the climate of terror sweeping Zimbabwe since the presidential elections campaign started. This administration should also organise fresh presidential elections, says a resolution adopted by the House. The resolution asks to tighten up sanctions against members of the Mugabe regime. The House stresses that the elections of 27 June cannot be regarded as legitimate, and welcomes the EU Presidency's statement of 28 June clearly stating this position.
The transitional administration should demobilise militias, repeal repressive legislation, resolve the humanitarian crisis and stabilise the economy. Youth militias and war veterans should be disarmed, demobilised and prosecuted, say MEPs.
The Zimbabwe Electoral Commission (ZEC) should be rebuild and create conditions for free and fair presidential elections in the near future under the auspice of the AU and the UN. A Truth and Reconciliation Commission should also be set up, according to MEPs.
Aid for Zimbabwe
The European Parliament welcomes Commissioner Michel's commitment to significantly increase support for Zimbabwe and its people by pledging 250 million euros in development aid, once democracy returns and a legitimate and credible government is elected.
Lift restrictions on humanitarian aid
MEPs call on Robert Mugabe's government to lift all restrictions on the delivery of aid, in the wake of the orders given to humanitarian aid organisations to suspend their operations.
The EU is urged to channel its aid through local and international NGOs without passing via the Harare authorities. Around two million people in Zimbabwe are under threat of famine, poverty and disease.
Beef up sanctions against Mugabe regime
The House calls on the Member States not to grant any visa to Mugabe, his cabinet and the ZANU PF leadership for any national or international purpose on EU territory.
The Council is called upon to tighten up the sanctions against members of the Mugabe regime and others responsible for grave violations of human rights, if mediation is not accepted and the state-sponsored violence is not ended, and to press for sanctions to be adopted at UN level, including an arms embargo and a comprehensive freeze of assets of the entire government and ruling party leadership.
The resolution also calls on EU Member States to reject international recognition should Robert Mugabe be sworn in as President for another term. China and Libya are urged to cease their support for the Harare regime.
Impact of this crisis on neighbouring countries
The impact of this crisis on neighbouring countries, including South Africa, should not be disregarded in the region.
Among the 10% - 40% predicted increase in numbers of Zimbabweans crossing borders in the next few weeks, MEPs note that, among these migrants, children will be in a particularly vulnerable situation, at risk of abuse and forced to take up dangerous jobs such as mining, handling farm machinery or sex work in order to survive.
The second round of the presidential elections took take place Friday 27 June with Mugabe as the only candidate. Election observers from both the Southern African Development Community and the Pan African Parliament condemned the election.
The resolution was adopted with 591 votes in favour, 8 against and 21 abstentions.
MDC representative at the EP next week
MEPs will debate the country's stalemate with Mr Hebson Makuvise, MDC Chief Representative for Europe, Tuesday 15 July 2008 at 5pm.
20080709IPR33862 Resolution, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 10 July)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
