Parliament welcomes positive developments in EU-China relations, remains concerned about human rights abuses
External relations
2008-07-10 - 11:15
A European Parliament resolution adopted on Thursday "expresses satisfaction at the developments in EU-China relations, the sectoral dialogues and the closer cooperation on various globalised issues." It commends China's reaction to the recent earthquake in Sichuan, but "deplores the fact that China's human rights record remains a matter for concern owing to widespread and systematic human rights abuses."
The resolution, adopted by (439-51-139) "calls on the Chinese authorities to bear in mind that earthquake warnings constitute one benchmark of the development of a country," stressing that future scientific warnings should be heeded if they forecast another natural disaster in China. Parliament stresses the importance of the EU and the international community for reconstruction efforts after the quake, and "notes with satisfaction that China rapidly agreed to accept the assistance of the international community in helping the victims of the earthquake."
Tibet and human rights
The House "welcomes the resumption of contacts, after the events of March 2008 in Lhasa, between the representatives of the Dalai Lama and the Chinese authorities," and calls for an intensification of these contacts. Nevertheless, MEPs also deplore the fact that "participants in the protest in Lhasa [are] still being traced, detained and arbitrarily arrested," and calls on China to "halt its ‘patriotic re-education’ campaign."
Parliament urges the Chinese authorities to display clemency to all political prisoners and human rights activists who are currently in jail, and to stop practices of discrimination and harassment. It "condemns China's frequent use of the death penalty and calls on the Chinese authorities to establish a moratorium on executions."
Beijing Olympics
The resolution "calls on China to abide by the public commitments which it made with regard to human rights and minority rights, democracy and the rule of law and which the International Olympic Committee (IOC) announced when it decided to allow China to host the Olympic Games."
The President of the European Parliament, Hans-Gert Pöttering, announced yesterday that he will not be attending the opening ceremony of the Olympic Games in Beijing, due to the lack of progress in talks between Chinese authorities and representatives of the Dalai Lama. At the same time, during Wednesday afternoon's debate, the French State Secretary for European Affairs Jean-Pierre Jouyet announced that after consultations with his colleagues in the European Council, French President Nicolas Sarkozy will be attending the event, representing both France and the EU as the holder of the current EU presidency.
20080709IPR33858 EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering will not attend Olympic Games opening ceremony Strasbourg - 09/07/2008 Text adopted on 'Situation in China after the earthquake and before the Olympic Games' will be available here (click on 10 July)
EN
1
LINK
/president/defaulten.htm#press_releases
EN
2
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
