Police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters: MEPs seek stronger personal data protection
Fundamental rights
2008-07-15 - 20:07
The Civil Liberties Committee sought to beef up the data protection provisions of a proposed Council framework decision on police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters in its third report, adopted on Tuesday, on this proposal. MEPs felt that the text had been weakened by the political agreement in the Council, which needs unanimity.
The report, by Martine Roure (PES, FR), was adopted unanimously minus one abstention. The vote was taken after MEPs had expressed the hope that this would be made a co-decision issue in 2009, if the Lisbon Treaty could enter into force in time.
"A lowest common denominator deal" in Council
The European Parliament had already been consulted on this issue, but when a November 2007 agreement in Council diverged substantially from the Commission's original proposal, MEPs were invited to comment on the new text. The rapporteur regretted that "the Council had emptied the Commission's initial proposal of its content and arrived at an agreement on the lowest common denominator". For example, the text drafted in Council would apply only to exchanges of data among Member States, and not to the processing of data within them, as originally planned.
MEPs considered on the contrary that the text should apply to data processed at national level, too, and that particular attention should be paid to the purposes to which personal data may be put. Article 7, on the processing of a special category of personal data to do inter alia with race or ethnic origin, political opinions, and religious or philosophical beliefs, is strengthened: the processing of these data is prohibited save in exceptional, clearly-defined, circumstances.
MEPs also reinsert the idea, proposed by the Commission but not taken up by the Council, of a working party on the protection of people with regard to the processing of personal data, which would deliver opinions and recommendations to the institutions.
Private operators, transfers to third countries or international organisations
MEPs stipulate that Member States' competent authorities must have access to data held by private operators case by case, subjet to judicial control. Private operators entrusted with public service tasks should be subject to requirements at least equivalent to those imposed on the authorities.
MEPs also stipulate that the transfer of personal data to third countries or international organisations must be better governed, by doing it case by case, and that Member States must meet tougher conditions in order to avail themselves of an exemption from the requirement to ensure adequate protection for data transferred to third countries. The assessment of whether the level of protection offered by a third country is adequate should moreover be done by an independent authority.
2008-07-14 Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs In the chair Gérard DEPREZ ADLE BE
Procedure: consultation. -- Plenary session: September I, Strasbourg.
20080714IPR34089 Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs web pages
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do;jsessionid=A36DFDD71E06FFBA2B071B699D0B3B86.node1?body=LIBE&language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
