Summer season on the parliament's website
Institutions
2008-07-18 - 11:32
The faces behind the stories we will be republishing in the coming weeks
As MEPs head to their countries and constituencies over the next few weeks the work of parliament slows as the summer recess takes hold. It is chance to take stock and prepare for the next plenary session in Strasbourg which opens on 1 September. Over the next few weeks we will be publishing a series of articles that look back at the policies and personalities that have engaged the attention of the parliament. Below is a timetable of what you can expect!
China and the European Union - 22 July: In this, the summer of the Beijing Olympics we look at Europe's relations with China as political and economic relations continue to grow - despite concerns over Tibet and human rights.
Inside the Parliament - 24 July: Inside the Parliament: a look at a series of reports that have hit the headlines this year. From Kosovo and Serbia to rape in DR Congo we look at things that have been debated by MEPs this spring.
International figures - 28 July and 14 August: Prince Charles and Ukraine's Yulia Tymoshenko are just two international figures who have taken their causes to the European Parliament in the last months. They have been joined by Mikhail Gorbachev and Swedish Prime Minister Frederik Reinfeldt. In a series of republished articles we look back at their visits to Brussels and Strasbourg.
Africa - 31 July: With its close physical proximity to Europe, Africa is a vitally important region for the EU. We look at several issues that MEPs have discussed over the last few months. From human rights to over-fishing threatening people's livelihoods we take a look at some main themes which have been debated.
A choice of articles - 4 August: The rights of children not to be exploited online and the 40th anniversary of the 1968 protests are just two things we look at when we republish a series of stories on these and other issues.
The economy - 7 August: As the world economy continues to wobble, in this publication we look at turmoil in the financial markets, inflation and world trade.
"Most wanted" - 11 August: "Most wanted" is a play of a series of articles that have been among the most popular in terms of visits to the parliament's website. These include a look at carbon capture and its possible impact on averting the worse scenario of climate change. We also look at the number of women MEPs and how the figures compare with other legislatures.
Miscellaneous - 18 August: Euro 2008, love and the European cities of culture are just three things we have published stories on this year. Here we re-publish them for you to have another look at them.
A touch of showbiz - 21 August: Finally, in a spark of showbiz we have interviews with singer Alanis Morissette and Bollywood actor Aamir Khan.
We hope you will enjoy the stories we will be republishing for you!
20080717STO34863
EN
1
PHOTO
20080715PHT34214.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
