Out of hours
Culture
2008-08-18 - 09:00
Liverpool, football and love…all you need… The parliament isn't just about plenary sessions and committee meetings, its members have views about an enormous variety of topics and you can read about just a few of them here. Read what some MEPs thought about Euro 2008 - we asked for predictions before it started to keep everyone happy! On 14 February we celebrated the feast of St Valentine by asking MEPs how they spent the romantic day. We also asked Members how they spend their Easter.
Catch up with our profile of Liverpool and Stavangar as the two ports celebrated being the 2008 European cities of culture. Read all about it here.
20080707FCS33614
Euro 2008 - will it unite or divide us Europeans?
Larger than life footballers at a Zurich train station For the next few weeks millions of Europeans will be in the grip of Euro 2008. As well as representing a cross section of talent the teams represent a cross section of Europe politically. Of the 16 teams, 12 are already EU members and a further two - Turkey and Croatia - have ambitions to join. One of the joint hosts - Switzerland - is neutral whilst Russia straddles the geographical border of Europe. We asked several MEPs at a time like this whether football unites or divides Europeans.
Thomas Mann - a German EPP-ED member - said that "let us hope for a great football celebration as we had two years ago at the World Cup in Germany, where fans from all over the world came together to enjoy their favourite sport. And that is what unites us about football, win or lose: We all share the love of the game".
To make this point he says that "the official ball of the tournament is called "Europass" which alludes to the cooperation and team-play...It's a metaphor for our work in the European Parliament. We "pass" arguments among ourselves, exchange views and experience in order to achieve a common "goal".
Swedish Socialist MEP Jan Andersson told us that "I have a history as chairman in Högaborgs football club whose most famous player is Henrik Larsson who has played both in Holland, Scotland and Spain. Next week I will travel to Salzburg to watch him play a game for Sweden against Greece. Nobody could say anything else then that football unit and creates contacts across borders".
"A football match is not a fight"
Romanian Liberal MEP Ramona Manescu said that "sport is a mean of interaction, and hence it unites people. Of course, sport is competitive, and you will find people ready to take the confrontation out of the pitch and into the street. However, this is more likely to occur in domestic competitions, as the teams meet frequently and have a “history” of confrontations. EURO 2008 is an opportunity for Europeans to visit Austria and Switzerland, befriend people from all around Europe and support their national team".
Roberta Angelilli - an Italian MEP from the UEN group - noted "that the next European Football Championship is a reason for unity for all the European citizens. Sporting values are universal, and they are against divisions. A football match is not a fight, but an opportunity to compare each other in an honest competition. Cheering and sporty fervour must stay in a playful way.. This way European citizen could meet their opponents and find in that a reason to feel the European affiliation".
"When I hear the anthem I get emotional"
Dutch Green MEP Joost Lagendijk had this to say "I think the European championships divide and unite at the same time. Most Europeans probably do not identify themselves as much with their own country as during these kind of championships. Personally when I hear the anthem of the Netherlands before a match I still get emotional. Europe is sometimes together and sometimes separately and we must keep it this way."
Patrick Louis - a French MEP from the Independence and Democracy group said that "we have always known that football does not divide but unites in the same passion. The players and fans show healthy national pride and honour to wear the jersey or national symbols. Beyond the disappointment of defeat or the euphoria of victory, remains the memory of shared moments in the stadiums, bars or homes to vibrate, sing, scream or cry". He went on to say that "this popular roots football in almost every country in the world and the strategy of the game are apolitical but they can give us a little lesson for us Europeans".
Youth say no to racism in football
Parliament has long been involved in the fight to make football as sporting as possible. A recent example is called "Youth Voices Against Racism" - young Europeans are being invited to join a continent-wide campaign launched 2 June by UNESCO, FC Barcelona and MEPs to eradicate violence and racism in sport. They will look at ways in which sport can be used to combat racism and discrimination and to promote tolerance, mutual respect and solidarity. A Youth Forum will be held from 18 to 20 September in Bologna (Italy) with the result presented to MEPs and the European Commissioner of Sport Jan Figel.
MEPs have already passed a against racism in football - the Dutch MEP who initiated this Emine Bozkurt remarked that "sport is a mirror of society, with all its shortcomings, but it also offers possibilities for social inclusion".
Euro 2008 Culture and Education Committee
MEPs share their Easter with us
Most Europeans have already celebrated Easter though for some in the Orthodox Church the celebrations are still to come. Easter is the most important religious festival for Christians and Jews celebrate Passover around the same time. The abundance of eggs, rabbits and chocolate over Easter also indicates that it has resonance for those who are not religious. As the snow settles over an unusually cold and early Easter 2008, we asked some MEPs what Easter means for them and how they celebrate it.
For some Members we spoke to, Easter is primarily a religious occasion and a time to be with family and friends. Ljudmila Novak (EPP-ED) told us that "in Slovenia we tend to accent the Easter celebration on spending time with the family and therefore we go to the church every day from Thursday to Monday together".
Independent Dutch MEP Bastiaan Belder told us that "we celebrated Easter with my wife, children and four grandsons, the whole family together. Easter has a very special religious meaning to us and it is not just a day off. On Easter Sunday we went twice to the protestant Church with 1000 people attending".
Finnish Green MEP Satu Hassi described her weekend; "o n Easter Monday we had a dinner with some friends at home with lamb steak and Easter dessert called pasha. For Easter decorations we had daffodils in the table and an "Easter Witch" in the window".
Easter is a time for tradition...
Romanian Liberal MEP Adina-Ioana Vălean told us that "a fter a long lent period that lasts for more than six weeks the Easter celebrations start on Friday before the Easter Sunday. On Saturday night after a religious ceremony everyone eats bread and wine and take home the light – the candle they held during the procession".
"It is believed that burying an Easter egg in the soil would bring a good harvest. Those who roll their egg the furthest in the egg rolling game can expect a successful year." This is how Lithuanian Member Eugenijus Maldeikis (UEN) explained to us a traditional Easter in his country.
Estonian Socialist Andres Tarand told us that "children in Estonia paint eggs in different colours and then adults hide them – we say that they’re brought by rabbits. People also offer branches of willow katkin to each other. People also go outside asking the children if “the sun is dancing”.
Irish MEP Kathy Sinnott (IND/DEM) described to us a typical Easter in her family; "a fter the Vigil Mass on Holy Saturday, Easter begins. Chocolate Eggs are exchanged on Easter Sunday or if children are present, the chocolate eggs are often hidden and hunted. In my house we also have an Easter Egg hunt with hard boiled eggs that we dye and decorate".
In the Czech Republic and Slovakia there is a tradition where women are symbolically "whipped" or have water poured on them to ensure that they are young, beautiful and healthy. In return women give men ham, eggs and sometimes money depending on the area. Czech MEP Jana Hybášková (EPP-ED) explained to us that "on Eastern Monday morning, me and my daughters carefully wait in our beds for dear Ivan, my husband, to come and whip us. We shout a lot".
Easter is a celebration of a new year...
Spanish Green MEP David Hammerstein sees Easter as "a celebration of spring, new life, so I turned it into a working celebration and gave several press conferences in defence of ecology. I will also celebrate the Jewish Easter . I celebrate it in a secular way with the symbolic dinner and I will think about the liberation of all people fighting against oppression, like in Tibet".
German MEP Feleknas Uca (GUE/NGL) spent 21 March in Diyabakir in Turkey, celebrating Newroz – the Kurdish New Year.
Articles about culture
Love is in the air...
The look of love from the EP "All you need is love..." as the Beatles famously said. Love may be as important as the air we breathe but talking about love is not always the easiest topic. We usually leave it to poets and singers, and not to politicians. But on the occasion of St. Valentine's Day, 14 February, a day celebrated in many parts of Europe, perhaps they too can have their say. With some trepidation, we spoke to some MEPs about love.
1. If there was a European Charter for Love, what should be in it?
Genowefa Grabowska (PES, PL): There should be no age limit...nor should it contain any sanctions. It has to be based on persuasion and faith...Maybe the Slovenian presidency could introduce a Charter of Love.
Katalin Lévai (PES, HU), author of the bestseller "Pillow-book": Mutual understanding and respect. Love is not only about sensual pleasures, but it is also about a spiritual and intellectual togetherness, otherwise desire dwindles away.
Frédérique Ries (ALDE, BE): Please, no charter! Love is allergic to paragraphs and annexes.
Zita Pleštinská (EPP-ED, SK): Love never fails. If we managed to put this idea into practise, the world would become much nicer. Then the Charter could replace many EP resolutions.
Henrik Lax (ALDE, FI): Live with your loved one as if every day you are together could be your last.
Christofer Fjellner (EPP-ED, SV): Love should not be bound by any borders; any more than goods, services, capital or people.
Roberta Alma Anastase (EPP-ED, RO): Nowadays, people do not use the word love in public speeches, however, our existence is based on feelings, particularly on love. The European Union is a space where thoughts, feelings, attitudes are encouraged to flourish openly. I think this charter already exists and it is to be found in every one of us.
2. Would you like to share any good tips about romance and love?
Katalin Lévai : Be sincere from the very beginning. The one who acts a role will eventually fall.
Astrid Lulling (EPP-ED, LUX): You cannot organise or plan romance and love. It happens or it does not!
Frédérique Ries : For eternal love, admire and be admired and surprise, always. Boredom poisons love.
Genowefa Grabowska : The more you love the more you expose yourself to suffering. But suffering enriches us. Every grandmother has a drawer full of advice because she has been in love so many times. But her granddaughters will never listen to her, because they would prefer to learn from their own experience.
Henrik Lax : Enjoy the romance, but do not take any serious life decisions until you know whether it is love or something else.
3. What "says it best" on Valentine's Day: chocolate, flowers or something else?
Roberta Alma Anastase : Chocolate and flowers are good, especially if mixed. However, the most important thing is to be sure the person you love is there for you.
Katalin Lévai : A good book is the most valuable of all, if it is accompanied by a flower, then my heart warms.
Genowefa Grabowska : If I was cynical and materialistic I would expect my husband to give me a red car, because I like red cars. But I am not, so what I would like to get is a red rose.
Frédérique Ries : Give yourself, that's the real present and not only on 14 February. Give your time, your imagination and your heart - there are infinite possibilities for wonderful surprises.
4. Are you planning to do anything special for Valentine's day?
Astrid Lulling : Valentine's Day only became fashionable when I was already over 40. But one can always dream, so why not hope that a good friend will take the initiative for a lovely surprise.
Christofer Fjellner : Yes, I will spend it with my girlfriend, Cecilia. Since I spend so much time in Brussels - and to much time in Strasbourg - spending time with her is always - in some way - special.
Henrik Lax : "No, I will be in Kiev, far from my wife whom I met 43 years ago. I will send my warmest thoughts and feelings to her and all my family.
Liverpool and Stavanger – European Capitals of Culture 2008
Liverpool's iconic seafront Liverpool and Stavanger, although over 800 km apart, will make their mark on the cultural map of Europe this year as they celebrate being the official 2008 European capitals of culture. Plays, concerts and exhibitions are among the events both cities plan as thousands of people visit the two port cities over the course of the year.
Each city is under the international spotlight for one year, giving them the chance to showcase their cultural life, raise their profile and transform their cultural image.
Since the launch of the capitals of culture programme in 1985, the European Parliament has played a role in deciding on the cities, giving its opinion on the merits of each application. MEPs on Parliament's Education and Culture Committee consider every application based on what the city can offer. As well debating the merits of individual bids, the committee can also hold public hearings.
Liverpool 08
Being crowned as the 2008 capital of culture is a recognition of the economic and cultural renaissance the city has undergone since the decline of traditional industries.
Liverpool's year as city of culture opened on 11 January when thousands gathered for a performance of "Liverpool the musical" featuring former Beatle Ringo Starr and the Royal Liverpool Philharmonic Orchestra.
Over the next 12 months a series of events will celebrate the creativity of Liverpool and her people. February will see a series of lectures on Liverpool and a concert of Sir John Tavener's new Requiem in Liverpool Metropolitan Cathedral at the end of the month. The piece attempts to reconcile the world’s warring religions through music.
The centrepiece of the theatre, dance and music events will be a concert at Anfield (home of Liverpool football club) on 1 June. The year also features book festivals, poetry readings and photography exhibits of the people of Liverpool.
The Beatles, UNESCO status
In 2004 the seafront at Liverpool was awarded World Heritage Status by the UN based on the city's history as a Maritime Mercantile city. Over the centuries the vast numbers of migrants - mainly Irish - and sailors who passed through the city have made it a religiously diverse city. It has also left a multicultural legacy with an estimated 60 different languages spoken by its 447,500 people. The city is also famous for the Beatles and two of Britain's most popular and successful football clubs Liverpool and Everton.
Stavanger – an open port
Norway – "the land of the midnight sun", fjords, glaciers, waterfalls and a perfect place to live coming first in the Global Peace Index and ranked second in the human development index. Stavanger has an unemployment rate of just 1% and is a wealthy town, having profited from the oil industry, shipping, fishing and timber.
Events in Stavanger centre around the concept of the "open port" with a free port of art and freedom of expression and new ideas. There will be workshops encouraging locals to create their own art and international artists will work with local artists. There will be events around architecture, literature, music and visual arts.
There will be a variety of artists from a range of countries including the South African Handspring Puppet Company, the Israeli dance company, the Belgian Muziektheater Transparant and the, Lithuanian Oskaras Koršunovas Theatre.
Visitors to Stavanger will also have the chance to enjoy:
Fjords - the "world's best scenery"
the windy wooden house of Norway
its famous symphony orchestra
the sardine canning museum and the oil museum
Liverpool08 Stavanger Culture goes north in 2008 Parliament's culture and Education Committee Luxembourg and Sibiu: 2007 European Capitals of Culture
EN
1
PHOTO
20080715PHT34210.jpg
EN
2
PHOTO
20080605PHT31009.jpg
EN
3
LINK
http://www.euro2008.uefa.com/
EN
4
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=CULT
EN
5
LINK
/news/public/documents_par_theme/906/default_en.htm
EN
6
PHOTO
20080213PHT21219.jpg
EN
7
PHOTO
20080211PHT20849.jpg
EN
8
LINK
http://www.liverpool08.com/index.asp
EN
9
LINK
http://www.stavanger2008.no/
EN
10
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/news/culture/080107_1_en.htm
EN
11
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do;jsessionid=1728BDCB4A72C884C8ACA3620D3096BD.node2?language=EN&body=CULT
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070125STO02408 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FEA DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FEA DOC XML V0//EN
