Autumn in Parliament: a bulging parliamentary in-tray
Institutions
2008-08-25 - 12:36
Busy autumn for MEPs As the summer recess ends, MEPs prepare for busy months of legislative work, filled with meetings, debates and decisive votes. Three innovative legal packages, which will affect citizens' lives for years to come, are taking shape in the House: on telecoms, CO2 emissions and maritime safety. Immigration policy, food safety, on-line security for our children and much more are also on Members' agenda for the autumn.
The first reading of long awaited telecom package designed to keep up with rapidly developing technology and give a boost to the European telecommunication market with a series of innovative legal solutions both for business and consumers will be discussed during the plenary sessions in September. Read more about the package in our theme series.
CO2/Global warming
Climate change is at the forefront of parliamentary activity this year. A series of legislative acts giving effect to EU commitments to curb CO2 emissions are under way in the House. This autumn will see a series of committee votes on the Climate package. There is a strong political will between the EP and the Council to wrap up the legislation by the end of the year.
One of the components is Italian Socialist Guido Sacconi's report on emission performance standards for new passenger cars addressing the growing climate change impact from road transport. The emissions target is set at an ambitious 120g CO2/km by 2012 .
The introduction of harmonised rules on the construction of motor vehicles to assure a high level of environmental protection against atmospheric emissions will also come under parliamentary scrutiny as will a report on energy efficiency in transport through the promotion of clean and energy efficient road transport vehicles. Also on the table are proposals to cut fuel consumption by focusing on award criteria in the public procurement of road transport vehicles, which must include an analysis of costs of energy consumption, CO2 emissions and pollutant emissions.
Maritime safety
The Transport and tourism Committee has been busy with a large scale review of legislation ensuring maritime transport safety and security. Six legislative acts amending existing legislation will get a final vote towards the end of September.
The improved law will lay down common rules and standards for ship inspection and survey organisations, determine liability of carriers of passengers by sea and inland waterways in the event of accidents and regulate community vessel traffic monitoring and information system.
Immigration - dual approach
The EU has a demographic deficit but at the same time has problems with illegal immigration so is seeking different ways to tackle the issues. The "Blue Card" scheme aims to improve the attractiveness of the EU as a destination for highly qualified workers from third countries, while there is also a proposal to sanction employers who illegally employ third-country nationals. The scale of the phenomenon in Europe is hard to quantify and estimates vary from between 4.5 million to 8 million.
Kids on the net
Parliament wants to protect children against internet abuse as well as to fight illegal and harmful content on-line. For that purpose members seek to establish a special Community programme. It will cover a five year period beginning 1 January 2009 with a proposed budget of €55 million. MEPs are scheduled to discuss the proposals in October.
20080825STO35410
EN
1
PHOTO
20080825PHT35436.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
