Highlights of September I plenary session - Brussels -1-4 September 2008
Institutions
2008-09-01 - 17:16
The first September plenary will be held exceptionally in Brussels. Highlights of the session include: A debate with Bernard Kouchner on the situation in Georgia - MEPs will also vote on a resolution, an address by Costa Rican President Óscar Arias, a debate on the telecoms package, a debate on the social package with proposals on labour rights and anti-discrimination, debate and vote on animal cloning for food production and a report on the impact of advertising on male-female equality.
Situation in Georgia - MEPs to vote on a resolution The House will debate and vote on a resolution on the latest situation in Georgia. Regarding Russia's move to recognise South Ossetia and Abkhazia, the Council strongly condemns this decision, which is contrary to the principles of Georgia’s independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity. The debate is scheduled to take place on Monday 1 September at 7.30pm with French Foreign Minister Bernard Kouchner representing Council. The vote on the resolution takes place on Wednesday 3 September. President of Costa Rica Óscar Arias to address the House The President of Costa Rica - Óscar Arias will address the House on Wednesday 3 September at midday. Óscar Rafael de Jesús Arias Sánchez (born 13 September 1940) is the current President of Costa Rica, and won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1987 for his efforts to end civil wars then raging in several Central American countries. Following his speech, President Arias will hold a joint press conference with EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering. Palestinian prisoners in Israel - vote on a resolution MEPs will vote on a resolution on Palestinian prisoners in Israel following the debate that was held on 9 July 2008 in Strasbourg. On 25 August, Israel released 198 Palestinian prisoners in what it calls a goodwill gesture to bolster Palestinian leader Mahmoud Abbas. They include two convicted killers of Israelis who have been in detention since 1977 and 1979 and who are among the longest-serving inmates. The vote takes place on Thursday 4 September.
*** Telecoms package Better protection for users' rights Access to the European emergency number 112 via electronic communications, more transparent information on access and use of content on internet as well as on operators' tariffs, portable numbers when changing operator and a clearer definition of the principle of network neutrality: these are the main points of the report proposed by the EP Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection as part of the "telecoms package". MEPs will vote during the September II sitting (22-25 September) EU-wide spectrum management for full benefits of wireless services Radio spectrum use must be co-ordinated and harmonised across the EU to enable citizens to benefit from new electronic services like mobile broadband internet access, says the Industry Committee. In reports for the committee, MEPs advocate setting up a new European body of national telecommunications regulators to ensure that measures apply consistently EU wide and also call for incentives to invest in new infrastructure, including "next generation" access networks. MEPs to call for coordinated use of "digital dividend" spectrum The use of spectrum frequencies released by the switchover from analogue to digital terrestrial TV should be coordinated at EU level, says a report proposed by the Industry Committee. MEPs call on Member States and Commission to identify common spectrum sub-bands to avoid interferences. The freed spectrum could be used for additional TV programmes, mobile broadband and new e-services such as e-government or e-health. MEPs will vote during the September II sitting (22-25 September) *** Social package - including health facility and discrimination directive MEPs will debate the Commission's proposed social package which was launched on 2nd and 3rd July. Altogether, the package contains 19 initiatives in the areas of employment and social affairs, education and youth, health, information society and economic affairs. John BOWIS (EPP-ED, UK), has been appointed the European Parliament's rapporteur on the new EU directive on cross-border healthcare. Stereotypes in advertising continue despite EU efforts Eva-Britt SVENSSON (GUE/NGL, SE) for the Women's Rights Committee will be putting forward an own-initiative report on how marketing and advertising affect equality between men and women. The report notes the continued widespread existence of male and female stereotypes despite various Community programmes to promote gender equality. McCann inspired written declaration on emergency cooperation in recovering missing children to be formally adopted The written declaration on emergency cooperation in recovering missing children, inspired by the disappearance of Madeline McCann on 3 May 2007, will be formally adopted in plenary with 418 MEP signatures . More than half of the total of 785 MEPs need to sign a written declaration for it to become the official position of the European Parliament. Cloning of animals for food supply - EP to vote on a resolution and quiz Commission Neil PARISH (EPP-ED, UK) on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development will be asking the Commission questions on cloning of animals for food supply. The House will also vote on a resolution on this topic. On the initiative of its chairman, Neil Parish, the EP Agriculture Committee is calling for a ban in the EU on the cloning of animals for food supply as well as an embargo on imports of cloned animals, their offspring and products derived from these sources. 2009 budget: adequate means for EU policy priorities The EU must give itself adequate budgetary means to achieve its policy aims - this is the spirit in which Parliament's delegation went to its budgetary conciliation meeting with the Council on 17 July. MEPs in the Budgets Committee propose increasing the payments entered in the preliminary draft budget for 2009. Responding to the plan to fund agricultural aid to developing countries with unspent CAP money, they also demanded that the Commission comply with budgetary rules. More competition in airline reservation systems - with protection for consumers The Code of Conduct for computerised reservation systems regulates how travel bookings are managed by air carriers, the CRS companies (e.g. Amadeus and Sabre), travel agents and, where relevant, rail operators. "This code was created 20 years ago in very different market conditions than the current ones. It is now increasingly ill-adapted to new market conditions, the deregulation of other CRSs markets around the world and the decrease of airline ownership in CRSs," says EP rapporteur Timothy KIRKHOPE (EPP-ED, UK). Human rights in the world As usual the session ends with three debates and votes on human rights issues in the world. On this occasion the topics are: Coup d'Etat in Mauritania, hangings in Iran, and the killing of albinos in Tanzania.
Full highlights can be found in the Briefing, follow the link below: 20080829IPR35624 Final draft agenda - 1-4 September 2008 Briefing for 1-4 September 2008 Live broadcasts from September I plenary session in Brussels
EN
1
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?reference=2008-09&language=EN
EN
3
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/faces/live/live-video.jsp?language=en
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080708BRI33691 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
