Improving judicial cooperation in Europe
Justice and home affairs
2008-09-02 - 12:54
MEPs adopted three reports which on Improving judicial cooperation in Europe. The subjects of the reports are mutual recognition between Member States of court decisions rendered in absentia, strengthening of the Eurojust system and the European Judicial Network.
Mutual recognition of judgments rendered in absentia
The report by Armando França (PES, PT), adopted by 609 votes in favour, 60 against and 14 abstentions, follows a proposal by seven states for common rules to be laid down on the recognition and enforcement of judicial rulings handed down in a Member State other than the one in which the person concerned is to be found.
The EU wants to create a common area for justice, which requires the mutual recognition of criminal law judgments by the Member States. Four framework decisions already deal with different aspects of this matter: the European arrest warrant, financial penalties, confiscation orders and prison sentences.
However, in practice national judicial systems diverge and in many cases of trials held "in absentia" the person concerned can argue that he/she was not informed of the procedures or was not summoned before the courts in accordance with the rules (which differ from one state to another). As a result the "enforcing" Member State does not enforce the judgment, since one condition for a fair trial is that the defendant should be properly informed.
To reduce legal uncertainty, Parliament is proposing to define cases in which enforcement can be refused. It stresses the importance of duly summoning the individual concerned as well as the right to a retrial and the right to be represented by legal counsel. However, the report also emphasises that the fact of summoning a person to court is not in itself enough to guarantee a fair trial and that the system of a retrial does not exist in all Member States. It therefore proposes that this could take the form of a right to an appeal.
Lastly, the report calls for defendants to be given information in a language they understand and for them to have the right to legal representation, possibly paid for by the state.
Strengthening of Eurojust
The report by Renate Weber (ALDE, RO), adopted by 615 votes in favour, 64 against and 16 abstentions, relates to a proposal by 14 Member States to strengthen the European judicial cooperation system in criminal law matters. This system, known as Eurojust, was set up in 2002 following a decision by the Tampere European Council of 1999. While it has been transposed into national law by all the Member States, the text establishing the system has given rise to various national interpretations.
The report therefore proposes the creation of a common basis of equivalent judicial powers for all national members when they are acting as the national authority of their Member State. It also calls for links between Eurojust and the European Judicial Network to be strengthened through the creation of a national coordination system. And it wants it to be made compulsory for Eurojust to be given the information it needs.
In addition, Parliament wishes to beef up data protection, especially when data is forwarded to a third country. It also seeks to add the fight against the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography to Eurojust's priorities. Lastly, the EP wants the right to oversee the activities of the network.
European Judicial Network
The European Judicial Network (EJN) was set up by a Joint Action in 1998. It consists of contact points at national level which provide each other with practical and legal information in order to facilitate judicial cooperation.
The report by Sylvia-Yvonne Kaufmann (GUE/NGL, DE), adopted by 618 votes in favour, 51 against and 12 abstentions , looks at a proposal by 14 Member States seeking to replace the existing framework while preserving its structure and content. It strengthens the communication system between contact points through a more secure telecommunications network and clarifies relations between the EJN and Eurojust.
Parliament believes the EJN is functioning well. However, it wishes to strengthen data protection by referring to the framework decision due to be adopted at the plenary session in late September (Roure report). It also emphasises the ideas of selection criteria and training sessions for the contact points, to improve the operation and use of the network.
20080901IPR35779 Judicial cooperation: enforcement of decisions rendered in absentia; European arrest warrant; surrender procedures between Member States; application of the principle of mutual recognition to financial penalties; application of the principle of mutual recognition to confiscation orders; application of the principle of mutual recognition to judgments in criminal matters imposing custodial sentences or measures involving deprivation of liberty (amend. Framework Decisions 2002/584/JHA, 2005/214/JHA, 2006/783/JHA, 2008/.../JHA). Initiative Slovenia, France, Czechia, Sweden, Slovakia, United Kingdom, Germany Strengthening of Eurojust (amend. Decision 2002/187/JHA). Initiative Belgium, Czechia, Estonia, Spain, France, Italy, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Austria, Poland, Portugal, Slovenia, Slovakia, Sweden European Judicial Network. Initiative Slovenia, France, Czechia, Sweden, Spain, Belgium, Poland, Italia, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Slovakia, Estonia, Austria, Portugal Texts, as adopted by the EP, will be available here(click on 2 September)
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5599442
EN
2
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5599452
EN
3
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5599432
EN
4
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
