Costa Rican President urges EU not to neglect Central America
External relations
2008-09-03 - 13:34
In a speech to the House on Wednesday (3 September), the President of Costa Rica, Óscar Arias Sánchez, urged Europe to support Central America's efforts to build a peaceful and prosperous society. In particular he called for the association agreement currently under negotiation with the EU to grant favourable trade terms to the region and for arms sales by outsiders to be discouraged.
Introducing President Arias, EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering referred to his previous term as President of Costa Rica in 1986-90, when his work for peace in Central America had led to him being awarded the Nobel Peace Prize. He described Mr Arias and his achievements as "a model for the whole world". The EP, Mr Pöttering stressed, was keen to see the association accord signed and he believed Mr Arias could play a key role in the negotiations.
Costa Rica: a haven of peace in a turbulent region
President Arias began by describing his country as one which had realised the ideal of "a society without an army" and would soon celebrate 110 years of democracy, even though it had been "surrounded by the most appalling dictatorships" in the second half of the 20th century.
Constructive role by Europe still needed to aid progress in Central America
He then recalled that twenty years ago Europe had played a positive part in helping to end the civil wars ravaging Central America. "Europe at that time was the answer to our prayers. The moral support of this continent legitimised our efforts to find a diplomatic solution to the conflicts". Now, however, "relations between Europe and Central America, so close in a time of war, have become distant in a time of peace". "We never imagined that in crossing the threshold of peace, we would enter the kingdom of oblivion", he said.
Mr Arias then highlighted three courses of action that could help strengthen ties between Europe and Central America. Firstly, the signing of the planned EU-Central America association agreement, which contained provisions on free trade. He acknowledged that "in this House there are all kinds of views regarding free trade". However, he pointed out bluntly that for a small country like Costa Rica, "if we cannot export more and more goods and services, we will end up exporting more and more people".
Secondly, said Mr Arias, "it is not a mark of honour that in 2007 Latin America's military expenditure reached 36,000 million dollars". To applause from the House, he argued "the developed nations of the world must not support, with aid and resources, the decision of those who prefer to equip their soldiers rather than educate their children". He called on Europe to support the Consensus of Costa Rica, "an initiative to create mechanisms for forgiving debt and supporting, with international resources, developing countries which investment more in environmental protection, education, health and housing for their peoples and less on arms and soldiers". He also urged backing for the Treaty on the Transfer of Arms, which bans arms transfers to states, groups or individuals suspected of using them to violate human rights or international law.
Thirdly, to further applause from MEPs, he alluded to Costa Rica's efforts to set an example on the environment by becoming carbon neutral by 2021. "We are leading a global crusade against global warming and today I ask you, humbly, to join us".
Concluding, the president said: "We are all members of a single species, which is still capable of plucking the best flowers from the garden of life. Our dreams are a common heritage and our decisions have an impact on the lives of others, whether we like it or not."
20080902IPR35966 Briefing article on President of Costa Rica Audio, 21:48 - Speech of the President of Costa Rica, Óscar Arias Sánchez - EN Audio, 19:32 - EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering, President of Costa Rica Óscar Arias Sánchez - EN
EN
2
MULTIMEDIA
20080903MLT36126.asf
EN
3
MULTIMEDIA
20080903MLT36132.asf
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080708BRI33691 ITEM-002-EN NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
