Hydrogen powered motor vehicles - supply network essential say MEPs
Free movement of goods
2008-09-03 - 11:43
Parliament adopted a legislative report on hydrogen powered motor vehicles. MEPs point out that the successful introduction of hydrogen-powered vehicles on the European market will also depend on whether the appropriate hydrogen filling station network can be established in time. The Commission, says the House, should, therefore, look into measures to support the establishment of a Europe-wide filling-station network for hydrogen powered vehicles.
The purpose of this proposal is to lay down harmonised technical provisions for the type-approval of hydrogen-powered vehicles for the first time. There is a need to introduce EU-wide approval criteria for such vehicles, to safeguard not only the operation of the single market but also a high level of safety and environmental protection. Since hydrogen-powered vehicles are not at present included in the EC type-approval system, Member States may grant approvals for such vehicles on a one-off basis without having to lay down new laws. In such a practice there is a risk that every Member State will draw up its own approval conditions, resulting in distortion of the single market. This would lead to high costs for manufacturers, create safety risks and also considerably impede the spread of hydrogen technology in the EU. For these reasons the rapporteur regards the Commission proposal as an important step towards obtaining alternative fuels for the transport sector.
In other parts of the world – such as in the United States or the Asian economic area – work is also proceeding on the development of hydrogen-powered vehicles. Here too the question of type-approval comes up. The EU’s negotiations at international level for approval conditions applicable worldwide are bound to take some while yet. An EU type-approval regulation could point the way forward for an international approval system.
Arlene McCarthy MEP (PES, UK) said: "At a time when petrol prices in Europe have doubled and with ever growing concern about the effects of climate change it is clear we need new hopes for future fuels."
Sale of alternative fuelled vehicles in the UK alone has grown from just a few hundred in 2000 to over 16'000 last year. Arlene McCarthy MEP added: "Sales of electric cars and other alternatives have soared but hydrogen cars are only on the cusp of large scale production. This new law will boost the development of these vehicles while ensuring they are reliable and safe".
Pure hydrogen in the future
In the future, hydrogen powered vehicles should be vehicles propelled by pure hydrogen produced as far as possible from renewable energies. Use of mixtures of hydrogen and natural gas/biomethane to propel vehicles must be no more than a transitional technology say MEPs.
Motorcycles
The regulation’s scope should also be expanded to include motor-cycles. And she also favours ensuring that rescue services are able to identify the hydrogen power source of such vehicles. For this purpose there are, in addition to the labelling scheme to be introduced initially, various longer-term options such as eCall (which automatically sends a signal to rescue services from the vehicle in the event of an accident), or a central database in which the vehicle’s technical data are stored independently of the vehicle’s owner and can be interrogated by accident rescue services.
Emergency services
The European Parliament also says that it must be possible for rescue services to identify the hydrogen power source of a vehicle. The legislative report was adopted with 644 votes in favour, 2 against and 11 abstentions.
20080902IPR35972 Motor vehicles: type-approval of hydrogen powered vehicles (amend. Directive 2007/46/EC) Text, as adopted, by the EP will be available here (click on 3 September)
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5543452
EN
2
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
