Making EU sanctions more coherent and effective
Human rights
2008-09-04 - 13:37
The House adopted on Thursday a resolution by the Foreign Affairs Committee calling for the European Union to improve the way it uses sanctions as a foreign policy instrument. The report highlights the need for greater coherence in the use of sanctions, including better analysis and impact assessments, to make EU sanctions more effective.
The House adopted the own-initiative report, drafted by Hélène Flautre (Greens/EFA, FR), chair of the Human Rights Subcommittee, by 546 votes to 36, with 40 abstentions.
Assessment, analysis and benchmarks seen as crucial
The resolution, which is a general review of EU sanctions policy, welcomes the "systematic inclusion of human rights clauses" in all new EU bilateral accords with third countries but highlights the fact that "no evaluation or impact assessment has been carried out in respect of the EU's sanction policy and it is therefore extremely difficult to gauge the policy's impact and effectiveness". Greater effectiveness would require, for example, "in-depth analysis of each specific situation prior to the adoption of sanctions" and "clear and specific benchmarks as conditions for the lifting of sanctions". MEPs also deplore the use of "sunset clauses" providing for sanctions to be lifted automatically.
Sanctions must be part of human rights strategy
The EP believes that "a sanctions policy will be much more effective when it forms part of a coherent human rights strategy" and therefore calls on "the Council and the Commission to devise a specific strategy on human rights and the situation as regards democracy as part of each country strategy paper". It recommends the creation by the Commission of a "network of independent experts" to advise on sanctions. But it also urges that sanctions be systematically accompanied by "positive measures to support civil society, human rights defenders and all kinds of projects promoting human rights and democracy".
Targeted sanctions preferred so as to spare populations
Since general economic sanctions can cause great suffering to the population of a country, the EU has shifted towards "smart", targeted sanctions aimed at regime leaders, such as the freezing of bank accounts and travel and visa bans. The EP stresses that such sanctions must be observed more strictly through a "concerted approach" by Member States. It also calls for measures against EU-based economic operators who flout such sanctions.
In a new departure, MEPs suggest that sanctions should be imposed where the authorities are guilty of "voluntary and irreversible degradation of the environment". They also say measures should be envisaged against "non-state entities" (e.g. mercenaries or multinationals) which undermine security and human rights.
Use of blacklists to fight terrorism
On the controversial question of "blacklisting" individuals and organisations as part of the fight against terrorism, the report as adopted says that "the system of anti-terrorist lists", provided it respects recent EU case-law, is "an effective instrument of European Union anti-terrorist policy". However, it calls on Council and Commission "to review the existing procedure for blacklisting and delisting, in order to respect blacklisted individuals' and entities' procedural and substantive human rights". Moreover, "the evidence leading to blacklisting is based primarily on information held by the secret services", notes the report, and MEPs call for effective parliamentary control over the work of those services, including a role for the EP.
Allegations of double standards
Lastly, MEPs deplore "the fact that the EU has often applied its sanctions policy inconsistently, by treating third countries differently even though their human rights and democratic records are similar, and thus triggering criticism for applying 'double standards'". The EU's policies on Russia and Cuba are pinpointed, and the invitation to Robert Mugabe to attend the EU-Africa summit in December 2007 is criticised.
20080903IPR36115 Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 4 September)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
