The Week Ahead – 8-14 September 2008
Institutions
2008-09-05 - 11:40
Committee week - Brussels
Conference of Presidents. European Parliament President Hans-Gert Pöttering and the political group leaders travel to Paris for a meeting with President Nicolas Sarkozy and the French presidency of the European Union (Wednesday).
Renewable energy. MEPs will vote on around 1 200 amendments to a co-decision report which is part of the "climate change" package (Thursday).
Economy. European Central Bank President Jean-Claude Trichet appears before the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee as part of the quarterly monetary dialogue. The committee also holds a debate with Jean-Claude Juncker in his capacity as chair of the Eurogroup (Wednesday).
Migration. Migration in Europe is the topic for discussion at a meeting of MEPs and national MPs (Wednesday-Thursday).
Clandestine labour. A vote at the Employment Committee is linked to the proposals on sanctions for employers of illegal immigrants (Wednesday).
Sakharov Prize 2008. The eight nominations for this year's Sakharov Prize for democracy and human rights will be formally presented at a joint meeting of the Foreign Affairs Committee, the Development Committee and the Human Rights Subcommittee (Tuesday).
EP/Greece. President Pöttering will be in Athens to speak at a conference on entrepreneurship, and will also meet his counterpart at the Greek Parliament, Dimitris Sioufas (Monday).
African week. Key issues facing Africa, including security of food supplies, will be on the agenda of several committees, which will welcome prominent figures, among them the director-general of the FAO, Jacques Diouf. President Pöttering will close the events of this, the first African Week held at the European Parliament (Monday to Thursday; press conference Wednesday).
Eurobarometer. The findings of a special EP/Commission Eurobarometer survey on climate change will be presented at a press conference (Thursday).
20080905IPR36382 For details of all the week's events, see "The Agenda"
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20083700AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
