The Week Ahead 22-28 September 2008
Institutions
2008-09-19 - 09:49
Plenary Session – Brussels
Financial markets. MEPs will debate the current crisis on world financial markets with the Commission and Council (Wednesday) as well as a call for legislation on hedge funds and private equity (debate Monday, vote Tuesday).
Telecom Package. Following last session’s debate, Parliament will vote on the set of measures covering telecommunications, spectrum management and network access (Wednesday).
Maritime Safety. Rules to improve safety at sea come to second reading, with no sign of agreement between Parliament and Council (debate Tuesday, vote Wednesday).
Commission work programme. MEPs discuss their priorities for the Commission’s 2009 legislative and work programmes before adopting a resolution (debate and vote Wednesday).
Terrorism and data protection. Proposals on the fight against terrorism and data protection will be debated and put to the vote (Tuesday).
Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew I. The spiritual leader of Orthodox Christians will address a formal sitting of Parliament. The Patriarch, who will also hold a bilateral meeting with EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering and join him for a press conference, is one of a series of guest speakers during the Year of Intercultural Dialogue (Wednesday).
Patient mobility. Plans to make it simpler for patients to seek treatment outside their own Member State will be debated with Commission and Council (Thursday).
CO2 emissions from cars. The Environment Committee holds its vote on limiting greenhouse gas emissions from cars (Thursday).
Sakharov Prize shortlist. At a joint meeting, the Foreign Affairs Committee and the Development Committee will choose three finalists from the seven remaining candidates for the 2008 Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought (Monday evening).
EP/German Presidents. President Pöttering will be in Berlin for a meeting with the German President, Horst Köhler (Friday).
20080918IPR37611 For details of all the week's events, see "The Agenda"
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20083900AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
