Financial crisis: MEPs to debate Europe's response
Economic and monetary affairs
2008-09-23 - 13:00
Lehman Brothers bank: 25,000 staff face the axe The crisis in the world's financial system will be centre stage Wednesday as MEPs debate how to respond. Banks, insurance companies and mortgage lenders have crashed, been bailed out or nationalised at an alarming rate over the last two weeks. How safe are people's savings, mortgages and investments will be a key issue as Members from left, right and centre set out their solutions.
"How safe are my savings?" has been one worrying question for small investors over the last few days. Other voters are concerned about the extent to which the taxpayer has had to bail out banks and insurance companies.
"Time that the legislator reacts"
MEPs have already called for new rules to ensure the regulation of financial markets - especially hedge funds and private equity investors. The move came after a debate on Monday which also saw calls for more transparency in the financial system.
The House today backed two reports calling for rules forbidding the "plunder" of companies by speculators, greater transparency for investors and regulators of investment products.
One of the authors of those reports is centre-right German Klaus-Heiner Lehne, an MEP since 1994 and expert on legal affairs. Speaking to us he said " the crisis has reached the small retail investor and taxpayer. It's time that the legislator reacts".
Another of the authors is former Danish Prime Minister Poul Nyrup Rasmussen. Now sitting as a Socialist MEP he told the House during Monday's debate that "incentives should be aligned with long term goals, not short term profits".
MEPs can ask for new financial regulation
Analysts are predicting that this could be worst financial crash since 1929. The effect it could have on unemployment in Europe will be closely watched. The EU's statistical agency Eurostat recently announced that over 16.2 million men and women were unemployed in July this year. This is actually a fall of over half a million since the same time last year. Given the crisis, whether this trend will continue will be closely monitored.
As there was a sufficient level of support among MEPs for the measures then Parliament can formally ask the European Commission to draw up new laws on financial regulation across the Union.
Watch Wednesday debate from 3pm
The debate will take place on Wednesday at 3pm CET with the Commission and the French government - who currently hold the rotating EU Presidency. Watch the debate live online from Brussels.
20080922STO37696 Watch live from 3pm Call for new financial regulation
EN
1
PHOTO
20080922PHT37831.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/faces/live/live-video.jsp?language=en
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080901BRI35769 ITEM-003-EN NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
