MEPs debate consequences of financial crisis - and how to improve the system
Institutions
2008-09-24 - 17:42
The financial market crisis which reached a new peak last week was the subject of a debate with the Council and Commission, with MEPs calling for action to improve the supervision of financial markets in the EU and around the world.
Council
"We appear to be witnessing the end of an era", MEPs were told by French European Affairs Minister Jean-Pierre JOUYET , who opened the debate on behalf of the Council. "The financial system in coming years will be very different from the one we are familiar with".
"For some time, there have been voices calling for changes to the world financial system", whose recent problems linked to the rapid growth in complex financial systems were "basically caused by greed", he said.
"Europe has not seen a crisis like this since the 1930s", argued the minister, and the French presidency's view was that the response must be "a strong, united Europe". Fortunately, thanks to economic and monetary union, Europe with its central bank has "a system that can intervene firmly and efficiently". He paid tribute to the ECB for its action in the crisis.
After referring to the decision in most EU Member States and the USA to ban short-selling for a limited period, Mr Jouyet added "we are not considering initiatives of US kind for now, buying toxic assets held by investors. The financial system of EU is still stable and does not require this type of measure".
Urgent measures might be needed but these alone would not solve the problems. Europe must respond to the slowdown by promoting economic growth.
At a meeting in Nice on 13 September, EU finance ministers had decided to let automatic stabilisers work and to deploy up to €30 billion to support small and medium-sized firms, which might suffer if the cost of credit went up.
Reforms were needed to the financial system, according to Mr Jouyet, in the areas of transparency, prudential rules, valuation of assets and ratings agencies.
While welcoming the EP's contribution to the current discussions, for example through its debate earlier this week on hedge funds and private equity, the minister stressed the need for a first-reading agreement between EP and Council on the Commission's forthcoming draft legislation on reform of the capital requirements directive.
Stressing that "the laissez-faire attitudes of the past" were no longer appropriate, the Mr Jouyet said "we must look at the power of the regulators", "the strength of financial supervision" and the "supply of data to the ECB". "Better oversight and financial supervision" must be the order of the day.
The European Council in October would be an opportunity to set out "a clear line at European level". The minister believed that "Europe cannot act alone but it must be ready". He also hoped that at a G8 meeting towards the end of the year "new common rules on the international financial system" would be agreed. On this front, he argued, "European can take the lead".
European Commission
Joaquín ALMUNIA, Commissioner for Economic and Monetary Affairs said:
"The series of events we have witnessed in financial markets during the last year, and in particular during the last few days, are of a magnitude that exceeds anything we have seen in our lifetime. Many believe, and I tend to agree, that this will trigger important changes in the functioning of the international financial system.
Since the outbreak of the crisis in August 2007, disclosed losses have totalled more than 500 billion dollars, a sum equivalent to the GDP of a country like Sweden. And unfortunately the final figure is considered to be larger still.
The US plan announced by Secretary Paulson last week is a good initiative. In short, the US Treasury Secretary proposes to set up a Federal fund to remove from the banks balance sheets the illiquid assets – those mortgage linked securities that are at the root of the problems we face. Removing these from the system would help to remove uncertainty and re-focus markets on fundamentals. However, the details of this proposal need to be properly defined – and quickly – if it is to succeed. The situation we face here in Europe is less acute and Member States do not at this point consider that a US style plan is needed.
First, in budgetary policy, we must preserve our commitment to fiscal discipline and the rules of the Stability and Growth Pact while letting the automatic stabilisers play their role. In this regard, the reform of the Pact in 2005 is being very helpful.
Second, a clear commitment to implement structural reforms, as defined in the framework of the Lisbon strategy and the National Reform Programs, would be crucial to boost consumer and investor confidence in the short term and improve the resilience and dynamism of our economies in the longer term. Measures to strengthen competition in retail and energy markets and improve the functioning of labour markets would be particularly valuable at this juncture.
Finally, delivering improvements in financial market regulation and meeting the goals of the Ecofin roadmap is, as I have already stressed, more urgent than ever before. An effective and rapid solution to the difficult challenges we are facing could go a long way to restore confidence quicker than expected and limit the damage to our economies."
Political group speakers
For the EPP-ED group, Alexander RADWAN (DE) said it was fine to talk of speedy action, but it was the market that had been speedy in recent times. Parliament had produced reports after the Parmalat affair and on credit rating agencies several years ago, but little had been done. The EU should not stick to the line of the US on market supervision: "We need to pursue our own European path. Let the Americans follow our example," he said. Regarding reform of the Capital Requirements Directive, he said a first reading agreement would be possible if the Council gave up its opposition to having a European supervisory system.
"Commissioner McCreevy tells us not to be hasty. Well, that is certainly not one of his failings. We need to have the right analysis from the Commission, but I wonder if it is Barroso who is the problem."
Socialist Group leader Martin SCHULZ (DE) said we were seeing the bankruptcy of an economic philosophy that said only unregulated markets were possible, only capitalism could generate growth. "We expect the Commission to take measures on credit rating agencies, and also to decouple City bonuses from short term speculative profits." Fund managers might be young and bright, he said, but they had brought entire companies to their knees and jobs had gone with them. Now in the US, large companies were being bailed out by small taxpayers. "Profits have been privatised, now the losses are nationalised - this has to end," he said.
Mr Schulz also condemned speculation based on surging food prices, which he said meant some investors had an interest in food shortages and hunger: "This is a perverse system which has consequences for the whole of humanity," he said. "The future involves supervising a market which has never respected anything."
Silvana KOCH-MEHRIN (DE) spoke for the ALDE group. She said that sometimes it looked as if just a few banks in crisis, but those who lose out are not securities operators, but families at bottom of system with pensions at risk, incomes damaged. We needed, she said, to act on the basis of facts. "The answer is not reigning in free markets - but we do need regulation of those markets. Rule should be set, and we need an arbiter of how they operate in practice. Those who have refused to be bound by the rules are to blame, not the market as such. We need rules for the whole world economy."
We must avoid panic - it leads to poor decisions", said Eoin RYAN (UEN, IE). Europe's markets are for the moment steadier than those of the US, but "we must implement structural reforms and be ready to act quickly to prevent runs on banks", he warned, stressing the need to promote local and global economic health, and to protect both investors and citizens.
"If EU leaders wanted to highlight the gulf between themselves and citizens, they would have acted just as they did on 14 September", said Francis WURTZ (FR) for the GUE/NGL group. Eurogroup President Jean-Claude Juncker had said that there must be no slow-down in the pace of structural reform, and more competition, "but who will pay?" asked Mr Wurtz. ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet had said that banking supervisors "should not make excessive demands", but it is "ordinary wage earners who are being squeezed", added Mr Wurtz. Banks must be rigorously supervised, and international financial institutions restructured, to ensure that money is put to useful work in the public interest, said Mr Wurtz, calling for a "move away from the smug complacency of a small élite".
Hanne DAHL (IND/DEM, DK) had heard, on the way to the airport, that the world crisis had reached her own bank. Because capital moves so freely across borders, the US sub-prime crisis has become an international one, she said adding that such fluidity benefits speculators and tax evaders. Financial operators should be able to "take" supervision without moving across borders, and that banks must lend to each other to find a way out of the crisis, she said.
Chair of the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee
Chair of the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee Pervenche BERÈS (PES, FR) called for "a modern type of regulation". She said there was no risk of hasty legislation: it was over a year since Commissioner McCreevy had laid blame at the door of rating agencies, but there were still no concrete proposals. The EU, she added, did not have the authority in the Financial Stability Forum to implement what she called "the discredited ECOFIN roadmap." "I hope Mr McCreevy will be convinced we need further regulation of the markets," she concluded.
British and Irish speakers in the debate
John WHITTAKER (IND/DEM, UK) urged Members to consider a completely different reaction to the current economic difficulties. They are, he said, a signal that we cannot continue as we are and that, thanks to borrowing that has been too cheap, and imports that have been too cheap, "we have all been living above our means and we cannot go on consuming at the same rate. Adjustment will be painful but it is necessary, he said. The EU cannot , he said, continue with its massive legislative programmes in the name of health and safety, consumer protection, social equality for instance. "For the overriding effect of all these schemes is to add costs and to crush the productive activity on which our very prosperity depends. In these hard times the one message that should be heard is that European countries can no longer afford the European Union, its institutions and its immense outpourings of legislation."
John PURVIS (EPP-ED, UK) said that the most vital thing, which we must bring about immediately, is the restoration of confidence.
He urged that the leaders of the world’s most important economies of America, Europe, the Middle and Far East, meet together within days and assure the world unequivocally that whatever is necessary to douse the flames will be provided unequivocally wherever those flames may erupt. Only when the flames and embers are extinguished, he said, can we turn to post-mortems as to how this happened and what is needed to avoid it happening again. Concluding, he said that it is now up to the political leaders of the highest level – a summit indeed – of the free market economies to come together – no excuses, no holding back, no arguments – to take full responsibility for restoring confidence.
Proinsias DE ROSSA (PES, IE) said that if Commissioner McCreevy is not prepared to regulate all financial institutions, then he should be forced to step aside. The Commission, he said, has a responsibility to ensure that these institutions are not allowed to pick the pockets of pension funds, of savings and of jobs. They have to be stopped and the only way to do it is to bring transparency and regulation into this area. "The so-called 'invisible hand' of the market is in fact a pickpocket and the more invisible it is the more pockets it picks" he concluded.
Council response to the debate
Replying to the debate, Mr Jouyet first turned to the matter of regulation. He described the current system of financial regulation as "archaic". "We need a more modern type of regulation", he continued but was at pains to stress that "regulation is not the enemy of the market". "The stability of the system, the protection of savers, jobs and growth" - these were what was at stake.
Mr Jouyet then stressed that Europe must operate through some form of "enhanced international cooperation", otherwise it would be "on the receiving end of American financial regulation". It was time for Europe to come together, to coordinate its action, so that it had "a clear voice at international level" on regulatory governance.
Turning to "remuneration and reward packages" for those working in the financial sector, he agreed with Gordon Brown's view that "some in-depth thinking" was needed on this. There had been a "crisis of ethics, of accountability". In Mr Jouyet's view, "Finance must remain at the service of the economy. The economy must not be the victim of finance".
The roadmap drawn up EU finance ministers with the Commission represented the way forward. "We must keep on track with the timetable", ensuring that proposals were on the table in time for the Council meeting of 15 October. Speedy action, using the full gamut of measures, was the answer, concluded the minister.
Commission response to the deb ate
In his response to the debate, Commissioner Almunia said that it was necessary to react to "the very big transformation" that had taken place in the market, and we needed to learn from the errors of the past. The EU institutions needed to work together as did the EU with its global partner to develop a "high degree of consensus." Key proposals would come forward next week on the capital requirements directive, and in a few weeks on the ratings agencies, it was important also to reach a deal on the Solvency II legislation, the Commissioner said.
The Commissioner also stressed the need to work more closely with the US authorities including the European Parliament with the US Congress. Finally, the Commission agreed that the issue of remuneration of top executives and "those whose decisions can affect the market such as CEOs" would need to be examined and he hoped that the Member States would support him on this.
20080923IPR37908
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
