European Parliament at the Irish National Ploughing Championship
Agriculture
Ireland
2008-10-06 - 15:51
Irish national ploughing championships - Mairead McGuinness The Office of the European Parliament in Ireland used this year's National Ploughing Championship in Kilkenny to put on the wellies and to represent the European Parliament at one of Europe's biggest agricultural fairs. Being located in the heart of the exhibition site, the Parliament staff used the event to provide information on the Parliament to the overall 208 000 visitors over the three days.
Ploughing Championship
The National Ploughing Championships or "the Ploughing" as it is more familiarly known, is rural Ireland's biggest annual event and one of the biggest agricultural fairs in Europe. This year's event took place in Cuffesgrange, a few miles outside of Kilkenny. Following its long lasting tradition, the ploughing competitions, held in 18 different categories crowning the Irish ploughing champions, are still the heart of the event. But the ploughing championship is today an agricultural fair, giving over 300 exhibitors the chance to present themselves and their products. At this year's event over 150 000 visitors were expected, but due to the good weather throughout the event, the organizing National Ploughing Organisation welcomed 208,000 people over the three days.
The European Union marquee
Following the positive experience from recent years, the European Parliament and the European Commission Representations in Ireland used this venue outside Dublin to attract visitors at their "European Union" marquee. Parliament was over the three days represented by up to three members of its staff, providing information on the Parliament and its Irish members and thereby reaching out to "rural" Ireland, in particular to the farmers and the thousands of local schoolchildren who took the time to visit each day. The staff gave not only out maps of Europe and Information leaflets on the Parliament and its members, but also 'European Parliament" ice-scrapers, Frisbees, lanyards and T-shirts. The European Union marquee hosted different exhibition by Irish Environmental groups, such as Coastwatch, BurrenLife and Coillte (Forestry) and two experts of the European Consumer Centre in Ireland and Eurojus gave advice on consumer rights in Europe. To allow parents the time to inform themselves on Europe, the European Union marquee invited the traditional storyteller Pat Speight to entertain the visiting children.
Irish MEPs at the Ploughing
A special highlight at the European Union marquee was the visits of different Irish MEPs, who used the Ploughing Championship to get in contact with Irish citizens. The East-MEPs Liam Aylward and Mairead McGuinness used the occasion that the event was held in their constituency, to get in contact with Irish citizens and to listen to their views and sometimes problems. Another MEP visiting the European Union marquee was Dublin-MEP Mary Lou McDonald.
20080926IPR38242 The European Parliament Office in Ireland
EN
1
PHOTO
20081006PHT38829.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.europarl.ie/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
