Building a genuine and transparent EU arms market
Free movement of goods
2008-10-08 - 14:50
The European Union should create a genuine single market for defence equipment. This is the aim of two proposed directives amended by the Internal Market Committee on Tuesday. MEPs' changes aim to make defence procurement, still essentially a national business, more transparent and more European, and to facilitate intra-Community trade in defence-related equipment.
Creating a European market for arms and other defence goods and equipment is vital to support European Security and Defence Policy (ESDP). Companies, including small and medium-sized enterprises, national budgets and the job market should all benefit from this reform. Stepping up intra-Community co-operation should also improve the quality of European arms. EU Member States are finding it ever harder to stay competitive on a market that demands ever more investment in new technologies.
Reducing the fragmentation of the EU defence procurement market and applying internal market rules - whilst respecting Member States' sovereignty and security - should enhance the competitiveness of this industry, in which Member States invested €201 billion in 2006. Two co-decision reports on these proposals were adopted by a large majority in the Internal Market Committee: one drafted by Alexander Graf Lambsdorff (ALDE, DE) on public defence procurement, and the other by Heide Rhüle (Greens, DE) on transfers of defence-related products. The new directive covers not only defence as such but also non-military security.
Defence procurement: more openness and more security
The EU's general rules on public procurement, set out in a directive in 2004, take insufficient account of the specificities of the defence sector. This is one reason why building a single market for defence goods is such a laborious task. A new directive, governing only public procurement of defence and security goods, should help to achieve this aim.
Alexander Graf Lambsdorf's report, as adopted, clarifies and widens the scope of the proposed directive on public procurement in the defence field. This should cover public works and public services which are necessary for the security and defence of the EU and its Member States. Protection is also provided for security-sensitive information appearing in contracts. The list of arms, munitions and other war material included in a Council decision of 1958, a longstanding cause of controversy, remains the reference, but is not exhaustive, say MEPs.
The Treaty articles, notably 296 and 30, that enable Member States not to apply internal market rules where justified by their vital security interests, are reiterated in the text. But the directive should improve certainty as to the law and reduce the risk that these articles may be misused. The European Court of Justice has ruled that recourse to these articles is frequently unjustified.
The text should circumscribe Member States' recourse to Treaty Article 296 to cases consistent with the case law. MEPs stipulate that the directive would not apply if "in the opinion of the Member State the disclosure of information which is necessary in order to award a contract is contrary to its vital security interests".
MEPs also reached a compromise on the wording of articles relating to the security of sensitive information and to security of supply. A new provision also states that Member States retain the power to decide whether or not to invite non-European bidders to tender. However, if contracting authorities wish to invite non-EU bidders, this should be done on the basis of mutual, equitable and fair market access. Finally, the Internal Market Committee inserted in the text an entire heading on legal remedies.
Defence-related products: simplifying transfer conditions
Heide Rhüle's report focuses on simplifying and harmonising the rules for granting licences to transfer military equipment from one country to another. There are currently 27 different régimes. This patchwork of rules prevents the free movement of equipment within the EU, whether for trade, repairs, modernisation or simply for trade fairs. The new proposal creates a European system of licences which will be uniform and applicable throughout the EU. Licences will nonetheless be granted by Member States, which will be free to impose sanctions if party to whom the licence is granted fails to observe the licensing conditions. Treaty Article 296 will continue to apply. The draft also stipulates that the directive shall apply without prejudice to Treaty srticles 296 and 30.
The text adopted by MEPs strengthens provisions to guarantee the security of transfers, notaby with respect to the final recipients of products or components, inter alia to ensure that arms and other defence-related products do not reach conflict zones. Another amendment inserts a reference to the European code of conduct on arms exports.
Parliament will put the two proposals to a plenary vote in November. MEPs are determined to complete their work on this draft legislation by the end of the French Presidency, but this will also depend on whether Parliament and Council can reach a compromise.
Procedure: co-decision, first reading -- plenary vote: November 2008-10-06 Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection In the chair Arlene MCCARTHY PES UK
20081006IPR38808 Internal Market and Consumer Protection Committee web site
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=IMCO
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
