Together for health: A strategic approach for the EU 2008-2013
Public health
2008-10-09 - 12:05
In adopting an own-initiative report entitled Together for health: A strategic approach for the EU 2008-2013, MEPs say that disease prevention efforts and vaccination campaigns, where effective products exist, should be stepped up significantly. Parliament therefore urges the Commission to draw up an ambitious plan for preventive actions for the entire five-year period. The report was adopted with 554 votes in favour, 23 against and 21 abstentions.
The House agrees that spending on health, particularly on prevention and early diagnosis of diseases, is not only a cost but also an investment that could be evaluated in terms of Healthy Life Years (HLYs) as a Lisbon Structural Indicator.
The report stresses the importance of carrying out well-organised, comprehensive and effective screening programmes to facilitate the early detection and immediate treatment of disease, thereby reducing the associated mortality and morbidity.
Healthy lifestyle
MEPs stress that the concept of ‘healthy lifestyle’ (i.e. a healthy diet, the absence of drug abuse and sufficient physical activity) needs to be complemented by a psychosocial dimension (i.e. a balanced approach to work and family life). The European Parliament argues that a healthy lifestyle includes good mental and physical health and that these are also important factors in maintaining a competitive economy.
Antibiotics
Parliament demands effective measures to combat antibiotic resistance including measures to make antibiotics prescription only, guidelines to decrease the prescription of antibiotics to limit it to cases in which the use of an antibiotic is indeed necessary, efforts to improve marker tests in order to encourage a more cautious use of antibiotics, and, where appropriate, hygiene codes. The report calls for special attention to be paid to the methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) bacteria. MEPs point out that the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (ECDC) should monitor and evaluate the application of the guidelines and codes.
The report draws the attention of the Commission and Member States to the need to support research and promote the prevention, early diagnosis and suitable treatment of chronic diseases in order to ensure sufferers' welfare and quality of life.
The House says that antibiotics are becoming increasingly useless as antibiotic resistance rises, whereas resistance levels vary across the EU, resulting from different attitudes to the use and control of antibiotics (3 to 4 times greater consumption of antibiotics in some Member States than in other Member States).
MEPs point out that antibiotic resistance is a European problem as frequent movements including tourism take place increasing the risk of spreading the resistant bacteria, and inappropriate use of antibiotics should therefore be monitored and prudent use of antibiotics encouraged, whereas the ECDC serves as the appropriate agency to coordinate these activities.
20081009IPR39072 Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 9 October)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
