Taking account of the special needs of women in prisons
Women's rights/Equal opportunities
2008-03-13 - 13:56
The European Parliament adopted an own-initiative report on the situation of women in prison, a minority of the prison population but a fast-growing one. The report focuses on prison conditions, the preservation of family ties and reintegration into society and the workplace.
Women account for a small percentage of the prison population in the European Union - around 5% - with Spain and Portugal having the largest numbers at 8% and 10% respectively, but most European countries have experienced a significant increase. The female prison population grew by 410% in Cyprus between 1994 and 2003 and by 173% in England and Wales from 1992 to 2002.
Due to the lack of resources for prisons, "women in prison are a minority whose special needs are not sufficiently taken into account in EU countries", according to Ms Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou (PPE-DE, EL) who drafted the report.
As unskilled female workers, those women also often suffer poor labour-market integration. For instance, in the UK, only 3% of women in prison were in work prior to coming to prison and over half said they were living on state benefits.
The report was adopted by 492 votes in favour, 24 votes against and 37 abstentions.
Prison conditions
Women's needs differ from those of men, notably in health and maternity care. MEPs call on the Commission and Council to adopt a framework decision on minimum standards for prisoners' rights based on Article 6 of the EU Treaty, to reflect the special needs of women.
As a high proportion of female prisoners have been victims of violence, sexual abuse or ill treatment, Member States are urged to provide psychological support, especially to women prisoners who have suffered such violence, to mothers with family responsibilities and to minors.
On the maternity front, MEPs say pregnant women should have access to prenatal and postnatal care.
The European Parliament also wants special arrangements for foreign prisoners, who it says should be able to contact their consulates and have access to prison resources and programmes. The House also stresses the need to end the detention of girls aged 18 and under in adult prisons.
Preserving social and family ties
If imprisoning women is likely to seriously disrupt family life (e.g. in cases of lone parent families or responsibility for dependants) the report suggests greater use of non-custodial punishments if the sentence is minor and the risk to public safety is low.
MEPs also call for judicial systems to guarantee the rights of children and for Member States and penal institutions to set up separate mother-and-child units with qualified staff to help prisoners who are mothers to meet their educational and care responsibilities.
Family planning
The House c alls on each Member State to facilitate access for women prisoners to prevention campaigns targeting the general public, dealing with issues such as the early detection of breast cancer and cervical cancer, and to ensure that they have the same access to national programmes concerning family planning.
MEPs call on Member States to respect fully the development of sexual orientation and the different forms of family life, provided they are in conformity with the law.
Social reintegration
To encourage their reintegration into society, the report stresses the need for women prisoners to have access, without encountering discrimination, to jobs and voluntary work as well as to varied vocational and civic training courses adapted to job market requirements.
MEPs also want every detention centre to have monitoring and individual support programmes available to all prisoners on a voluntary basis, to devise and implement personal reintegration plans.
Lastly, the report calls on Member States to invest more in resources for prisons to develop literacy, life-long learning and vocational training programmes, partly by using financing instruments such as the European Social Fund and PROGRESS.
20080312IPR23864 The situation of women in prison and the impact of the imprisonment of parents on social and family life Text, as adopted by the EP on 13 March, will be available here
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5484662
EN
2
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
