Euro-med Parliamentary Assembly: Middle East peace process the big issue at Jordan plenary
External relations
2008-10-13 - 12:31
"The momentum launched at Annapolis has enabled Israelis and Palestinians to restart their dialogue and must be continued", EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering told the extraordinary meeting of the Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly (EMPA) on the Middle East peace process, held in Jordan on 12 and 13 October. The Assembly also decided to ask Euro-med foreign ministers to officially recognise EMPA within the Union for the Mediterranean.
"The peace process set in train in Annapolis has enabled the Palestinians and Israelis to talk to each other again and, despite some setbacks, to pursue the path of dialogue", said the President of the European Parliament, who is currently the President-in-Office of EMPA. According to Mr Pöttering, there are two outstanding issues to be resolved in the Middle East conflict: "the expansion of settlements, which is undermining the Palestinians' confidence" in the negotiation process launched in November 2007 in the United States, and "the extremely restricted freedom of movement of the Palestinians", which prevents investment in and recovery of the Palestinian economy.
With the EMPA countries alone providing 60% of all aid to the Palestinians, the EP President warned of the need to prevent donors being overcome by "a certain fatigue, or lack of interest in the fate of the Palestinians". He also believed it was "unacceptable that the fruits of financial solidarity should be wiped out as a result of military operations or for security reasons, however legitimate they may be".
Ahead of the EU Council of ministers responsible for Euromed affairs, which takes place in Marseille on 3 and 4 November, EMPA adopted a resolution regretting the fact that the international financial support provided by the donors' conference of December 2007 had still not led to an economic recovery in the Palestinian territories. The Assembly urged parliaments "whose governments are contributors to evaluate the impact of the funds granted to development projects" in the Palestinian territories.
Union for the Mediterranean
EMPA also called on ministers to recognise it officially as the “democratically legitimized parliamentary institution" of the "Barcelona Process: Union for the Mediterranean” (UFM) launched at the Paris summit in July 2008. "The role of our Assembly must be to scrutinise and make proposals as part of the UFM", said Tokia Saïfi (EPP-ED, FR), chair of the EMPA Political Affairs Committee.
EMPA expands
With the recent accession of Romania and Bulgaria, the number of members of the Assembly has increased from 240 to 260. The European Union is represented by 130 members (49 MEPs and 81 members designated by the parliaments of the EU's 27 Member States), while 130 members represent the national parliaments of the Mediterranean partners which are not members of the EU: Algeria, Egypt, Jordan, Israel, Lebanon, Morocco, Palestinian Authority, Syria, Tunisia and Turkey.
EMPA, which meets once a year in plenary session, is a joint parliamentary assembly. It uses French, English and Arabic as working languages for its debates. The texts adopted are also available in Hebrew, Turkish and all the EU official languages.
Plenary session in Brussels in March 2009
The European Parliament will host the next plenary meeting of EMPA, in Brussels from 15 to 17 March 2009. Jordan will take over the reins until March 2010.
20081013IPR39258 Euro-Mediterranean Parliamentary Assembly web site
EN
1
LINK
/intcoop/empa/home/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
