"1000 bucks for a hazardous sea voyage" scoops web journalism prize
Youth
2008-10-17 - 17:52
Finland's Pete Pakarinen won for his article on immigration Immigration is one of the most politically emotive issues that Europe faces. As the population ages the debate over the extent we allow people into the continent will increase, not diminish with time. Pete Pakarinen's emotive article "a thousand bucks for a hazardous sea voyage" has explored the issue. On Friday he won parliament's journalism prize for his work on the internet. We spoke to him.
You were awarded the EP Journalism Prize, in the domain "online media". Could you explain to us why you chose your subject and summarize your article?
I wrote about illegal immigration from Africa to Europe, and more particularly about the situation in Malta from the point of view of an immigrant who was staying for about two years in an immigration centre there. He had come to Malta by boat from Africa, so I described the normal immigration route from Africa by boat and the life-threatening boat trip, which cost something like one thousand dollars. Then I described the broader immigration problems and the measures about to be taken in order to solve them. After one year, I can say the situation hasn't changed a lot.
I chose immigration because I was in Malta at the time, as I was attending a study day organised by the EPP-ED group, and because immigration is a very crucial question in Malta. Then I had the possibility to visit the immigration centre, read a lot of newspapers, talk with different people and thus I have structured a typical reportage-kind of article from all this material.
Do you think that the online media has any added value in comparison with the other media? And, if so, could online media one day threaten the existence of other media - print, radio, TV?
On the web, the stories are shorter and more rapidly produced. Besides, there are lots of people who search background information from the internet, so the stories live longer than articles in printed media.
However, I don't believe that online media can threaten the other media. The death of a book has been announced for decades or perhaps hundreds of years, but books are still alive and kicking. The same stands for radio
Are citizens of Europe well aware of European issues in your opinion and, if not, how can the media or institutions like the European Parliament increase awareness?
Online media can indeed help raise awareness on European issues, as well as any other media. There is plenty of information available but there could be more journalistic information about the structures, the decision-making processes and all the things that are difficult to understand about the EU. The difficulty in reaching people though is that quite a lot of people just search for scandals or funny news and that every single story competes with all the other ones.
The public could be well informed if it is interested. I think it is the politicians' job to make their work interesting and important, and simplify the difficult things, not only the European politicians, but the national politicians too. In Finland but I suppose the situation is pretty much the same everywhere national politics doesn't see the value of the European news, they blame everything on the EU or they look at the EU as if it was one monolithic block.
What is your message today to Europeans citizens?
I would just say look closer to the EU, to what is happening there, how it functions, what it really decides. There are quite magnificent, great things happening in the EU. I am myself quite enthusiastic about the EU, even though there are also downsides. Be interested; ask the politicians about the EU and how European politics correlates to our everyday life. Right now many politicians think they are alone in the world.
EP journalism prize winners
Kirsten Wörnle (GEOWissen, Germany)
Wolfgang Böhm (Die Presse, Austria)
Shirin Wheeler (BBC, United Kingdom)
Mircea Radu Lipovan (Radio Iaşi, Romania),
Andreea Manzat (Radio Iaşi, Romania)
20081013STO39203 Verkkouutiset - website that Mr Pakarinen writes for EP Journalism Prize Journalism Prize website
EN
1
PHOTO
20081017PHT39891.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.verkkouutiset.fi/
EN
4
LINK
https://www.eppj.eu/EPPJ_en.html
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081016IPR39745 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
