Irish journalists visit Brussels
Institutions
Ireland
2008-10-22 - 15:53
Roundtable discussion with Irish MEPs Two media seminars, one for national journalists and one for regional and local journalists, were organised by the EP Office and the European Commission Representation in Ireland. During the three-day visits, the work of the European Parliament and the Commission were explained to the journalists in a series of meetings with Hans-Gert Pöttering, the President of the EP, Charlie McCreevy, Commissioner from Ireland and Bobby McDonagh, Ambassador, Permanent Representation of Ireland to the EU.
Seminar for regional and local journalists
For the local and regional media seminar, which took place 8-10 October, a group of 20 Irish journalists came to Brussels to learn more about the European Union, its workings and how the EU affects the daily life of Irish citizens. The highlight of the first day was meeting the Irish Members of the European Parliament, who talked over how EU legislation impacts on citizens in their constituencies. The roundtable discussion with the MEPs was followed by an introduction to the Petitions Committee, which deals with petitions from Irish citizens. The second day saw meetings with Oliver Drewes, the spokesperson for the Irish Commissioner, Charlie McCreevy (Internal Market and Services), and with Peter Power, the spokesperson for the Commissioner for Trade (former Peter Mandelson). During their visit the group received further insight into the Health review of the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) and the institutional state of the European Union.
National Media seminar
The second media seminar targeted Irish journalists from national papers, TV- and radio stations. All together 13 journalists went to Brussels, 13-15 October, to visit the Parliament and the Commission. The first day started with the traditional roundtable discussion with Irish MEPs. Before the this discussion, journalists met with Spanish MEP Ìñigo Méndez de Vigo to debate Parliament's position on the Lisbon Treaty and with Finnish MEP Satu Hassi to get further insights into Parliament's position on Climate Change. The afternoon of the first day was based around a meeting with the Secretary-General of the European Commission (the highest position for non-political staff of the Commission), currently held by Catherine Day, an Irish woman. In the evening the group attended a buffet dinner, which was hosted by the European Commissioner from Ireland, Charlie McCreevy.
The highlight of the second day was a meeting with the President of the European Parliament Hans-Gert Pöttering, who talked with the journalists about the forthcoming meeting of the European Council. Concentrating on the current financial crises, on climate change and energy, Pöttering also turned to the issue of the Lisbon treaty. He stressed the need for Lisbon to go ahead, as "the great challenges we now face make the Lisbon treaty, which will give us a Europe that is capable of action, democratic and close to its citizens, more necessary then ever." While tomorrow's challenges would turn all too quickly into today's challenges, he reinforced his confidence in Ireland and pointed out that "all the Member states and the European Institutions now have a great responsibility to work with Ireland to find a solution acceptable to all."
20081022IPR40438 European Parliament Office in Ireland
EN
1
PHOTO
20081022PHT40440.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.europarl.ie/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
