Tuesday in Strasbourg: Sarkozy, financial crisis, Russia
Institutions
2008-10-22 - 12:40
Nicolas Sarkozy makes his point to MEPs, 21 October Strasbourg Tuesday in Strasbourg saw MEPs debate the conclusions of the last EU summit held on 15-16 October. The agenda included the financial crisis and Europe's recent troubled relations with Moscow. As holder of the rotating EU presidency Nicolas Sarkozy briefed MEPs on attempts to deal with the present financial crisis.
Europe "must not miss date with history"
In a detailed address to the Parliament, President Sarkozy stated his thoughts on climate change with conviction. He warned the Chamber that the EU's climate change package must not be over-shadowed by the current economic crisis stating "we must not miss our date with history."
He was also keen to stress that the "ambitious" climate control package should not be viewed under the long shadow cast by the financial crisis.
He added that "the ambitious energy package is based on the belief that the world is heading for disaster .... It would be tragic to abandon its policies on the pretext that the financial crisis occurred."
Financial crisis: call to help vulnerable in Europe
Addressing the House, President Sarkozy was also vehement in his recognition of the seriousness of the financial crisis. He called for a European and worldwide effort to rectify the problem; "The crisis is global, the response must be global" he said.
Among ideas he floated were measures to ensure that "European companies are not bought up by non-European capital while their stock exchange values are low."
EC President José Manuel Barroso was quick to echo the sentiments of Sarkozy stating "European citizens need support - especially the vulnerable."
MEPs voice support for direct action
Joseph Daul, leader of the centre right EPP-ED group made his approval clear but warned that forward planning is needed: "Of course, the financial crisis is not behind us yet. It is during such situations that we can adopt rules for the future".
The leader of the Socialist PSE group Martin Schulz thanked Mr Sarkozy for finally adopting a more socialist standpoint: "I am glad you have finally arrived, however late." He added that "the credit crunch will pass, but climate change will not."
Leader of the Liberal ALDE group Graham Watson: "In August, Europe kept tanks out of Tblisi, this month, Europe has kept the banks in business, if in December Europe acts to preserve the planet, than we should convince even the most sceptical that we need the Lisbon Treaty".
The Parliament will vote on a resolution on the issue Wednesday 22 October.
Europe's relations with Russia debated
Tuesday afternoon saw the chamber steer its discussion towards relations with Russia. Security of energy supply, international status-quo after Georgia and the future of EU dialogue with Russia in times of economical crisis and political tensions dominated this vibrant debate.
Most speakers for the political groups concurred that though the Georgian crisis had provided important lessons for Europe in its relations with Russia. However, many MEPs felt Moscow should remain an important strategic partner for the European Union.
A positive rhetoric was used and most felt that talk of a second cold war and economic isolation of Russia inaccurate and counterproductive.
"Europe does not want another Cold War", said President Sarkozy "It is Europe that has brought about peace."
20081020STO39957 Watch Parliament Live Agenda of the session EP Press Service
EN
1
PHOTO
20081020PHT40041.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/faces/live/live-video.jsp?language=en
EN
3
LINK
/sides/getDoc.do?type=AGENDA&reference=20081021-LASTV&secondRef=0&language=EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081020IPR40025 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
