Transparency: Civil Liberties Committee wants EU institutions to set an example
Citizens' rights
2008-11-18 - 12:13
A report adopted on Monday by the EP Civil Liberties Committee urges the EU institutions to do more to open up their registers and documents to the public. In the light of a recent judgment by the Court of Justice, MEPs in the committee call on the Council to hold all its debates in public and on Parliament to publish more information on its Members' activities. The report will now be debated and put to the vote by the full Parliament at the 15-18 December session.
The report by Marco Cappato (ALDE, IT) on public access to documents of the European Parliament, the Council and the Commission was adopted unopposed with one abstention.
MEPs believe that the EU and its Member States have moved towards recognising a genuine right of access to documents of the institutions and they point out that the rate of refusals to allow access is falling. However, shortcomings have emerged in the implementation of the regulation, owing to differing interpretations. They call on the institutions to take fresh measures to improve transparency, arguing that this is "a condition of their legality, their legitimacy and their accountability".
The committee stresses that the European institutions have a duty to ensure that their activities are publicised, a principle underscored by the European Court of Justice in a judgment delivered on 1 July this year on a case brought by former MEP Maurizio Turco. The Luxembourg-based judges took the view that opinions of the Council's legal service relating to any piece of legislation should be made public. They also set limits to the grounds for refusing access to a document.
According to MEPs, this "historic" ruling requires the Council to ensure that all its documents and information are in the public domain, including the identity of members of national delegations and working parties.
A single European information portal
In addition, the committee argued that Parliament must take the lead on transparency and should embark on a special action plan ahead of the 2009 elections, with more information on MEPs' activities, their attendance at parliamentary meetings - in absolute, relative and percentage terms - and on their allowances and expenses.
MEPs add that "accessing information relating to the EU institutions still remains an obstacle-strewn path for ordinary citizens". An inter-institutional search engine should be introduced, together with "a single EU register / portal" for information and documents. The institutions are urged to improve transparency of the procedures for comitology and for agreements thrashed out at first-reading of the co-decision procedure through "trialogues".
The report will be put to the vote at the Strasbourg plenary in December.
2008-11-18 Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs Chair Gérard Deprez ALDE
20081118IPR42340 Civil Liberties Committee web site
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=LIBE
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
