MEPs voice serious criticism at EU PNR scheme
Justice and home affairs
2008-11-20 - 12:44
The European Parliament stands against a plan to collect air passenger records for law enforcement purposes that could pose a threat to privacy. MEPs say the measure is not justified legally, as well as in terms of effectiveness in the fight against terrorism. They ask for evidence that such a system would be useful at EU level, and could not vote on the text until their many concerns have been addressed.
By adopting a resolution drafted by Sophie In't Veld (ADLE, NL) by 512 votes in favour, 5 against and 19 abstentions, the European Parliament criticised the European commission proposal for a framework resolution on the use of PNR (Passenger Name Record) data for law enforcement purposes.
The text, tabled in November 2007, proposes that air carriers would make PNR data for flights coming to or leaving the EU (in and outbound EU flights) available to specialized national units carrying out risk assessments and law enforcement and counter terrorism missions.
UK system
The preliminary conclusions from the UK system for the use of PNR data provides no evidence of the usefulness of the mass collection and use of PNR data for counter terrorism purposes (it does provide evidence of its usefulness for other purposes, as well as the value of using PNR on a case-by-case basis in the context of ongoing investigations, on the basis of a warrant and with due cause) say MEPs.
MEPs say that the proposal, having a considerable impact on the personal life sphere of European citizens, is not justified clearly enough, in its compatibility with fundamental rights as well as concerning its legal basis.- They remind that the European Court of Justice already challenged the EU-US PNR agreement on this ground. They therefore decide to reserve their formal opinion on the framework-decision once their concerns have been addressed..
MEPs question the conditions which could make this new EU intervention necessary and underline that "same or better results could be obtained by improving the mutual legal assistance between law enforcements authorities" instead of introducing an EU-wide PNR scheme..
They say the new legislation should include a sunset clause and estimate that the need for action at the community level has not been sufficiently demonstrated, nor the proportionality of the measure : MEPs are concerned that the proposal would give authorities warrantless access to all data while their added value for law enforcements purposes has not been proved as there is no evidence that PNR data are useful for massive profiling or data mining in order to seek potential terrorists.
On the ground of data protection, MEPs say the adoption of an adequate framework is a precondition for any EU PNR scheme. They recall that sensitive data should be used only on a case by case basis, in the context of a regular investigation.
MEPs also say the proposal should also create a burden for air carriers, and that they should not be required to collect additional data or be made responsible to verify the records.
20081119IPR42567 Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 20 November)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
