Human rights: stoning in Somalia, death penalty in Nigeria, eviction of al-Kurd family
Human rights
2008-11-20 - 17:17
The stoning to death of a 13-year old rape victim in Somalia, an appeal to the Nigerian authorities to scrap the death penalty and the eviction of the al-Kurd family from their house in East Jerusalem were the subjects of the human rights resolutions adopted by Parliament at the end of this week's Strasbourg session.
Public stoning of a 13-year old rape victim in Somalia
Parliament is pressing the Somali Government to condemn the execution of Aisha Ibrahim Duhulow, a 13-year old rape victim who was publicly stoned to death, and to "take action to prevent such brutal executions in the future".
Aisha Ibrahim Duhulow, a 13-year-old girl, was stoned to death in Somalia on 27 October, 2008 for committing adultery in breach of Islamic law, although she was in fact a victim of rape by three men. The stoning was carried out by a group of 50 men in a stadium in the southern port of Kismayo in front of around 1,000 spectators.
Parliament "strongly condemns the stoning and execution of Aisha Ibrahim Duhulow and expresses its horror at such a barbaric act perpetrated against a 13-year-old rape victim".
Call for justice
The al-Shabab militia, who control Kismayo, detained and ordered the execution by stoning of Aisha Ibrahim Duhulow, and did not arrest or detain those accused of her rape.
The resolution, which was adopted unanimously, supports the legitimate Somali Government's attempts to assert its control over the port of Kismayo, and calls "for those accused of raping Aisha Ibrahim Duhulow to be brought to justice by due process". It also calls on the Somali Government to condemn the execution and prevent such acts in future, as well as "to issue documents and make statements to restore the honour of Aisha Ibrahim Duhulow posthumously".
Gross violations of human rights committed daily
Owing partly to widespread violence by some factions of the Alliance for the Re-Liberation of Somalia (the 'Islamic Courts'), which are trying to topple the legitimate government of Somalia, there are gross violations of human rights in Somalia on a daily basis.
These violations of human rights also include the kidnapping of two Italian Catholic nuns from Kenya currently being held in Somalia, and the increase in suicide attacks, which have killed at least 30 people in the north of the country in recent weeks. Parliament calls on both the Somali and Kenyan authorities to "make all possible efforts and take all possible political and diplomatic initiatives to secure the release of the two Italian Catholic nuns".
EU should back present Somali government and help establish lasting democracy
Turning to longer term solutions, MEPs urge the EU to "provide all necessary support in order to create a lasting democratic government in Somalia and to further aid the Government of Somalia to assert its control over the whole country and establish the rule of law in a manner compatible with its international human rights obligations, which would prevent such executions in the future."
* * *
Call to abolish death penalty in Nigeria
Noting that more than 720 men and 11 women are under sentence of death in Nigeria's prisons, the European Parliament calls on the Federal Government of Nigeria and the state governments to abolish the death penalty and, pending abolition, "declare an immediate moratorium on all executions as provided for by UN General Assembly resolution 62/149".
Although Nigeria has not officially reported any executions since 2002, Islamic Sharia courts, which have jurisdiction over criminal cases in 12 of Nigeria's 36 states, continue to hand down death sentences as well as sentences of flogging and amputation.
Right to a fair trial
The Nigerian criminal justice system is riddled with corruption and negligence and over half the country's 40,000 prison inmates have not been tried or sentenced. Moreover, according to Nigerian sources, inmates on death row are almost exclusively poor and without legal representation.
In the light of these problems, Parliament's resolution - adopted unanimously - calls on the Federal Government of Nigeria and the state governments to "ensure that in capital cases the most rigorous internationally recognised and constitutional standards for fair trial are respected, especially in the areas of inadequate legal representation of poorer prisoners, of confessions or evidence obtained through violence, coercion or torture, of inordinately long trial and appeal periods, and of conviction of minors".
Death penalty for child offenders
International law prohibits the use of the death penalty against child offenders. The resolution states that at least 40 death row prisoners were aged between 13 and 17 at the time of their alleged offence. It urges the Nigerian governing bodies to "remove all provisions in both federal and state legislation which provide for the death penalty for people who were under the age of 18 at the time of the alleged crime".
EU urged to help Nigerian authorities
Looking to the long term, the EP calls on the Council, the Commission and the Member States to provide technical support to the Nigerian authorities with a view to reviewing the legislation which provides for the death penalty, abolishing the death penalty, and improving the investigation procedures of the Nigerian police.
* * *
Eviction of the al-Kurd family in East Jerusalem
In a resolution on the case of the al-Kurd family, who have been evicted from their home in East Jerusalem by the Israeli authorities, Parliament voices deep concern at this and other operations and points to the possible consequences for the peace process.
The al-Kurd family were forcibly removed from their home in the Sheikh Jarrah neighbourhood of East Jerusalem by members of the Israeli police and armed forces on the night of Sunday 9 November 2008. Immediately after the eviction, settlers were allowed to enter the house, in which the family had lived for more than 50 years.
According to the resolution, which was adopted by an overwhelming majority, the eviction of the al-Kurd family and the recent destruction of the houses of Palestinian families by the Israeli authorities in several areas of East Jerusalem may have serious consequences.
However, as the result of an amendment tabled by the EPP-ED group and adopted by a majority of Members present, a paragraph calling "for the al-Kurd family's property to be returned to it immediately" was deleted from the text of the resolution.
Chances of peace agreement between Palestine and Israeli can only be damaged
The resolution emphasises that "these operations, which seriously affect the lives of the residents of these areas, contravene international law" and it calls on the Israeli authorities to put an end to such acts as soon as possible. MEPs point to the fact that "under international law East Jerusalem is not subject to the jurisdiction of Israeli courts".
The EP presses Israel to "refrain from all unilateral measures that may pre-empt the result of the final status negotiations, particularly in Jerusalem", stressing that "such actions can only damage the chances of reaching a peace agreement between Palestinians and Israelis." It also reiterates its call to the Israeli authorities "immediately to halt any expansion of settlements and the building of the security fence beyond Israel’s 1967 borders".
International community asked to support Palestinian residents
Finally, Parliament calls on the Council, the Commission and the international community, including the Quartet, to "make all possible efforts to protect Palestinian residents in the Sheikh Jarrah neighbourhood and other areas of East Jerusalem" and urges the Quartet to play a more active role in this direction.
20081119IPR42590 Full text of adopted resolutions will appear here (click on 20 November 2008)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
