Pöttering visits Ireland for Bishops' conference and Lisbon talks
Institutions
2008-11-26 - 11:46
EP President Pöttering in Ireland During his visit to Ireland, EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering took the chance to meet with Irish politicians to discuss the future of the Lisbon Treaty in Ireland. After attending the Irish Episcopal Conference in Maynooth in the morning, President Pöttering met up with Irish Minister of Foreign Affairs, Micheál Martin TD, and with members of the Irish Parliament's Sub-Committee on Ireland's Future in Europe.
President Pöttering attends Bishops' conference in Maynooth
Following a two-day visit to Northern Ireland, EP President Pöttering accepted the invitation of Cardinal Seán Brady and Archbishop Diarmuid Martin to meet with the Episcopal Conference of Ireland. The Episcopal conference consists of 26 Bishops of the dioceses of Ireland and seven Irish auxiliary Bishops. President Pöttering visited the Bishops' conference during its winter meeting to exchange views, concentrating on the role of the Church in European integration.
The Irish Episcopal Conference is traditionally held at the historic St. Patrick's College in Maynooth, which is the National Seminary for Ireland, but also houses the National University of Ireland.
Meeting with Irish politicians in Dublin
Following the morning in Maynooth, the EP President came to Dublin to lunch with Micheál Martin, Irish Minister for Foreign Affairs and to talk with members of the Irish Parliament's Sub-Committee on Ireland's future in Europe. The Oireachtas Sub-Committee on Ireland's Future in Europe is a joint Sub-Committee of the two Irish Houses of Parliament, Dáil Éireann and Seanad Èireann.
The Sub-Committee was established, following the result of the Lisbon Treaty referendum. It was set up to analyse the challenges facing Ireland following the referendum and to contribute to an open, comprehensive and sincere debate on Ireland's future relationship with the EU. Its findings will inform the Irish Government as it prepares to present a way forward before the December Council of European Heads of State and Government. President Pöttering met with members of the Sub-Committee after its hearings of over 80 witnesses from over 50 organisations.
He discussed a number of issues which had come up in the course of the hearings, stressing "I have come here to listen and learn - and see how we might find a common way forward." The Sub-Committee is now preparing its findings, which are expected to be published at the end of this week.
During his visit to Ireland, President Pöttering also stressed the advantages the Lisbon Treaty offers: "It is precisely because the European Union faces challenges which are global in their origins and scope, that the leaders of the 27 Member States signed the provisions of the Lisbon Reform Treaty in December 2007. This treaty is about ensuring that the European Union is equipped with the tools to deal with the challenges of the 21st century globalised world in which we live."
Honouring the important work of the Oireachtas Sub-Committee, President Pöttering reiterated the message which he had delivered the previous day to the Northern Ireland Assembly: "We in the European Parliament hope that Ireland will also find a solution to the current situation so that they too can ratify and the treaty can come into force."
20081126STO43057 EP Dublin Office Pöttering website European Parliament President welcomes Irish Parliament report on Ireland's Future in Europe
EN
1
PHOTO
20081126PHT43061.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/parliament/public/nearYou.do?country=IE&language=EN#address
EN
3
LINK
/president/defaulten.htm
EN
4
LINK
/president/defaulten.htm?press_releases
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
