"e-Parliament" discusses connection with voters
Youth
2008-11-27 - 11:32
Online debates and greater access to documents are themes of the e-Parliament The role that the internet can play in parliamentary democracy was explored this week when 400 people gathered in Brussels for the annual "e-Parliament conference". Ways in which new web developments can be used to get people more involved in politics were discussed by 400 delegates from around the world.
In practical terms, the "e-Parliament" concept aims to get people involved in politics using their computers. It involves things like electronic access to documents, online discussion forums and the live broadcast of parliamentary debates online.
The recent success of the Obama presidential bid in mobilising first-time voters was mention by at least one speaker at the event held in the Parliament's Chamber on 25-26 November.
German Socialist MEP Mechtild Rothe told the conference that every parliament around the world needs to think about new technologies to "empower citizens, achieve transparency and think about participation in a new way".
She also said it could allow younger people to feel they had a greater say in how decisions were taken.
The role of youth was taken up her by Romanian colleague Silvia-Adriana Țicǎu who said that the whole concept of e-democracy could be extended to engage children with European politics through things like interactive online cartoons.
She stressed that with the European elections 7 months away now was the right time to be thinking about these issues and said the "budgetary and human resources must be ensured".
The recent launch of EuroparlTV and the ability to watch debates and meetings live online on the parliament's website have been steps in this direction.
The possible misuse of technology was taken up by the Speaker of Egypt's Parliament Ahmed Fathi Sorour in his remarks to delegates.
Anders Johnsson, the Secretary General of the Interparliamentary Union, said that new technologies could help with fighting corruption and overcoming public apathy.
Finally, the head of the Pan-African Parliament Gertrude Mongella told those gathered that African parliaments "lack the financial means and expertise" to introduce it. She said a general lack of dialogue between people in general society was a key problem for Africa.
The event was hosted and organised by the European Parliament, the UN's Global Centre for Information Technologies in Parliament and the Inter-Parliamentary Union.
20081120STO42708 World e-Parliament europarltv The Parliament online
EN
1
PHOTO
20081126PHT43088.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.ictparliament.org/worldeparliamentconference2008/
EN
3
LINK
http://www.europarltv.europa.eu
EN
4
LINK
/eplive/public/default_en.htm?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
