New rules for cleaner, quieter, safer cars
Consumers
2008-12-03 - 13:06
The EU will soon have a simpler, standardised system for the type-approval of motor vehicles, following a vote on Tuesday by Parliament's Internal Market Committee. Members of the committee decided to beef up plans to introduce new rules on the registration, sale and use of cars, with the aim of improving road safety and protecting the environment better.
Ordinary tyres, all-weather tyres and snow tyres, the design and manufacture of cars in general and the use of modern technology on cars - all these things influence the safety and environmental impact of motor vehicles. A single regulation, directly applicable in all the Member States, will soon synthesise all the rules on these matters, replacing around fifty existing directives. Members of the Internal Market Committee approved the Commission's draft legislation with amendments when they adopted a first-reading co-decision report by Andreas Schwab (EPP-ED, DE) by 32 votes to 10 with 7 abstentions.
Following the vote, Mr Schwab was optimistic: "We are going to improved road safety in Europe by going further than the Commission. The new technologies must be pushed ahead faster, to set lower sound limits in future years and thus improve public health by reducing harmful road traffic noise".
Safer roads
The safety of road vehicles is steadily improving, the number of people killed on Europe's roads having fallen by 24% since 2001 thanks to better car design and manufacture. In this area the new regulation lays down a number of rules to be observed by manufacturers. But new safety technology, already available on top car models, can also help cut accident risks. The regulation will make such technology compulsory on ordinary cars too. An example is the electronic stability control system (ESC), which helps the driver keep control of his vehicle. Advanced emergency braking systems (AEBS) and lane departure warning systems (LDW) are to be made compulsory on lorries. MEPs changed the Commission's proposal to install such systems on other vehicles, because the systems were devised for lorries and are not suited to other vehicles such as private cars.
Greater environmental protection, lower energy consumption
Some of the rules on tyre standards have also been revised, as regards not just safety but also environmental impact. Rolling resistance and pressure affect the noise levels and CO2 emitted by vehicles. The new regulation lays down various standards on tyres which will cut CO2 emissions and fuel consumption. It also makes the installation of tyre pressure monitoring systems (TPMS) compulsory. This measure will apply to private cars. MEPs did not vote to extend this requirement to lorries but they beefed up the rules on the effectiveness and reliability of such systems, without giving preference to any particular technology. The committee also tightened up the definitions of tyres, for example limiting the possibility of installing off-road professional tyres on 4x4 cars marketed for private or leisure use.
Gradual entry into force
The new regulation will be easier to apply and easier for consumers and industry to understand. It replaces a number of directives, is directly applicable in the Member States and reflects car safety standards harmonised by the United Nations.
Once adopted by Parliament and Council, it should apply from 1 November 2011, say MEPs, a year earlier than the Commission proposed. But various transition periods are provided for, in some cases until 2018, to enable the car industry to adapt to the new measures.
"My main concern is to ensure that this European regulation does not impose extra costs on consumers and manufacturers. We want to see to it that drivers will save money by using less petrol in a healthier environment with lower CO2 emissions", commented the rapporteur.
Procedure: Co-decision, first reading -- Plenary vote: February 2009 (Strasbourg) 2008-12-02 Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection In the chair Arlene MCCarthy PES UK
20081201IPR43348 Website of the Internal Market Committee
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=IMCO
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
