MEPs debate the European Council of 11 and 12 December: Climate change, economic crisis and Lisbon Treaty
European Council
2008-12-03 - 17:44
President Pöttering pauses for a moment as MEPs recall the Mumbai victims Ahead of the European Council of the 11 and 12 December, MEPs debated the three key topics, namely, the climate change and energy package, the response to the economic crisis and progress on the Lisbon Strategy. Most group speakers agreed the need for a deal on the climate change package on 17 December in Strasbourg and supported the Commission's proposals on the economic crisis. Some of the smaller groups asked for the Lisbon Treaty to be forgotten given the No vote in Ireland on 12 June.
Council - French Presidency European Affairs Minister Jean-Pierre JOUYET underlined that the three main topics of the European Council 11 and 12 December would be: The Lisbon Treaty, the EU's response to the economic and financial crisis, and the fight against climate change. On the Lisbon Treaty , the Minister recalled that Ireland had just gone through a cross-party exercise of finding a way forward and whose conclusions were: Ireland must not be sidelined in Europe, full participation of Ireland in the EU is desirable and it was for Ireland to come forward with a solution taking into account the concerns expressed on 12 June in the referendum. Mr Jouyet recalled that 25 parliaments had ratified the Lisbon Treaty and the European Council would draw up a "road map" on the way forward. As to the economic crisis , Minister Jouyet said that the EU had already responded by bringing forward proposals. The European Commission he said was on the right track. The European Social Fund, the Globalisation Fund, structural funds and the European Investment Bank would all be crucial in finding a response. It would also be essential funding for SMEs who bore much of the economic crisis. On the energy and climate change package , Minister Jouyet underlined the importance of reaching a deal under the French Presidency in order to be ready for the negotiations in Copenhagen. European Commission Commission President José Manuel BARROSO focussed his comments on three priorities for the forthcoming summit: to enact decisive measures towards economic recovery, to show Europe will be able to equip itself to become low carbon economy giving leadership in fighting climate change, and to set out a road map to ratification for the Treaty of Lisbon. The Commission's proposal on the economy was to "inject €200bn to get the economy moving again via unprecedented joint action - it is plan which is not the lowest common denominator, but which does take account of the different budgetary situations of the Member States". It was a matter of defining common goals to be attained jointly. There would need to be coordination in the implementation of the plan as well as in drawing it up. "This is a test the about very idea we have of Europe - do we want a European response to global problems: it can show we have requisite coordination and budgetary stimulation while guaranteeing long term viability of public expenditure," he said. Mr Barroso also called for a change to the EU budgetary framework to allow unspent appropriations to pay for environmentally friendly energy projects. On climate change, Parliament had, he said, helped to show it to be one of the major political, economic and civilisational issues at this time. Despite the downturn, the EU had not wavered in its commitment to core 20-20-20 goal for 2020. The European Council would be crucial to reaching an agreement on climate change legislation but Parliament's role was vital too. As well as its democratic input, Parliament was indispensable in building the necessary cross-party and cross-border consensus. "Some would argue in this economic downturn, that the Lisbon treaty discussion is a distraction - they are wrong." The crisis had shown the EU to be essential in helping to ensure the welfare of its citizens. This was, he said, the time to make its tools to achieve this more effective and efficient. The EU had, he said, shown maturity in respecting the Irish vote and taking time, working together with Ireland to find way forward which also respected the positive ratification decisions in other Member States. It was now urgent to see a treaty in force: "I hope next week we will have a road map to allowing Ireland to ratify too." Political group speakers Joseph DAUL (EPP-ED, FR) welcomed the Commission's recovery plan, which is "an appropriate tool for responding to current difficulties", but stressed that "the economic and social cohesion of our countries has to remain the key priority". The Commission's proposals are a "good step forward", he said, but "our priority has to be to prevent us getting into a downward spiral of recession". He found it "deeply regrettable that some political families do not agree with that approach". With regard to the energy and climate package, Mr Daul called "on all those involved to do their utmost to find a satisfactory agreement". The EU must show the way by adopting a responsible, political attitude, which is tailored to the situation, he said, and the fact that "we have made progress on some of the texts is a positive sign". For the PES group, Poul Nyrup RASMUSSEN (DK) said that that 21 million will be unemployed in one year's time, and 25 million will be unemployed by 2010 "unless we do something". He stressed the importance of "true co-ordination" in tackling the current financial difficulties, and proposed that Member States invest 1% of GDP "this year, in 2010 and in 2011". "I share your ambition", he said, "but there is a lack of goals in practise." Graham WATSON (ALDE, UK) noted that for this European Council "speed no longer seems to be of the essence". "We need the Council and Commission to acknowledge what Martin Luther King called the 'fierce urgency of now'", he said. "We've got to stay in the growth and stability pact, maintain competitions and meet the challenge of the Lisbon agenda, but we've got to act fast." Regarding the climate package, Mr Watson said "If we don't tackle climate change now," "the bill will balloon". "Last week's CO2 deal on cars show how easy it is to take the path of least resistance, to let vested interests get ahead of global interests," he said. He also stressed the importance of cohesion between member states, stating that the Mumbai terrorist attacks highlighted the failure of the EU when an EU Consul told Members of Parliament that he could only help citizens of his own country. Rebecca HARMS (Greens/EFA, DE) asked if there was going to be an "ambitious climate strategy" against the backdrop of the economic and financial crisis. "I would assert that everything the Commission has said so far seems to negate what has been done in the trilogue." Emissions trading is the most important lever we have in climate policy, she argued, and yet energy intensive industries are being allowed an opt-out, and only developing countries are to meet CO2 targets. "The Commission needs to stop making mistakes of the past," she added. Brian CROWLEY (UEN, IE) said that on the economic recovery plan all Member States would need to work together and what the Commission is proposing "dovetailed nicely" into the Member States' policies. It was ironic, he said, that it was this crisis that brought the UK government closer to the EU. Collective effort and will was the answer. On the Lisbon Treaty, Mr Crowley welcomed the recent report of the Irish Parliament. All Member States, he said, would have to make changes and compromise. Mary Lou McDONALD (IE) spoke for the GUE/NGL group. She said that if (Irish Taoiseach) Brian Cowan told EU leaders Irish support for Lisbon could be won with soothing noises and political declarations, he would be being misleading. The Irish people had "concerns on workers rights, public services, militarisation and democracy. These are shared by millions of working people across Europe." As governments recognised the need for state intervention to meet people's needs, the Lisbon Treaty was a "coronation of the failed free market approach", she said. EU leaders should "lead from the hearts and spirits of the people" rather than reflecting the interests of lobbyists or bureaucrats, she said. For the IND/DEM group, Hanne DAHL (DK) said we now faced a hollow compromise on the Treaty, as result of manipulation and threats in the wake of the Nice Treaty. Making the Commission smaller was bad news for Ireland and for her own Member State, she said. "Democracy has failed here. We lecture people on democracy, with the Sakharov Prize, but democracy is about more than threats and promise. Where people have spoken, they have said no." Jim ALLISTER (UK), a non-attached MEP, said the summit should focus solely on the economic crisis, but "sadly will devote time to trying to subjugate will of the Irish people. This juggernaut-Mugabe approach would not be dared with large country, but the Republic of Ireland votes were fair game to be pushed around by the European elite for whom precious Lisbon project is more important than democracy," he said. Response by Commission President Responding to the leading group speakers, Mr Barroso welcomed support for the economic recovery plan. He agree with Mr Rasmussen that employment was a key issue: indeed, it would be the main measure of the success of the steps taken. It was, he said, vital to build a cross-party and cross-border consensus on the need for policy coordination to get the greatest effect out of the measures taken. He called for MEPs to try to influence finance ministers from their political families to abandon their traditional resistance to coordination of economic measures: "If it is not now, in face of this crisis that we can agree on more coordination, then when? This is why I see it as a test for Europe. Is Europe going to translate concern into coordination for the future? This is the position I will bring to European Council on behalf of the Commission." British and Irish speakers In relation to economic issues, Timothy KIRKHOPE (EPP-ED, UK) said that the UK government has announced the largest level of borrowing in history and is now saddled with massive borrowing for the foreseeable future. "Last week we had details of the Commission's important recovery plan – which I believe contained some very positive items – but I do fear that this initiative may not alone deal with the immediate problems. The focus should be to get the banks to lend to each other and to businesses and ordinary people. With unemployment set to soar, we must build confidence, not leave a legacy of debt and higher taxes for our children and grandchildren to contend with." Regarding the Lisbon Treaty, Andrew DUFF (ALDE, UK) said he believed that we are making some progress at last. The Czech Court and the Irish Parliament have comprehensively and decisively blunted the attack upon the Treaty from the nationalist and reactionary forces. It is now up to the Czech Parliament and the Irish Government, he said, to take the next decisive steps. "We need a clear pledge from the Taoiseach that he is to hold a second referendum at a specific time and we need a more professional campaign plan. The Parliament here appeals to the profound generosity of the Irish people and to their sharp intelligence to see the seriousness of the consequences of a second 'no'." While there is an overwhelming desire in Ireland to remain at the heart of European affairs, now more important than ever in the current economic climate, Proinsias DE ROSSA (PES, IE) stressed that Irish citizens, however, need assurances that the misleading claims on Lisbon by the 'no' camp on the Commission, on abortion, on conscription, on military neutrality, no workers' rights and public services have no basis in fact. The right of all Member States to nominate a Commissioner without restriction is also important and he felt that a simple extension of that right from 2014 to 2019 will not be sufficient to ensure ratification in Ireland. In addition, a commitment to add a social clause on labour rights to the posting of workers directive. Mr De Rossa urged the Council and the Commission to address these matters urgently at the coming summit. On the Lisbon Treaty, Avril DOYLE (EPP-ED, IE) said, "yes we have had time to digest and analyse the 12 June vote, but no, Minister Jouyet, we will not – and should not even attempt – to ratify again at the beginning of next year, or we risk failure again with our deeply unpopular government." She expressed her thanks to the French Presidency's offer of all assistance with legal guarantees and any assurances that may be required. "I thank all Members and you, Madam President, for your understanding as we continue to trespass on your patience." Neena GILL (PES, UK) said that given the massive increase of loss of life due to terrorist attacks across the world where innocent people from east, west, north and south are increasingly targets, she believed it is remiss of the Council not to put this issue on the agenda of next week's council meeting. The US is acting but Europe not, she said. "As we speak Condoleezza Rise is over there but where is Javier Solana? Tensions are increasing between two nuclear states. Europe should and could do more, especially by looking at the agreements it has like the strategic partnership with India but adequately resorting the sentiments that have been there as to how they can be achieved and realised." Mairead McGUINNESS (EPP-ED, IE) said that "we wait to see what the Irish Government says next week. It does not have much public confidence at the moment so it may not be the best of times to talk about another vote if that is what has to happen. But I do believe that there is sense prevailing in Ireland and that people are now reflecting on the situation we find ourselves in and now know that we need to be at the heart of Europe given the crisis that we are in." Richard CORBETT (PES, UK) questioned where in a situation where 25 or 26 countries have said 'yes' to the Lisbon Treaty and just one has said no, it is not unreasonable, nor indeed undemocratic to ask whether the one is willing to reconsider, but provided the rest of us are willing to meet the concerns that were expressed when they voted no. That, he said, is not to ignore the result of the Irish referendum, but to respond to the result, look at the concerns that were expressed and try to meet them. But that requires Ireland to tell us exactly what concerns were expressed, to define a list of demands that we can then respond to or at least negotiate over. The solution, he said, has to be acceptable to all 27 countries, preferably that means not renegotiating the whole Treaty but interpreting it, clarifying it, adjusting the way it could be implemented to meet the concerns. Concluding, Mr Corbett said he was confident that this could be done but it requires the first step from Ireland. He was glad that the Irish Parliament is taking the initiative on this instead of leaving it to the government.
20081203IPR43595 audio, 28:48 - Council and Commission (J.-P. Jouyet, J. M. Barroso) - EN audio, 24:46 - Political groups - EN
EN
1
PHOTO
20081124PHT42892.jpg
EN
2
MULTIMEDIA
20081203MLT43693.asf
EN
3
MULTIMEDIA
20081203MLT43697.asf
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
