MEPs debate climate change and energy package ahead of key vote
Environment
2008-12-04 - 11:20
The European Parliament debated the climate change and energy package with the Council and Commission. Most political group speakers underlined the urgency of reaching an early deal on 17 December in Strasbourg stating that climate change was the greatest challenge of our times. Other speakers said the package was not ambitious enough while one speaker questioned the science of climate change.
European Commission
Energy Commissioner Andris PIEBALGS said that the three institutions were close to reaching an agreement on the climate change package with only a few issues outstanding. An agreement on renewable energy directive would make a big difference especially for Europe's energy supply. The goal, he recalled was to have a 20 per cent share of renewable energy in the EU by 2020. The directive would set out the goals on bio fuels and ensure access to the energy networks for renewable energy.
The main sticking points int the trilogue, he said, was on the "co-operation mechanisms" and whether to introduce a review in 2014. The European Parliament, he said, felt that such a review could undermine the certainty for investment. Overall, there would be no changes to the binding targets by there was a need for flexibility.
Environment Commissioner Stavros DIMAS said that the climate change and energy package was one of the most significant pieces of work the EU had carried out over recent years. A low carbon economy would boost Europe's competitiveness and encourage innovation. Mr Dimas said that significant progress has been made and was "optimistic of a first-reading agreement".
On the emissions trading system he recalled that the ceilings would lead to a 21 per cent reduction by 2020 in carbon emissions. On leakage, Mr Dimas underlined the importance of reaching an international agreement, and on financing carbon capture and storage, an issue close to the heart of the European Parliament, a decision had already been taken to use the reserve.
Council Presidency
The Council presidency was represented by Jean-Louis BORLOO , French Minister of Ecology and Sustainable Development and Planning, who told the House that "the eyes of the world are on Europe this month" and that we are at "a turning point in our history".
Referring to last night's EP-Council-Commission trilogue on the climate change package, he said "we are now in a crucial phase in the negotiations" but the trilogue was proceeding as well as could be expected.
However, some difficult points remained, including the question of solidarity and progressivity in achieving the 20/2/20 targets, given the differing circumstances of different Member States and the need to increase efficiency on the electricity market without imposing a burden on consumers.
The minister told MEPs that three main blocs had emerged in the negotiations: the Baltic countries, which are committed under treaty to dismantling nuclear power stations, countries such as Poland which have less energy-efficient, high-carbon economies and need agreement on the progressivity timetable, and countries which are sensitive to the cost of the solidarity mechanisms.
He looked forward to progress being made on these issues at a meeting on 6 December in Gdansk under the French presidency and emphasised "What we don't do today will have a higher cost in future" and "if we make this historic change it will augur well for the Copenhagen conference and for our planet".
Political group speakers
On behalf of the EPP-ED group, Joseph DAUL (FR) described the energy and climate change package as a "huge challenge" even before the financial crisis but stressed that "we cannot afford to fail". He believed "it is not impossible to win people over" and "to get our fellow citizens on our side". Europe needs "to promote eco-innovation", he said, and he was encouraged by the adoption of an agreement on reducing CO2 emissions in cars. The key was to "reassure our citizens about the future".
Describing climate change as "one of the central challenges of our time", Martin SCHULZ (DE), for the Socialist group, stressed that "the tough detailed work has been done here in this House" and therefore that "not Sarkozy but Sacconi should get the credit" (a reference to Parliament's rapporteur, Guido Sacconi). He stressed that the special procedure being used in Parliament to speed through the legislation was unusual and that MEPs would insist that the outcome of the negotiations, when finished, would have to be acceptable to the EP.
Speaking for the Liberals, Graham WATSON (UK) was pleased that "we might be days away from a historic agreement" but he warned of those who would complain. He said it was "irresponsible" of Italy to claim that energy measures would push up power bills by 17%. Concluding, he said we need the Council "to reaffirm its commitment to the 20/20/20 targets" and we must ensure that lobbying by certain interests doesn't blight this opportunity. In short, "the Council must keep its word".
Claude TURMES (LU) for the Greens/EFA warned: "We will lose all diplomatic credibility if we do not have a climate change package that looks to the future". The fact that Barack Obama wants to put renewable energies and green technology at the heart of the structure of the American economy represents an "historical opportunity", he said. "Europe has always shown international leadership. We have always set the standards for international climate policy, and now we are risking throwing it away because the highest polluting companies."
Alessandro FOGLIETTA (UEN, IT) stressed the importance of universal targets and it is up to Europe to lead the way. The 20, 20, 20 formula represents an ambitious attempt to improve our situation, he said, but "we should be bold enough to admit that we might hamper Europe's industry if all targets are not respected multilaterally," he said, otherwise "it would render our efforts vain". Measures needed to keep Europe competitive on the world stage include providing a cost benefit analysis and evaluating the effect of instruments in the climate package and the ETS directive on Europe's SMEs and the public purse, he concluded.
Umberto GUIDONI (GUE/NGL, IT) said that people who thought the 20, 20, 20 formula will prove too costly for the European economy "are blind". There are "huge advantages" to disseminating renewable energies, including job creation, better energy use, and an improved economy. "We need to move away from the finance-based economy - bailing out our banks, which led us to this situation in the first place," he said. "Public investment should focus on innovative areas in the environment and energy," he added.
Johannes BLOKLAND (IND/DEM, NL) welcomed the "ambitious climate and energy package" and thanked the Commission for its "untiring efforts during the negotiations". At times, the Presidency gave the impression that it could not move substantially towards the position of the European Parliament and "this could really damage the energy and climate package". Some Member States are using the financial crisis as a pretext to "water down" climate obligations, but the costs in future would be far greater, he said.
Roger HELMER (NI, UK) said that we are undoubtedly facing the "greatest crisis that I have seen in my lifetime". "The threat is not posed by global warming," he said, "but by our policy responses to global warming" because "they will have a devastating economic effect". "The measures we are debating today represent the greatest collective flight from reality that we have ever seen," he concluded.
British and Irish speakers
Referring to Minister Borloo's speech in which he spoke about special arrangements for some countries in difficulty, Linda MCAVAN (PSE, UK) thought it acceptable, provided they are time limited and do not undermine the overall architecture of the project. Her group, she said, will support those special arrangements if they are in that context. Europe has to make a choice, she said, "Either we lead or we dance to other people's tunes." With regard to the economic crisis, she said it was failure to act to regulate financial institutions which has caused this crisis – failure by politicians as well as banks. Let us, she said, not make that same mistake on climate change. "If we do, it will be ordinary people who will pay the price for our failure, just as they are paying the price today for failure on the banking crisis."
In relation to carbon capture and storage, Chris DAVIES (ALDE, UK) stressed on the potential this technology has to make a huge difference in abating CO2 emissions into the atmosphere. If we are to secure an international agreement, he said, if we are to lock China in – which gets 80% of its electricity from coal – we have got to deal with the problem of big power stations, big fossil-fuel, carbon dioxide-generating power stations. The first step is to test and develop the technology. We have got to get the demonstration projects up and running. But, he said, what is on the table from the Council is not enough. It will not deliver the pledge made by heads of government last year to have up to 12 demonstration projects in operation by 2015. In the next two weeks, he said, we have a chance to negotiate a deal to actually put this technology into practice.
On climate legislation, Avril DOYLE (EPP-ED, IE) said that there is no choice. As politicians, she said, we owe it to our communities, both present and future, to stand up and be counted. Having witnessed first-hand many frustrating COPs in recent years, Mrs Doyle believed in the need for Europe to drive this process forward, as was done in Bali, and to deliver in time for the COP 15 in Copenhagen. However, she warned that we will not just ‘sign off’ on any deal. Any signing off, she said, will be done at a subsequent trialogue between the French presidency and the European Parliament. She asked Minister Borloo to make it very clear to President Sarkozy – that a generous percentage of the auction revenues should be earmarked for adaptation and mitigation in developing countries, because legislation without generous financing will not result in a global agreement.
Caroline LUCAS (Greens/EFA, UK) challenged one sentiment that has been repeated several times today. We, she said, do not have to choose between tackling the economic crisis and tackling the climate crisis. We should be using the financial crisis as an opportunity to completely reshape the focus and direction of our economy, to make it a genuinely sustainable economy which will actually deliver environmental and economic benefits. This is a critical test for the whole EU project itself, and it is not one we can afford to fail.
While huge progress was made in the negotiations on renewable energy, Fiona HALL (ALDE, UK) said it was disappointing not to reach complete agreement last night, but the one clause at issue is not just about keeping inviolate the 20% by 2020 target. A lot of hard work has been done to ensure that there is legal certainly in the flexibility mechanisms which Member States can use to help them achieve their renewables targets. A review of the flexibility mechanisms in 2014 risks undoing all that good work. It risks undermining the large-scale development of renewables and green collar jobs which promise a renaissance for European regions like mine, north-east England. That is why we cannot give in on a wording which is being insisted on by just one Member State. Positive progress has been made on the renewables directive with the achievement of a strong text on biofuels and crucially indirect land use change will now be factored in at the insistence of the Parliament. This legislation, she concluded, must work well for the EU but it must also work as a strong offer on the table of the global negotiations.
Martin CALLANAN (EPP-ED, UK) expressed concern that, during the progress of this legislation, it is being speeded through both the Council and Parliament with sometimes undue haste. It is important, he stressed, that all of this legislation is scrutinised properly and that everybody has the chance to contribute to the debate. We must, he said, make sure that we get this very important legislation right and that there are no mistakes that might discovered in future.
John BOWIS (EPP-ED, UK) said that the Pacific islands are quite literally sinking beneath the waves. Global warming is bringing new diseases and also mosquitoes carrying malaria and dengue fever into that region. He reported that at the recent ACP meeting in Papua New Guinea where the consequences of failing to prevent and failing to manage climate change were discussed. "Even if we meet our 2o target that means a 25% reduction in water availability; it means a 10% decline in crop yields; it means 50 million more people subject to malaria; it means 10 million more subject to coastal flooding; it means dramatic increases in respiratory, cardio-vascular, vector-borne diseases, skin cancer and eyesight problems. If they fail, we fail. Their diseases are already our diseases. Their migration will become our migration. Their desperation could lead to desperation as they spill across our borders too and it is for our sakes as much as for theirs that we must help them make progress, and make it quickly."
Colm BURKE (EPP-ED, IE) said that climate change is attacking the natural resource face of poor communities including their land and water reserves and people are subsequently being forced to migrate for survival. Such migration flows can have destabilising consequences and can threaten the overall internal security of a particular country, region or border area. Reporting on his visit to the Chad/Sudanese border area this year as a member of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Mr Burke saw the devastation caused by war and food shortages. Climate change will make situations like this worse, he said, Unfortunately, those most at risk are the least culpable in creating this situation. He was delighted to see Parliament taking leadership on this matter. The EU, the US and other world powers need to act, he concluded.
The contribution in writing from Richard CORBETT (PSE, UK) welcomed the progress that has been made to date. "To be acceptable to Parliament the package of measures must be sufficiently vigorous for us to achieve the agreed EU targets of a 20% reduction in CO2 emissions and a 20% increase in renewables by the year 2020 - but also to enable us to go further and raise this up to 30% in the event of an international agreement. I am also pleased that there seems to be agreement that the bio-fuels target should be subject to strict sustainability criteria."
20081203IPR43669 Briefing text + related links
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081113BRI41902 ITEM-003-EN NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
