Common human values, inner peace and Tibet: Dalai Lama at European Parliament
Institutions
2008-12-04 - 13:46
Common human values, inner peace and Tibet: Dalai Lama The importance of individual happiness, which can be achieved with the help of universal human values - whether religious or non-religious - was one major theme in an address by the 14th Dalai Lama to the European Parliament on Wednesday. The other topic raised by the Buddhist spiritual leader was the current plight and the future of Tibet.
The Dalai Lama gave his speech to a formal sitting of the House as part of European Year of Intercultural Dialogue.
Dalai Lama's non-violent approach "an extraordinary example", says EP President
In his welcoming address, European Parliament President Hans-Gert Pöttering alluded to the recent atrocities in Mumbai, saying that in such times "faith leaders who preach a message of peace and reconciliation between peoples can make a major contribution to our society."
Turning to the situation of Tibet, the EP president stressed that "the European Parliament seeks to be a voice raised in defence of human rights and human dignity. In this respect, Parliament has consistently sought to highlight the human rights of the Tibetan people". While respecting China's territorial integrity, he stressed that "in our dialogue with China, we have a responsibility to be open and honest in expressing our commitment to our shared values of democracy, the rule of law, human rights and freedom of expression".
Concluding, he told the Dalai Lama, "Your non-violent approach provides an extraordinary example of committed and peaceful campaigning for a worthy cause".
Dalai Lama: happiness can be based on religious or non-religious values
While asking MEPs to take note of his written statement (see link below), the Tibetan spiritual leader chose to speak without notes. Describing himself as "just one of 6 billion people", he said his first concerns were to promote human values and religious harmony.
He stressed the importance of leading "a happy life", which could best be achieved by having "peace of mind" and argued that there was nowadays too much emphasis on material values, with "too much stress, suspicion, ambition and greed".
However, he believed that inner value "does not necessarily come from religious teaching" but is a "biological" necessity, since "we are social animals". In fact, he saw "secular ethics" and an emphasis on "inner peace" as a basis for a happy life, and he advocated "secular methods", including "common sense, common experience, religious and scientific findings". He pointed out that Buddhism was a "non-theistic religion".
Commenting on the number of women MEPs in the Chamber, the Buddhist leader said the historical emphasis on physical strength was now being superseded by an emphasis on mental powers - a development which would give the advantage to women and which he welcomed since women were "more feeling and more sensitive".
Tibet
Turning to his other major concern, the fate of Tibet, the Dalai Lama reiterated his well-known position that he sought not independence but general autonomy for Tibet within the People's Republic of China, and also that he was committed to non-violence in pursuing that goal. The Chinese constitution, he pointed out, specifically mentions minority rights.
Indeed, his approach was best for China itself, argued the Tibetan spiritual leader, since "general harmony and unity can only come through trust and mutual respect".
He also asked the European Union to play a role, saying that while it should keep close to China, nevertheless - to quote a Tibetan saying - "if you are a true friend you will make clear your friend's faults".
The Dalai Lama concluded by thanking the EP Tibet Intergroup for its support and said he was joining their 24 hour fast in support of the Tibetan people.
20081203IPR43683 Briefing article + related links audio, 22:39 - Dalai Lama - OR audio, 22:39 - - Dalai Lama - EN Dalai Lama - Speech - 4.12.08
EN
1
PHOTO
20081120PHT42652.jpg
EN
3
MULTIMEDIA
20081204MLT43776.asf
EN
4
MULTIMEDIA
20081204MLT43773.asf
EN
5
MULTIMEDIA
20081201MLT43325.pdf
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081113BRI41902 ITEM-002-EN NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
