"Monsieur Europe" Jouyet concludes 6 months of an untraditional Presidency
Institutions
2008-12-10 - 17:09
54-year old Jean-Pierre Jouyet has been France's face in Parliament French EU affairs minister Jean-Pierre Jouyet has been the face of the French presidency in Parliament over the last six month, fielding MEPs questions and remarks, be they on Georgia, climate change or the financial crisis. He has done so in a way that he himself describes as not “traditionally French” and has won plaudits from MEPs. As he prepares to quit his post in the French cabinet, we asked him to take stock of the French EU Council Presidency and his experience with the Parliament.
Mr Jouyet, what would you like people to remember from the French Presidency of the European Union over the last 6 months? A Presidency that was active and reactive in the management of international crises - such as Georgia or the economic and financial crisis. Also it was a Presidency not in the French tradition in that it very much listened to the EU institutions. President Sarkozy will in total have come three times to the European Parliament, and each time, he spent much time and effort listening to parliamentarians. The third element is that we tried to ensure that it is a citizen Presidency...we've tried to bring to the agenda themes of citizenship, such as increased mobility for young people.
Are there cases where the Union has advanced more than you'd hoped, or others for which you expected more progress? It was more advanced than what we could have hoped regarding foreign policy and security policy. The conflict between Russia and Georgia and the fact that 27 states were able to resolve a conflict and propose a peace plan was good. Europe has been able to assert itself in this issue.
The second aspect is that the Union was able be innovative in its working methods in dealing with the economic and financial crisis. What do we regret is the delay in the implementation of the Treaty of Lisbon. We did not expect the Irish accident. We also regret that there remains a problem of communication for the European Union in relationship to its citizens. What impact has the financial crisis on projects of the French Presidency and its plans? I believe that the priorities we have had will be nearly met. The climate issue remains for the European Council of 11 and 12 December the most difficult issue. Over 90% of it has been agreed but as always, the remaining 10% will be the most difficult. Other priorities - defence, food, agriculture, immigration and asylum - we are likely to be satisfied with what we will have. So the financial crisis has meant more work but has not disrupted the schedule of priorities of the French Presidency. What moments of the six months of cooperation with the EP will you remember? I think the President Sarkozy has had moments for everyone in terms of relations between President of the Council and the Parliament More personally, I had many debates in Parliament that were very memorable: on AIDS, for example, since there was a lot of emotion. I also had a lot of contact with the Parliament in the preparation of the Presidency. Listening to Members and meetings with the presidents of the groups were my best moments, every time.
The European Parliament was the institution that I knew the least but is the one in which I feel closer today.
There was also the accident of the collapse of the ceiling in Strasbourg ... I remember it well! If you look towards the future, what in your opinion be the European themes that will make the "A" after the European elections of 2009? I think the institutional issue will be very strongly on the agenda because we will see what our Irish friends will do. But whatever the result, the institutional issue will be put back on the scene. Unfortunately, the treatment of the economic crisis will be at the centre of European priorities. How Europe can keep its dynamism and its social model, while keeping to the rules and rebuilding its economy and restoring confidence to investors, consumers and savers will be a key issue. Another point in early January will be how to forge relations with the new Obama Administration The last point is the challenge of climate change - which will remain on the front of the European scene as the second half of 2009 will be devoted to the Copenhagen conference. Parting shot...
Jean-Pierre Jouyet will leave his post within the French government this week after being appointed to head France's financial markets authority.
20081209STO44053 MEPs and Ministers French Presidency website Mr Jouyet's blog (French) Sarkozy to the European Parliament: "Europe cannot be condemned to inaction" Jouyet profile (French)
EN
1
PHOTO
20081209PHT44030.jpg
EN
3
LINK
http://www.eu2008.fr/PFUE/lang/en/accueil
EN
4
LINK
http://www.jpjouyet.eu/
EN
6
LINK
http://www.diplomatie.gouv.fr/fr/ministere_817/ministre-les-secretaires-etat_818/jean-pierre-jouyet_16629/m.-jean-pierre-jouyet-secretaire-etat-charge-affaires-europeennes_53814.html
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20070130STO02570 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080709IPR33856 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
