European Parliament President Hans-Gert Pöttering welcomes results of the European Council
Institutions
2008-12-12 - 18:03
The President of the European Parliament, Hans-Gert Pöttering, welcomed the agreement on the Lisbon Treaty between Member States and decisions on the €200 billion stimulus package. The President also made clear that the final word on the climate and energy package has not yet been given as it is subject to a vote in the European Parliament in Strasbourg next week.
After the conclusion of the summit the President made the following comment:
"I appreciate the work which has been done over the last two days by the Heads of State and Government on issues of highest importance for the European Union today and in the future. These are important steps in strengthening the European Union so that it can effectively defend our values and interests.
European solidarity prevailed and a solution was found which addresses the concerns of the Irish people on the Lisbon Treaty as set out by Taoiseach Brian Cowen, but which is acceptable to all 27 Member States, as well as the European Commission and the European Parliament.
The commitment of the Irish Government to seek ratification of the Lisbon Treaty by the end of 2009 gives us a clear plan for moving forward. A date for a second referendum is of course a matter for the Irish. However, Ireland's partners in the European Union have shown tremendous good will in dealing with sensitive socio-ethical issues such as the right to life, family and education; as well as safeguards on neutrality, workers rights, public services and taxation.
On another vital issue, the stimulus package for the European economy, I welcome the agreement. It gives hope for the various sectors of the European economy to receive a helping hand in dealing with the current economic challenges. This should be an important contribution to saving jobs of ordinary Europeans.
On the issue of climate change, I would like to underline that the agreement in the Council is not yet the final say. The European Parliament is a co-legislator in this matter. Next week in Strasbourg we are due to vote on this important package once we find an agreement with the Council. For the European Parliament it is a priority that the European Union show strong leadership in the quest to combat climate change. If we succeed in this key task it will be a great legacy that we leave for the generations to come".
20081212IPR44455 President's web pages
EN
1
LINK
/president/defaulten.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
