Highlights of December II plenary in Strasbourg
Institutions
2008-12-15 - 17:29
The highlights of the Strasbourg European Parliament plenary session 15-18 December are set out below, full details can be found in the Briefing (see link below):
President Sarkozy to report to MEPs on outcome of the 11-12 December European Council summit
Climate change and energy package 20 20 20 by 2020
Working Time Directive: MEPs to vote on opt-out
Sakharov Prize for freedom of thought: 20th anniversary and 2008 winner Chinese political activist Hu Jia
A new directive to improve the safety of toys just before the festive season
Traffic offences: effective cross-border enforcement
Budget 2009: Budgets Committee backs deal with Council but restates EP priorities
President Sarkozy to report to MEPs on outcome of the 11-12 December European Council summit On Tuesday 16 December, at 10am, the House will debate the outcome of the European Council of 11 and 12 December after hearing statements from French President and President-in-Office of the EU Council, Nicolas Sarkozy and Commission President José Manuel Barroso. Parliament will also debate the work of the French Presidency over the last six months. The three main topics being address at this key summit are: the economic crisis, the Lisbon treaty and the climate and energy package. EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering will address the Heads of State and government at the December summit. Climate change and energy package 20 20 20 by 2020 MEPs will debate the climate change and energy package. At the time of publication, agreement between Council and Parliament has been reached on CO2 emissions from cars (Sacconi report), monitoring and reduction of greenhouse gas emissions from fuels (Corbey report) and on the Renewables Directive (Turmes report). The overarching aims are to reduce EU greenhouse gases by 20%, to reach 20% of renewable energy and increase energy efficiency all by 20% by 2020. Cleaning up heavy vehicle exhaust emissions: new Euro VI standards Proposed tougher limits on harmful exhaust emissions from trucks, lorries and buses, including ozone precursors such as nitrogen oxides and hydrocarbons as well as particles were backed in a compromise adopted between Parliament and Council representatives. If the Plenary adopts this compromise, the new "Euro VI" regulation emission limits will apply de facto from 1 January 2014 for new vehicles, nine months earlier than the Commission proposed. Working Time Directive: MEPs to vote on opt-out Parliament will vote at second reading on the working time directive. The directive is being revised in order to strike a balance between protecting workers and the flexible organisation of work, and to take account of rulings by the European Court of Justice. The 1993 directive on the organisation of working time lays down basic principles concerning maximum weekly working hours, daily rest time, breaks, weekly rest time, annual holidays and the duration of night work. It also lists various derogations that Member States may allow for certain categories of worker (for example senior executives) or certain sectors. European Works Council - better information and consultation for workers Members of the Employment and Social Affairs Committee are proposing amendments to the recast directive on the European works councils, which was unveiled by the European Commission in July as part of the new social agenda. Around 820 European works councils are currently operating, representing some 14.5 million workers. Parliament and Council have agreed a first-reading agreement on this topic. The updates to Directive 94/45/EC proposed by the Commission are designed to tighten up the definitions of information and consultation of workers, define the powers of European works councils, require employees' representatives to report to the employees they represent and enable them to receive the training they require without loss of wages. EU credit system for vocational training to ease cross-border mobility The planned European Credit System for Vocational Education and Training (ECVET) will help ease cross-border mobility of workers and create transparency for professional qualifications gained abroad, says the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs. However, participating in the initiative should be voluntary and "variations between national qualifications must not be erased". Sakharov Prize for freedom of thought: 20th anniversary and 2008 winner Chinese political activist Hu Jia This year's Sakharov Prize ceremonies in Strasbourg have a dual character. To celebrate the 20th anniversary of the award Parliament has invited a number of former winners of the Prize to Strasbourg. However, the winner of the Prize for 2008, Chinese dissident Hu Jia , will be unable to receive his award as he is imprisoned in China. Instead, a special ceremony will be held in Parliament's Plenary Chamber in his honour. A new directive to improve the safety of toys just before the festive season The European Parliament and Council have reached agreement on legislation to aimed at making toys safer which will be debated and voted on in Strasbourg just before the festive season. The new legislation will beef up safety regulations and ban the use of certain chemicals and heavy metals. The report on the safety of toys, drafted by Marianne Thyssen (EPP-ED, BE) aims to strengthen and update the rules on toy safety. The existing directive has given good service but needs replacing. Traffic offences: effective cross-border enforcement At present, drivers committing an offence under the Highway Code in a Member State other than their own often avoid paying the penalty imposed on local drivers. The Transport Committee recommends approving legislation to ensure that drivers will be able to be identified and fined for offences they commit anywhere in the EU. Speeding, drink-driving, not wearing a seat belt and failing to stop at a red light will all be covered by the proposal. Budget 2009: Budgets Committee backs deal with Council but restates EP priorities Parliament's Budgets Committee is proposing its second reading on the draft EU budget for 2009. MEPs endorse the agreement concluded with the Council on the level of payments (€116.1 billion) while increasing some expenditure on the EP's priorities (growth, cohesion, employment) above the level of the preliminary draft budget. The agreement on the "food facility" for developing countries was also approved. Too many violations of fundamental rights in the EU, says the Civil Liberties Committee MEPs in the Civil Liberties Committee express their concern over the "high number of fundamental rights violations in the EU", pointing to instances of serious discrimination against minorities and threats to privacy. They also urge EU Institutions and Member States to cooperate in the field of immigration and asylum. The vote on this report will take place in January 2009. In a report drafted by Giusto CATANIA (GUE/NGL, IT), the committee proposes its overview of the situation of fundamental rights in the EU. A previous report on this issue was rejected by the plenary session in 2004 and the committee has aimed for a broad compromise. European area of freedom, security and justice (FSJA) - questions to Council At the end of 2009 the European Council should adopt the new multiannual programme for the FSJA. Ten years after Tampere, the European Union ‘acquis’ is now substantial, even if its overall balance seems to be more oriented to cooperation between administrations, especially in security matters, than to the protection and promotion at European level of citizens’ fundamental rights. Bearing this in mind, Gérard DEPREZ (ALDE, BE), on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs will be asking the Council questions on progress in 2008 of the European area of freedom, security and justice (FSJA) Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee recommends approving increase in bank deposit guarantee The committee is proposing a report by Christian EHLER (EPP-ED, DE), which, if approved by Parliament in plenary session, would amend existing legislation on deposit guarantee schemes and raise the guarantee level in the event of deposits being unavailable. The report also modifies the deadline for payouts and proposes setting up an emergency fund. Reducing administrative burden for EU's mid-sized companies Aimed at reducing administrative burden for EU companies, the Commission is proposing legislative measures in the areas of company law, accounting and auditing as part of a second fast track package. Ieke van den BURG (PSE, NL) will be tabling a report, on behalf of the Legal Affairs Committee, which introduces five amendments to the Commission proposal. Financial services rules: clearing and settlement and credit claims MEPs are to vote on proposals to update European rules relating to two aspects of the “plumbing” of the financial system: the aim, on the one hand, is to reflect in law the increasingly interconnected operation of clearing and settlement systems, and, on the other hand, to create a level playing field for central banks in Europe regarding the rules on accepting credit claims (receivable assets resulting from bank loans) as collateral from commercial banks. New employment and payment system for MEPs' assistants The Legal Affairs committee endorses legislation to add-on contracts of Brussels-based MEPs' assistants to the statute for European civil servants. This new scheme, of which the outlines were set out by the European Parliament in July, is part of a larger package of measures taken by the Parliament to overhaul the entire system of employing and paying MEPs' assistants. The proposal is due for a vote in Parliament's plenary in December in Strasbourg. Operational solidarity between Member States essential in the fight against illegal immigration, say MEPs All Member States should meet their obligations with regard to the fight against illegal immigration, and should make available the material and human resources to enable FRONTEX, the agency responsible for managing operational cooperation at the external borders of the EU, to "function effectively", says Javier Moreno SÁNCHEZ on behalf of the Civil Liberties Committee. The Committee's own-initiative report on the evaluation and future development of the FRONTEX agency and of the European Border Surveillance System (EUROSUR) considers the agency to be an "essential instrument" in the EU's global strategy on immigration and calls on the Commission to "present proposals to review the mandate of the Agency in order to strengthen its role and make it more effective". e-Justice portals give citizens and businesses improved access to justice e-Justice portals should be created to provide citizens and businesses with improved access to justice, says the Committee on Legal Affairs. In its own-initiative report, the Committee calls on the European Commission to put forward a legislative proposal on e-Justice that would not only improve access to justice, but would facilitate a cross-border judicial system and contribute to an efficient single market. The report, drafted by Diana WALLIS (ALDE, UK), recommends the creation of two separate e-Justice portals - one would be the European e-Justice portal for citizens, and the other would be a secure system designed specifically for judicial authorities. Fighting counterfeited goods is a priority, says the International Trade Committee To fight the burgeoning counterfeiting market, worth approximately €500, the Committee on International Trade is calling for specialised anti-counterfeiting teams to be set up in Member States. The business sector also has an important role in raising consumer awareness of the consequences of buying counterfeit goods, say MEPs, goods which are no longer confined to luxury and high-quality goods but also include commonly used products such as toys, medicines, cosmetics and food. MEPs question the Commission on counterfeit goods just before the festive season Counterfeiting and piracy have developed at an increasing rate in recent years. In 2007, customs registered over 43 000 cases of fake goods seized at the EU's external border, compared to 37 000 in 2006, an increase of almost 17%. Counterfeiting is increasingly about fake medicines, fake food products, fake cosmetics, fake toys and fake electronic equipment. In addition to the serious economic damage to businesses in the internal market, these products can cause serious harm to consumers. Arlene McCARTHY (PES, UK), on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection will be asking the Commission questions on consumer protection aspects of counterfeiting. Building a genuine and transparent EU arms market The European Union should create a genuine single market for defence equipment. This is the aim of a directive on the transfer of defence-related products. MEPs and Council have reached a first-reading deal on this. Reducing the bureaucratic burden on small and innovative regional development projects The report recommends that Parliament give its assent to a Commission proposal to revise Council Regulation 1083/2006 Article 55 (EU contributions to "revenue-generating" projects), so as to reduce the bureaucratic burden on small projects co-funded by the European Social fund (ESF), the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF) or the Cohesion Fund, facilitate more innovative projects, especially in the environmental, social, energy and research fields, and accelerate funding decisions. Measures to enhance the role of the European Judicial Network The European Judicial Network, set up in 2002 to simplify judicial co-operation between Member States and facilitate citizens' access to justice in litigation with cross-border impact, is still far from achieving its full potential. A report drafted by Ona JUKNEVIČIENĖ (ALDE, LT) on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs, introduces 17 amendments to the Commission proposal aimed at enhancing the role of the Network. Human rights in the world As usual the session ends with three debates and votes on human rights issues in the world, on this occasion the topics are: Zimbabwe, Nicaragua and Russia: aggression against human rights defenders and the trial on the murder of Anna Politkovskaya.
20081212IPR44327 Briefing - 15-18 December 2008 - Strasbourg plenary session Final draft agenda - 15-18 December 2008 Watch the plenary live on-line
EN
2
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?reference=2008-12-2&language=EN
EN
3
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/faces/live/live-video.jsp?language=en
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081208BRI43933 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
