MEPs debate the French Presidency with President Sarkozy
European Council
2008-12-16 - 13:14
Sarkozy: Europe is not the enemy of nations, nations are not the enemy of Europe MEPs in Strasbourg debated the six-month French Presidency of the EU which comes to an end on 31 December. Many group leaders welcomed President Sarkozy's and the French government's swift and successful reaction to events in Georgia, and the rapid reaction to the economic and financial crises. Other political group leaders criticised the French Presidency for backing down on the climate change package and for pushing forward with the Lisbon ratification despite the initial No in Ireland.
Introducing President Sarkozy , EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering said: "You took over the EU Presidency at a time that needed action and negotiations, and you took on the challenges of Georgia, the financial crisis, the European economy and other problems."
Sarkozy: "Europe is not the enemy of nations and nations are not the enemy of Europe"
In a wide-ranging review of the work done under the French presidency of the EU over the last six months, President Nicolas Sarkozy told the House that France had sought to organise the work of its presidency on the basis of "two convictions: that the world needs a strong Europe and that Europe cannot be strong if it is not united". A strong Europe was one that "rejects consensus based on pushing problems to one side".
Georgia
Turning to the many challenges faced during his government's tenure of the EU presidency, Mr Sarkozy spoke first of the Georgian crisis, where his main aim had been "to stop the war and not fall into the same trap as in Bosnia", where the USA had taken the lead and Europe followed. It had been a "real obsession" of France's presidency that Europe should "take responsibility" over Georgia and fortunately Europe had remained united over the issue.
Financial crisis
In the global financial crisis, too, unity had been crucial and a European recovery plan had been agreed. If Europe's countries and institutions had not taken responsibility, this would have led to "the destruction of the European banking system". Arguing that "we in Europe want entrepreneurial capitalism not speculative capitalism" and that "we have said this with one voice", he added "our economies and our political cultures are not the same but we all agreed in the end".
Mediterranean Union
The Mediterranean Union was another project where compromise had proved crucial, and would provide a way to ensure that Europe plays a part in the Middle East. The EU, he believed, "must cease to be just a fund provider and must have a say in the peace process".
Climate change and energy
Mr Sarkozy told the House that "we had an enormous fight" about climate change and energy because "each Member State had reason for dissatisfaction". Here too, compromises had been accepted. Unanimity had been important to ensure that any deal would be implemented and he added that "the European Parliament's determination to get an agreement was a powerful factor in securing a deal" among the governments.
Immigration, defence
Negotiation and compromise over migration policy had been essential since most EU countries are in the Schengen area and Mr Sarkozy was glad that "now we have the foundations for a common immigration policy". Similarly, on defence, he said, referring to next year's NATO summit, "the 27 must understand that European security and defence policy is complementary to NATO".
Lastly, turning to the "constitutional question", he pointed out that the Czech constitutional court had just indicated that the Lisbon Treaty ratification process could go ahead. This left Ireland. He emphasised that as part of a compromise every country would have a Commissioner and Ireland would have guarantees for its neutrality, fiscal independence and family law. He hoped for a positive result from a fresh referendum by the end of 2009.
It's easier for Europe to have big ambitions than small ones
In conclusion, Mr Sarkozy said Europe required an understanding between different nations, though he stressed he was not an integrationist but he was determined to preserve the nation state. Nevertheless, "however European you are, Europe is not the enemy of the nations and the nations are not the enemy of Europe". Above all, he believed "it is easier for Europe to have big ambitions than small ones, because only big projects have the power to overcome national egos".
European Commission President
President of the European Commission José Manuel BARROSO said: "The balance sheet of the last EU summit will go down in history - rarely has Europe been able to express its satisfaction at so many positive results". And he welcomed the essential partnership between the Parliament, Council and Commission, which meant that we can now speak of a 'new era' in Europe. With tomorrow's vote on the climate change package, "the European Parliament holds the last key to the last door enabling a Europe of the 21st century to start working".
With the climate change initiatives, Europe will be the first to accept legally binding rules by 2020 and we will be strengthening these limits as agreement is reached globally. We can now turn to our friends in America and say to them: " Yes, you can!"
Mr Barroso also gave an insight into some of the measures that lie ahead . He spoke of advance payments being made available so that Member States would have early access to €1.9bn; h e spoke of €5bn for 2009-2010 to be re-allocated to Trans-European Energy networks, broadband infrastructure projects and energy efficiency ; and on state aid, while announcing an extension of exemptions on state aid rules, he insisted that this should not be used as a pretext for suspending competition rules and reiterated the need for keeping internal market rules if a European response to the crisis was to be maintained.
Political group speakers
For the EPP-ED group, Chairman Joseph Daul (FR) saluted the French Presidency's efforts, which he said, had helped to win worldwide respect for Europe's policies on climate change and immigration, and its co-ordinated response to the financial crisis.
The Presidency's sang-froid and pragmatism illustrate the centre-right philosophy that guided the joint responses of Council, Commission and Parliament to the financial crisis, brought about co-ordinated protection for savers' deposits and recapitalisation for banks, and thus prevented a chain reaction in which thousands of jobs could have been lost, he continued, stressing that it is the social market economy that guarantees balance between management and the workforce.
Mr Daul also paid tribute to the Presidency for the outcome of the climate change negotiations - this complex agreement among 27 Member States would protect both the environment and jobs he said, adding that the EU must now lead the worldwide fight against climate change, press the worst polluters to act, and seek tangible commitments from President Obama.
The Union needs more political stability and more effective decision-taking and the Lisbon Treaty offers "the tools to finish the job", he concluded.
"You changed Europe, but Europe has changed you, too" said PES Chairman Martin Schulz (DE) to Mr Sarkozy, whom, he added, had "come out of the closet, as a pro-European".
The Presidency had been "quite good" overall, said Mr Schulz, noting that the climate change package in particular had been a "huge success", on which Parliament's rapporteurs, with just 3-5 workers each (compared to the "Commission's 22,000", had done a "top notch" job. As social democrats, "we sought a balance between economic necessity and ecological obligation", he said.
The Presidency also "did well" on the financial crisis, he said, noting that Mr Sarkozy had reacted, albeit "somewhat late" to the time-bomb of social imbalances in Europe.
"We still don't have the Lisbon Treaty, and what you have decided will not help, unless an Irish leader points out to the people that the response to the financial crisis has been a European success", said Mr Schulz, thanking the French Presidency for helping Europe to "make progress".
The Presidency had some a "fairy tale" qualities, noted Graham Watson (ALDE, UK) for the Liberal Democrats, citing inter alia its riding to the rescue of "our lady of Georgia" and welcoming the "Cinderella of London" to the ball.
The Presidency had not chosen its challenges, but had tackled them with energy, enthusiasm and creativity, he said, praising its efforts to restore market confidence, and parry protectionism. The "concessions" agreed on state aid and public procurement are reasonable, if taken with the Presidency's commitment to accompany them with Lisbon Strategy structural reforms, he added.
Liberal Democrats urge the Council to cut VAT now on energy saving and renewable energy equipment, so as to help industry and the environment. They also welcome the renewed commitment to sustainable public finances and a rapid return to medium-term budgetary targets , he said, adding that " o ur response to the recession must be based on solidarity and sound economics".
The Presidency appears to have found a practical answer to Ireland’s worries about the new treaty - it may not be elegant, but it is worthy of Henry IV: "Si Paris valait une messe, Dublin vaut un commissaire", he said.
On climate change, "a blizzard of corporate concessions has been written into the Council conclusions", and "cap and trade emissions permits will be given away when they should have been auctioned". Derogations like these will "push down the cost of carbon, cut the cash raised and makes the emission targets harder to hit", said Mr Watson, who nonetheless welcomed the agreements on energy saving, earmarking half the revenues from emissions to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and on carbon capture and storage.
Daniel Cohn-Bendit for the Greens/EFA said: "Presidents - Yes we do acknowledge your desire to move forward. Yes you want Europe to progress, Nicolas the first came in 2008 to the parliament; that unanimity kills democracy. We were astounded. You reduce the parliament to a kind of government Viagra. That is not our role. Nobody has said they want a Europe that is against the nations. We represent the peoples in this house and if you come to get the Lisbon Treaty ratified, then unanimity kills democracy. Mrs Merkel was here when she stood down and just heeded the German interests and not European. We won't accept any blackmail; yes I think the first reading is blackmail.
Mr Obama will say to you, no you cannot! The recovery plan is not sufficient, there is not enough money going with it. Our policy to China was that we shouldn't humiliate the Chinese, but I say that they walked all over you! I'm proud we haven't bowed under the Chinese for every day them trample human rights. We're saying no, it has to be spelt out No."
Cristiana Muscardini UEN said "We are the union for the Europe as nations- look at the ability to steer us through the economic crisis, look we have given support to a presidency which has repositioned Europe at the centre of the world debate. We must look at our institutions. Crises cannot be solved by the central banks. The climate package has been a major success; we must go down this road to peace and prosperity particular in the Mediterranean. We talk about equal treatment by means of the pension age; we need to look at wage equality before we go any further. You said this crisis is a systemic crisis, so we are with you to get reforms of the system. We must make sure that manufacturing is more important than plastic. "
Francis Wurtz GUE/NGL said "We will stand by this French presidency. We will remember it because of the seriousness of the events of this half year. Yet we see policies creeping in which we do not need. We need to underscore the importance for the EU that there is a compromise that has been reached between the 27. This is not a historic agreement. Does it risk in letting the big players off the hook for damage to the environment? Only a small share of Europe's emissions will be tackled outside of the Union. If this model becomes the general model then we will miss some of the clear objectives that the scientific and world community has set.
I think to mind this is counter productive where consumption is falling and jobs are being cut, where social worries are now rising to the surface, so it is recovery for who? One state increases purchasing power and the other does not. Why is there not systematic control so there is a fair management of resources so we can create useful jobs for society?
My group will not be congratulating the pressure used by the council on the Irish people. You cannot treat them this way. You have to listen to them and understand them. When things are on the table you have to deal with them."
For the IND/DEM group, Nigel Farage (UK) complimented the French presidency on its "energy and dynamism" but was unhappy that its goal was "more power for the Union". He then complained of what he described as "an appalling attack on President Klaus" by Green group leader Daniel Cohn-Bendit at the recent meeting in Prague of EP political group leaders with the president of the Czech Republic ahead of that country's assumption of the EU presidency in January. In particular he accused Mr Cohn-Bendit of behaving like "a thug and a bully" towards Mr Klaus and said "Danny the libertarian is now Danny the authoritarian".
Bruno Gollnisch (NA, FR ) for the non-aligned MEPs, believed the current financial crisis showed the Union is "not fit for purpose", since solutions would have been best found at national or at global level. The energy and climate change package had been "emasculated", and the EU immigration legislation had been undermined by Italy's action in granting a mass regularisation of immigrants "when the ink was barely dry". On Lisbon Treaty, Mr Gollnisch felt we were witnessing a form of "servitude" of the people, with the same question being put time and again until the right result was obtained.
British and Irish speakers
Timothy Kirkhope (PPE-DE, UK) acknowledged the role that President Sarkozy has played during his time as President of the Council. Mr Kirkhope believed that the EU should continue to take a lead in relation to climate matters. The British economy, he said, is heading for probably the longest and deepest recession of all the major EU economies, and the British Prime Minister has lost any claim to fiscal prudence and sound economic management.. Concluding, he congratulated President Sarkozy on his six months in office and he hoped that the next six months will be good for the people of Europe.
On the economy, Ian Hudghton (Greens/EFA, UK) noted that Mr Sarkozy acknowledged that Ireland was first to support its banks, and now the whole of the European Union is following – more accurate I think than Gordon Brown’s recent slip-of-the-tongue statement that he, in fact, had saved the world single-handedly.
Mr Hudghton thanked the Irish Government for once again demonstrating how influential small Member States can be in the European Union. He also thanked the Irish people too for ‘interrupting’, as President Sarkozy put it, the Lisbon ratification process. "The assurances given to Ireland will help my country, Scotland, too, by underlining that there is fiscal independence in Europe and that we could nominate a Commissioner as an independent Member State." Quoting Mr Sarkozy who said "we cannot have a strong Europe if Europe is not united" let us remember that unity in diversity is not just a slogan but something we must aspire too: we must not lose sight of that which makes us proud to be Scottish, Welsh, Irish, French, Czech, whatever, as well as citizens – not subjects – of the European Union.
Brian Crowley (UEN, IE) congratulated President Sarkozy on his efforts and not just with regard to Ireland. We, he said, greatly appreciate the compromise that has been reached to allow for a second decision from the Irish people with regard to the Lisbon Treaty.
In relation to what Mr Crowley was attributed to saying in Prague, "I never mentioned my father, according to the transcript that President Klaus released. Secondly, I never said that the Irish wished for Europe. I said that it is up to the Irish people to determine what will happen with the Lisbon Treaty. As move forward, in the light of our experience over the last six months in particular, I think that what is really needed is a Europe that cooperates, coordinates and works together to achieve common goals with a basis of understanding and tolerance for the differing opinions and the different economic cycles which take place within the European Parliament."
Stating that Ireland should be in the European Union, Bairbre De Brún (GUE/NGL, UK) said cooperation with our European colleagues is extremely valuable. But the manner in which the 'No' vote in Ireland was dealt with is not creating goodwill. It could even add to the stand against the EU, and not only in Ireland. The Council, she said, did not address the main concerns of the Irish people have in relation to the militarisation of the EU, the rights of works and public services. And the gap between the leaders of the Union and its citizens is becoming deeper as a result of the response to the 'No' vote in Ireland in other places. She warned that fear and false projections will have primary place in the re-run of the referendum. In relation to the Conclusions of the Council concerning the energy and climate change package, she said it is extremely important that legislation will exist with legally-binding objectives.
Kathy Sinnott (IND/DEM, IE) said a a poll two weeks ago showed that an overwhelming number of voters do not want a second referendum. They have made their decision and it makes no sense to them to continue the debate in the middle of a global economic meltdown. They are concerned with unemployment and with budget cuts that are affecting the most vulnerable. They feel alone in these problems, with their leaders chasing the Lisbon phantom. It is, she said, especially annoying because the issues that brought about the ‘no’ vote, starting with the lack of democracy in the Treaty itself, have not been addressed; rather we have been told that the Treaty will remain unchanged and that what is offered is cosmetic. We are an island nation, she said, yet our fish and fishing industry are vanishing. Pro-life people remain concerned about the destruction of embryos in research funded by the EU. In voting ‘no’ voters voted to protect their jobs, their farms, their families and their constitution. "You talk about uniting Europe, but I put to you that what should unite us is democracy and what divides us is Lisbon."
Andrew Duff (ALDE, UK) said that the package on the Treaty should be sufficient to persuade the Irish to change their minds. Mr Duff suspected that that Mr Sarkozy would describe himself, following this experience of the financial crisis, as a Keynesian. In the absence of a prudent stimulus to productive employment from Germany, he thought that there cannot be a sure recovery from the economic recession.
Marian Harkin (ALDE, IE) said that subject to satisfactory conclusions, the Irish Government will run a second referendum, and that is the essence of democracy: politicians working to produce a solution and then asking the people for their consent. However, she warned that we must not, again, underestimate the forces at play here. We must, she said, pay very careful attention to those who are trying to influence the outcome and those who are funding part of the ‘no’ campaign. We must fully understand that some on the ‘no’ side, who profess to be pro-European, want to see an unravelling of the EU and its institutions. Ireland was and will be a battleground for the heart and soul of Europe. That is what is at stake – nothing less – and it is worth our every cooperation, our every commitment and our every effort. "To those, like Nigel Farage, who lecture us on democracy and others who say that the people of Europe, given a chance in a direct vote, would say ‘no’ to Lisbon, I want to say: you have neglected to check the facts and figures. The results from five direct votes – four on the Constitution and one on Lisbon – have yielded 27 million EU citizens voting ‘yes’ and 23 million voting ‘no’, so the majority of EU citizens who have voted directly have voted ‘yes’."
For Colm Burke (EPP-ED, IE) the key point was the concerns expressed during the Lisbon referendum in relation to taxation, military neutrality and abortion were largely based on misinformation. The reality is that these issues are either unaffected by the Lisbon Treaty or have protocols already attached safeguarding Ireland’s position. For example, Protocol 35 to the present Lisbon Treaty protects Ireland’s stance on abortion. There must, he said, be a meaningful engagement with the Irish people to rebuild understanding of, and support for, the European process. Voter research after the referendum revealed a very low level of public understanding of the role and functions of the European Union. This disengagement is a major challenge for both the European Union itself and for the national political system and should not be under-estimated again by the Irish Government. He proposed a constitutional change to allow future international treaties to be referred to the Irish Supreme Court when they are agreed, to establish which provisions should be put to the Irish people. Such a mechanism would tease out the issues in need of debate in Ireland, would let the Irish electorate have their say and would finally allow Ireland to ratify the spirit of such treaties overall without stalling progress for other concerned parties. He also proposed the establishment of a new constitutional office of European Union citizens’ officer. The appointee would act as an independent advisory officer on all aspects of EU legislation, including its transposition into Irish law. This individual would be responsible for providing impartial information on the facts about European issues, including when conflicting arguments arise.
Richard Corbett (PES, IE) was surprised that the other Member States conceded so quickly to reverting to the size of the Commission that will be one Commissioner per country. This shows the willingness of other Member States to move to meet the concerns that were expressed in the Irish 'No' campaign and the Irish ‘No’ vote. This is not an attempt to ignore the ‘No’ vote. It is an attempt to respond to the ‘No’ vote, to move to meet half way and to try and find a solution that is acceptable to all 27 countries. In this Union, he said, when there is a divergence like that, we try to bridge the gap. The other Member States have shown their willingness to move to meet Irish concerns. Mr Corbett hoped that will be sufficient to enable a positive result in a new referendum to be held next year, when it is up to the Irish people to make their choice.
Proinsias De Rossa (PES, IE). welcomed the decisions on the Lisbon Treaty by the European Council. Unsurprisingly, the Europhobic ‘no’ campaigners continue to prattle on with their threadbare arguments reflected here today by Ms de Brún, Ms Sinnott and Mr Farage. The right of each Member State to nominate a Commissioner has been secured; the guarantees have been negotiated to address other concerns, the content and nature of which have still to be negotiated. Workers’ rights issues arising from the Laval and other judgments must be comprehensively addressed. But these ECJ judgments are based on the Posting of Workers Directive, not the Lisbon Treaty, and it is that directive that needs not only to be amended but also implemented by the Member States comprehensively.
The content of the guarantees have to satisfy the broad majority of Irish and European citizenship. They must not be used to freeze social progress in Ireland or Europe or to deny any of us the benefits of the Charter of Fundamental Rights. This Parliament, and indeed all politicians in Ireland, have a responsibility to participate in shaping the content of those guarantees and to ensure that the conclusions are not regressive.
What we have learned, Gary Titley (PES, UK) said is that Europe stands or falls together. He welcomed the dynamic leadership we have had, "in contrast with Mr Kirkhope’s party, whose members, like rabbits paralysed in the headlights, think that doing nothing is the only solution to our great crisis." He emphasised the of Europe working with the new American administration in January, so that we have a united front to the great challenges such as climate change and the financial crisis.
To those Member States which had doubts about aspects of what we were seeking, Avril Doyle (EPP-ED, IE ) " I thank you for making the effort to accommodate us with a Commissioner all round and legal guarantees on taxation, neutrality, the right to life, education and the family. There will still be those who will continue to argue against a second referendum. But the majority of the Irish continue to acknowledge and fully appreciate our EU membership, particularly at this time of unprecedented global economic difficulty, when marginalisation and loss of influence cannot be an option for us and when unfettered access to the single market of 500 million consumers is critical for Irish exports – including our delicious pig meat by the way – so we can trade our way out of growth."
The problem for Ireland, Mairead McGuinness (PPE-DE, IE) said is not so much the contents of the Treaty – we know that from the first vote – it is in dealing with the issues that people have concerns about, and the Council has done that. It rests, therefore, she said, on those of us who fully back the Treaty and the legal arrangements, which we hope will be in place, to canvas widely for the values that are in the Treaty and to divide the issues of national concern from those at European level. It will be a tough job but, with the support of this House, it can be done, she concluded.
20081216IPR44608 BRUSSELS EUROPEAN COUNCIL 11 / 12 DECEMBER 2008 PRESIDENCY CONCLUSIONS audio, 35:45 - Council statement (French President Nicolas Sarkozy) - EN audio, 38:19 - - Extracts from the plenary 16/12/2008 - Political group leaders - EN audio, 43:49 - - EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering and French President Nicolas Sarkozy - EN
EN
1
PHOTO
20081216PHT44769.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.consilium.europa.eu/ueDocs/cms_Data/docs/pressData/en/ec/104692.pdf
EN
3
MULTIMEDIA
20081216MLT44637.asf
EN
4
MULTIMEDIA
20081216MLT44745.asf
EN
5
MULTIMEDIA
20081216MLT44996.asf
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
