New employment and payment system for MEPs' assistants
Institutions
2008-12-16 - 10:40
The European Parliament endorsed legislation to add-on contracts of Brussels-based MEPs' assistants to the statute for European civil servants. This new scheme, of which the outlines were set out by the European Parliament in July, is part of a larger package of measures taken by the Parliament to overhaul the entire system of employing and paying MEPs' assistants.
The report, drafted by Giuseppe Gargani (EPP-ED, IT), was adopted by 598 votes in favour, 19 against and 47 abstentions. It aims at ensuring transparency and non-discrimination through a set of common rules on the system for hiring MEPs' assistants. The new regulation, once approved by the Council, will replace 27 different national systems on contractual relationships, taxation and social security with a single scheme.
After the vote, the rapporteur read a joint political declaration of the European Parliament and the Council stating that the transition to the new regime will not entail an increase of the Parliament budget line. Mr Gargani also commented on the result of the vote: "I think we have reached a good compromise between the right of free choice of the Members and the need for transparency", he said.
Common rules for all Brussels-based assistants
Assistants based in Brussels will constitute a specific category of staff, taking into account their specific task of supporting Members in carrying out their duties.
The present proposal means assistants' employment contracts will be concluded for a specific period, although all contracts will end automatically at the end of a legislature. Assistants will have similar social benefits to those of EU civil servants. Their salaries will be dependent on their grade.
The contracts of, and salary payments to, the assistants will be handled by the Parliament's financial services, but the MEPs will be entirely free in their choice of assistants, the tasks to be assigned to them and the duration of the labour contracts.
New rules also for assistants working in Member States
The larger package of measures includes not only a European statute for assistants working in Brussels but also the handling of contracts of and payments to assistants working in the Member States by qualified and duly recognised payroll organisations in those countries.
In addition, the approved text sets out that a maximum of 25% of the parliamentary assistance allowance may be used for services such as research studies or other advisory work.
The legislative procedure
As the statute for Brussels-based assistants entails an adaptation of the regulations covering EU civil servants and other staff, a formal legislative procedure was required. After the plenary vote, the changes will need the final approval of the Council. The aim is to have the new assistants' statute enter into force in July next year, right after the European elections, at the same time as the new statute for Members of the European Parliament.
20081216IPR44600 Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 16 December)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
