Stop misleading advertising by business directory companies, say MEPs
Consumers
2008-12-16 - 11:04
MEPs call on Member States to act together to put an end to misleading advertising by business directory companies, further to 400 complaints from small firms across Europe that they had been misled into committing themselves to pay for adverts costing €1,000 per year. They also call upon the Commission to introduce a blacklist of such misleading practices, and upon victims to report business scams.
Parliament has received more than 400 petitions from small businesses who claim to have fallen victim to misleading advertising by business-directory companies.
Business-directory company usually approached by mail to businesses inviting them to complete or update their business name and contact details and giving them the false impression that they will be listed in a business directory free of charge. Signatories later discover that they have, in fact, unintentionally signed up to a contract, normally binding them for a minimum of three years, to be listed in a business directory at a yearly charge of some €1.000.
MEPs express concern at the problem raised by the petitioners and underline the cross-border nature of this problem. Not only small businesses but also non-profit making entities such as NGOs, charities, schools, libraries and local social clubs have suffered financial loss due to these abuses.
Future measures
Parliament says that the validity of contracts should be annulled or terminated and that victims may be reimbursed.
Victims should report cases of business scams to national authorities and Member States should provide small firms with the "know-how" needed to file complaints and to ensure that victims seek appropriate advice before they pay fees demanded by business directory companies.
Member States are urged to set up and maintain a centralised database of complaints.
International co-ordination
The report welcomes action taken by Italy, Spain, Netherlands, Belgium, the UK, and notably Austria, to try to prevent business directory companies from using misleading practices, but says that these efforts remain inefficient and need to be co-ordinated internationally
MEPs regret that the EU directive on misleading advertising, which applies to business-to-business transactions, appears insufficient and asks the European Commission to report by December 2009 on the feasibility of including a blacklist of misleading practices in the directive.
The European Parliament also regrets that Member States appear reluctant to extend the scope of the EU directive on unfair commercial practices to business-to-business transactions, and asks the Commission to report by December 2009 on the feasibility of this measure.
Austria, an example of good practice
The report welcomes the example set by Austria, which specifically prohibits advertising in business directories unless prospective clients are unequivocally and clearly informed that such advertisement is solely an offer for a contract against payment. The House also calls on the Commission to propose EU legislation based on the Austrian model.
The report was adopted with 632 votes in favour, 4 against and 12 abstentions.
20081216IPR44616 Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 16 December)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
