Sakharov human rights prize awarded to China's Hu Jia
Human rights
2008-12-18 - 10:27
Hu Jia's wife Zeng Jinyan sent a video message from house arrest in Beijing The award of the 2008 Sakharov prize for human rights to jailed Chinese dissident Hu Jia took place at midday Wednesday. In his absence his wife gave an emotional and moving video message from under house arrest in Beijing to MEPs today. Zeng Jinyan spoke about her husband's poor health and his continued fight for human rights. A symbolic empty chair was in the middle of the Chamber for Hu Jia.
Zeng Jinyan said she had been forbidden by prison guards to discuss the prize when she last visited her husband on 21 November: "We were both warned...that we were forbidden to talk about the fact that he had been awarded the Sakharov Prize."
President Hans-Gert Pöttering said Hu Jia "was nominated as the representative of the silenced voices of China and Tibet, but today we will hear that voice."
Elena Bonner, the widow of Andrei Sakharov, was also in the Chamber for the award as were former winners of the Sakharov prize which celebrated 20 years this year.
“Repression has failed to silence the voices of courage”
Opening the award ceremony Mr Pöttering said today "is a day when we recall the fundamental principles of our Union as a force for peace, progress and human rights. As Dr Andrei Sakharov said "it is impossible to achieve any one of these goals if one of the other two is ignored."
"In 1988, one of our first prize winners, Nelson Mandela, was in jail. In 1988, there was also an empty chair for Andrei Sakharov; here today, there is an empty chair for Hu Jia," he added. The "2008 Sakharov Prize winner Hu Jia was nominated as the representative of the silenced voices of China and Tibet, but today we will hear that voice" he said.
Zeng Jinyan: the voice of Hu Jia
MEPs then heard a recorded speech by Zeng Jinyan, herself a cyber-dissident and currently under house arrest.
Zeng Jinyan made the following comments from her husband, "Perhaps the European Parliament was thinking of the work I did in the areas of AIDS and the environment, because what I did in terms of human rights was very far from sufficient and I will need to redouble my efforts."
She said Hu Jia is far from being the only prisoner of conscience in China. "Sometimes the price to be paid is very, very high." Not only activists but also their relatives have been "harassed by the police, lost their jobs or have been put under house arrest. And more serious still, some have even been tried and convicted," she said.
She also said that Hu Jia had "hoped he would be the last political prisoner".
Prize money to fund support network for persecuted activists and their families
Hu Jia had "often said he would like to set up a support network to help the families of human rights activists. To provide moral support for the families, to ease their mental and life pressure to which they are subjected," she said. Consequently, "I would like to use the €50,000 Sakharov Prize as start-up money, to establish a foundation to support the families of human rights activists."
Hu Jia’s path: from AIDS and environment to human rights
Until 2004, Hu Jia devoted most of his activities to the problems of AIDS and the environment," she said. "From 2004, the police regularly denied him his freedom of movement and he had no other choice but to participate in human rights movements from his home, writing articles and publishing reports."
"During all these years, the most important and most interesting thing he did was to have constantly persisted in speaking the truth. He never stopped writing about the phenomena he observed. He never stopped describing, one by one, all the realities that the Chinese media cannot say," she said.
Optimism for a more democratic China
Hu Jia has always remained optimistic, said his wife. "He said he thought China was experiencing the most open period of its history...whether the government wants it or not…China is moving at great speed towards an open and democratic society," she said. "We are full of hope of soon being able to hail the arrival of an open China. We are full of energy for China to become a country at peace."
At the end of the video message former winners and MEPs gave the message a standing ovation.
Human rights not a threat to any nation
Elena Bonner, Andrei Sakharov’s widow and herself a renowned human rights and democracy campaigner, praised Zeng Jinyan and asked the House "if everyone present had done enough to protect Hu Jia, his wife and their child from the State (namely China) that they want to do business with?"
Ms Bonner was in trenchant mood. She reaffirmed her husband's belief that "people should always follow their consciences". She went on to say that "human rights the basis of civilisation".
She also questioned whether the position of the EP and Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe on human rights is always based on principle.
Ms Bonner also unveiled a list of 97 titles and awards received by Andrei Sakharov so people could know him better.
President Hans-Gert Pöttering had earlier added that "we speak out on human rights as a friend of the Chinese people and we know how much we can do together for peace and progress".
The ceremony ended with one minutes of applause for Hu Jia
20081216STO44643 Sakharov webpage Hans-Gert Pottering website Watch Euroinfo on Hu Jia
EN
1
PHOTO
20081216PHT44775.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/sakharov/default_en.htm
EN
3
LINK
/president/defaulten.htm
EN
4
LINK
/eplive/public/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
