Round-up of Tuesday: French Presidency and climate package
Institutions
2008-12-17 - 16:31
Sarkozy "we need a strong Europe" "I tried to move Europe, but Europe changed me," French President Sarkozy told MEPs yesterday as he wrapped up the six-month French Presidency of the Council. EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering responded by thanking Mr Sarkozy for his "display of will for a unity of Europe". The afternoon's debates focused on climate change and the energy package.
Nicolas Sarkozy said a strong Europe must be a unified Europe. Specifically commenting on the climate change agreement he said, "when we do not have unity, how will the rest of the world listen to us".
Mixed reception from MEPs
He got a mixed reception from MEPs. Socialist group leader Martin Schulz said, "Your presidency was a success because you stood up for Europe".
Liberal group leader Graham Watson said President Sarkozy's term resembled a "fairy tale" citing "riding to the rescue of our lady of Georgia" and welcoming the "Cinderella of London" to the ball".
Christian Democrat Chairman Joseph Daul paid tribute to the Presidency for the outcome of the climate change negotiations. "The EU must now lead the worldwide fight against climate change, press the worst polluters to act, and seek tangible commitments from President Obama."
Daniel Cohn Bendit, co-leader of the Greens was less enthusiastic. "The climate and economy packages are not enough," he said. "There are certain things even you cannot do."
Climate and energy package
MEPs debated the climate change and energy package in the afternoon including, renewables, greenhouse emissions, emission performance standards for new passenger cars and geological storage of carbon dioxide
MEPs adopted reports on:
Media literacy
Medals and tokens similar to euro coins
the transfer of defence-related products
Tougher limits on harmful exhaust emissions from trucks and buses.
20081211STO44309
EN
1
PHOTO
20081216PHT44767.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
