Establishing common points of reference for vocational education and training
Employment policy
2008-12-18 - 12:45
MEPs adopted an agreement at first reading, on two reports related to Vocational Education and Training. They aim at establishing common points of references to ensure quality in the education systems, create transparency for professional qualifications gained abroad, and help ease cross-border mobility of workers. However, participating in the initiatives should be voluntary and diversity between national systems should be respected.
European credit system for vocational education and training (ECVET)
The European credit system for vocational training is a methodological framework that can be used to describe qualifications in terms of units of learning outcomes with associated points.
Thomas MANN (EPP-ED, DE) recommends that the initiative be introduced gradually with the voluntary participation of Member States. The report was adopted by 564 votes in favour, 12 against and 8 abstentions.
The Recommendation will improve the mobility and portability of qualifications at national level between the various sectors of the economy and within the labour market. It will also contribute to the development and expansion of European cooperation in education and training.
The deadline of 2012 put forward by the Commission for the introduction of ECVET is to be extended to allow for a test period.
The Commission should promote and participate together with the Member States in an ECVET network and carry out a report five years after the adoption of this Recommendation to the Parliament and the Council on the experience gained and the implications for the future.
European Quality Assurance Framework for Vocational Education and Training
Across the EU, vocational training is organised at national and regional levels with different standards. The aim of the Framework is to have common points of reference to ensure quality of Vocational Education and Training (VET) systems.
The report by Jan ANDERSSON (PES, SE) asks that a framework for the identification, support and exchange of best practices be provided at national, local and regional levels. The report was adopted by 561 votes in favour, 16 against and 10 abstentions.
The Framework does not prescribe a particular quality system or approach but provides common principles, quality criteria, indicative descriptors and indicators that may help in assessing and improving existing systems and provision.
It should be implemented in accordance with national legislation and practice, says the report, and a review of the implementation process should be undertaken every four years.
If used and further developed by the Member States, the report states, the Framework "could help them to further improve and develop their VET systems, support lifelong learning strategies, further European labour market integration and the implementation of the European Qualification Framework and promote a culture of quality improvement at all levels, while respecting the rich diversity of national education systems."
This Recommendation should also contribute to modernising education and training systems, improving the effectiveness of training to ensure that people do not leave without qualifications.
20081217IPR45141 Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 18 December)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
