Development as a cross-cutting issue in post-conflict situations
Development and cooperation
2008-12-18 - 13:03
Immediate priorities in post-conflict situations are access to fresh water, food, sanitation, essential medicines and to incentivise local leaders into power-sharing, according to a report adopted today by the European Parliament. There are 42 ongoing civil conflicts around the world. Half of all countries that emerge from conflicts return to conflict within five years.
MEPs call on the Commission to designate conflict prevention as a cross-cutting issue in development cooperation and to integrate conflict sensitivity and conflict analysis into existing and future policies.
The report drafted by Nirj DEVA (EPP-ED, UK) believes that in post-conflict situations there should be coordination among peace-building, humanitarian aid and development activities, in accordance with the "Linking Relief, Rehabilitation and Development” (LRRD) strategic framework.
MEPs also stress the need to enhance Civil-Military Coordination (CMCO); takes the view that in post-conflict situations the transition from military to civilian security must take place as soon as is practicable. MEPs also support human rights training for the army and police (including human and civil rights campaigns for effected segments of the population).
There are two phases of peace building and state building: the stabilisation phase where the emphasis is on security, law and order and provision of basic services. The second phase of state-building focuses on governance and the institutions which will deliver it; with the provision that: the second phase should not take place until the country is stabilised, as institutions created before stabilisation will reflect the character of the conflict and not what the country needs for a stable and enduring peace.
Small arms and light weapons
A majority of victims in conflict situations are killed by small arms and light weapons (SALW) and landmines. MEPs call upon the Council and the Commission to accelerate the implementation of the European Strategy to combat illicit accumulation and trafficking of SALW and their ammunition (Court of Justice ruling of May 2008).
The House stresses that "Responsibility to Protect" should be considered as a means to promote human security; by stressing that the primary responsibility for the prevention of genocide, war crimes, ethnic cleansing and crimes against humanity against a population lies with the state itself, reinforces the responsibility of each government towards the protection of its own citizens.
MEPs urge the EU and the African Union Member States to address the implementation of all warrants of arrest issued by the International Criminal Court in a consistent way in all conflict situations.
20081217IPR45215 Text, as adopted by the EP, will be available here (click on 18 December)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
