Human Rights: Humanitarian crisis in Zimbabwe, political rights abuses in Nicaragua, assassination attempts in Russia
Human rights
2008-12-18 - 17:17
In three resolutions on democracy and human rights adopted at the end of this week's Strasbourg plenary session, the European Parliament voices concern at the humanitarian crisis "of massive proportions" in Zimbabwe, condemns attacks on human rights defenders in Russia, and voices its regret at the "lack of democratic legitimacy" of the Nicaraguan local elections.
Catastrophic humanitarian situation in Zimbabwe
Parliament voices its "deep concern" at the catastrophic humanitarian situation in Zimbabwe, the cholera epidemic, the hunger and the complete refusal of the Mugabe regime to respond positively to the crisis, and expresses its outrage at the spate of recent abductions of human rights defenders.
With 5.1 million Zimbabweans (almost half of the population) facing hunger, 16 400 infected with cholera, and 300 000 seriously weakened by food and in grave danger from the epidemic, Zimbabwe is "facing a humanitarian crisis of massive proportions". According to the international medical humanitarian organisation Médecins Sans Frontières, at least 1.4 million people are at risk of contracting cholera if the outbreak is not contained by addressing its root causes.
Noting that the EU has just released EUR 10 million in aid, the EP calls on the Zimbabwean authorities to "lift all restrictions on humanitarian aid agencies and to ensure that humanitarian aid can be delivered in accordance with the principles of humanity, neutrality, impartiality and independence."
Abductions of human rights defenders
In view of the "worsening human rights crisis" and the "unprecedented spate of abductions of human rights defenders", the EP calls for the immediate release of those abducted, including a number of members of the Movement for Democratic Change (MDC), the main opposition party, and civil society activists, and calls for the perpetrators of these abductions "to be held to account".
Sanctions
The EP welcomes the recent extension of the EU's list of banned individuals in the Mugabe regime, and calls for further names of key Mugabe loyalists to be added. It also calls on the UN Security Council to consider imposing targeted sanctions, such as travel bans and asset freezes on Mr Mugabe and persons actively engaged in violence or human rights infringements.
International community urged to provide support
Turning to measures the EU could take, Parliament urges the Council and Member States to step up their diplomatic action in Africa in order to secure active support for change in Zimbabwe. It also calls on the Council to encourage the African Union to prepare contingencies for active intervention, and to "remain vigilant in relation to the possible consequences for the region of ZANU-PF's deliberate neglect and misgovernance that is destabilising Zimbabwe".
The EP strongly appeals to all stakeholders and the international community to "be prepared to support the economic and social recovery of Zimbabwe once a government has been formed which genuinely reflects the will of the Zimbabwean people at all levels and once there are tangible signs of a return to respect for democracy, human rights and rule of law".
* * *
Attacks on human rights activists, civil liberties and democracy in Nicaragua
In a resolution on Nicaragua adopted by 52 votes to 5 with one abstention, MEPs voice their regret at the way in which the local elections of 9 November were conducted, stating that "the results lack all democratic legitimacy". Parliament is concerned that the progress of democratic consolidation and governance in Nicaragua, particularly with regard to inclusion and active participation, is being flouted. Two political parties were unable to take part in the local elections.
The issue of possible fraud over the results of the municipal elections of 9 November 2008 raised in the reports of the EU expert team highlight the unwillingness of the Nicaraguan authorities to hold a genuinely democratic vote. There has also been accompanying violence, targeted in particular on the media
The UN, the EU, the US and several Nicaraguan NGOs have expressed concern over the transparency of the elections.
Violent demonstrations after questionable elections
Parliament regrets the fact that the climate of suspected fraud in some municipalities has provoked demonstrations and clashes between supporters of different parties, leaving a number of people injured and aggravating an already profound political crisis. The resolution calls on the government of Nicaragua to take urgent measures to pacify the situation created, and on political parties to condemn their supporters' acts of violence.
Attacks on human rights organisations
With regard to the numerous attacks on human rights organisations and their members, independent journalists and the representatives of the Commission delegation in Nicaragua in the last few months, on the part of individuals, political forces and bodies linked to the state, the EP asks the Nicaraguan authorities to respect the work of the human rights organisations.
The resolution also urges the Nicaraguan government and the state authorities to "protect freedom of expression and the independence of the judiciary and thus ensure preservation of their country's democratic bases, and to ensure that as soon as possible Nicaragua ratifies the Rome Statute setting up the International Criminal Court".
Reminder from EU of principles of democracy
Recalling the negotiations on the Association Agreement between the EU and the countries of Central America, Parliament stresses that Nicaragua must be reminded of the need to respect the principles of rule of law, democracy and human rights, as defended and promoted by the EU.
MEPs call on the EU Member States to ensure that the situation in Nicaragua is placed on the agenda of all meetings with the Nicaraguan authorities, whether bilateral or multilateral.
* * *
Attacks on human rights defenders in Russia
Parliament, in a resolution adopted unanimously, firmly condemns attacks on human rights defenders, including lawyers who are representing citizens' rights, and voices concern at recent moves to rehabilitate the Stalinist regime as well as growing trends of targeted violence. "Only by coming to terms with its tragic past can Russia establish a true democratic culture".
Between July and October 2008, there have been numerous attempts on the lives of human rights defenders. In mid-October a leading Russian human rights lawyer, Karinna Moskalenko, who has successfully represented 30 Russian citizens in the Strasbourg human rights court, was the victim of an attempt to poison her by placing mercury in her car in Strasbourg. The EP appeals to both the French and Russian authorities to identify the perpetrators and their motives.
In terms of targeted violence, more than 100 people were killed in 2008 on the basis of their race, nationality, religion or sexual orientation, according to the Moscow Bureau for Human Rights, raising concerns of an absence of effective condemnation of such hate crimes by Russian authorities.
Concern has also been expressed at the continuing, large-scale abuses against conscripts in the Russian armed forces. The Parliament calls on the Russian authorities to "investigate and prosecute those responsible and to uproot abusive practices within the armed forces and demonstrate a determination to modernise the prevailing culture".
Lack of respect for the rule of law highlighted by case of Anna Politkovskaya
Two years after the brutal killing of the Russian independent journalist Anna Politkovskaya, who has become a symbol for freedom of the press, serious concerns have been raised with regard to transparency and respect for the rule of law in the criminal investigation and trial following the murder. Parliament calls on the court to fully respect the jury's decision, open the proceedings to all journalists and media, and "establish not only who committed and assisted in the murder of Anna Politkovskaya, but also who ordered it".
Parliament also condemns the police raid on 3 December 2008 on the Memorial Research and Information Centre, an organisation, which has been conducting research into Stalinist repression in the Soviet Union. The EP asks the Russian authorities and the St Petersburg Public Prosecutor's Office to return without delay eleven hard drives and CDs that were taken from the centre during a police raid that contain invaluable data on more than 50 000 victims of Stalinist-era repression.
Human rights integral to EU-Russia relations
The EP points out that "human rights, the rule of law and democracy must remain core issues for the further development of EU-Russia relations". The resolution stresses the importance of the continuous exchange of views on human rights with Russia as part of the EU-Russia human rights consultations, and calls for the format of such meetings to be improved so as to involve relevant ministries, the judiciary and representatives of Russian civil society.
In terms of the ongoing negotiations for a new agreement on a new comprehensive framework for EU-Russia relations (re-launched during the last EU-Russia Summit in November 2008), Parliament takes the view that respect for human rights, democracy and the rule of law should be an integral part of the new framework agreement.
Call for EU institutions to give practical support
Finally, Parliament strongly encourages the EU institutions to give practical expression to their support for human rights defenders by setting up a focal point for defenders in all three institutions, so as to better coordinate their actions with the other international and European organisations.
20081217IPR45203 Full text of adopted resolutions will appear here (click on 18 December 2008)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
