Replay- A look back at the stories you have been reading
Institutions
2008-12-22 - 09:03
We look back at some of the most read stories of 2008 Over the past months we welcomed thousands of visitors to the Parliament's news page. Here are a few of the most read stories from the past six months. The selection is varied and eclectic.
One of the highlights of 2008 was the build up to this year's Sakharov prize ceremony. The Parliament's annual human rights prize was awarded to Chinese dissident Hu Jia and the story proved to be a major hit.
Our story on gender attracted lots of readers in September. Swedish GUE MEP Eva-Britt Svensson claimed that gender stereotypes were proving detrimental to women. Also popular were stories on Africa week at the Parliament and the use of EU funds to solve world hunger?
Readers were also eager to read about the EP and the crisis in Georgia , which saw Russian troops move into South Ossetia. Thousands of you clicked onto the website as we asked MEPs, did the EU call this correctly?
20081204FCS43818
Advertisers must stop "artificial roles" for men and women
Swedish MEP Eva-Britt Svensson points the way toward greater equality Women cleaning the kitchen, men polishing their cars - two images we often see on our TV screens. But are these realistic and do they just play up (or down) to stereotypes about the role of men and women - and in doing so undermine efforts to achieve equality between the sexes? Swedish MEP Eva-Britt Svensson from the left (GUE/NGL) group certainly believes this to be the case. We caught up with her ahead of Parliament's debate on Tuesday evening on her own initiative report.
In the report Ms Svensson says that "gender stereotyping in advertising straitjackets women, men, girls and boys by restricting individuals to predetermined and artificial roles that are often degrading, humiliating and dumbed down for both sexes".
How strong is the effect of advertising and marketing on equality between men and women?
Gender stereotyping in advertising is one of several factors that have a big influence on efforts to make society more gender equal. This influence tends to be bigger because of the fact that many persons are not aware of how we all are influenced by the images that constantly surround us.
Advertising is everywhere: in the home, in public spaces, in newspapers, magazines and on TV. When women and men are portrayed in a stereotypical way the consequence may be that it becomes difficult in other contexts to see women and men's resources and abilities in areas other than those of the traditional gender roles. In the same way young girls and boys are influenced in their choices of education and career.
What can European Union countries do to improve the situation?
They can be aware of gender stereotyping and take it into consideration. They can also ensure that a body exists to which the public can address complaints about gender stereotypes in marketing and advertising. Research may be undertaken by the future European Gender Institute.
Awareness among consumers and the public about the influence of advertising has great importance. Today, for instance, no advertisement that increases pollution can be used. Advertising for different products must show a responsibility for the environment and prevent climate change. The purpose of my report is to help make it impossible to use gender stereotypes in advertising.
Follow the debate on EP Live Tuesday evening, vote Wednesday.
Svensson report Eva-Britt Svensson
EU summit on Georgia – MEPs react: did the EU get it right?
9 August - Russian troops on the road to South Ossetia's capital Tskhinvali On Monday, the heads of state and government, meeting for a special summit on the Georgia conflict condemned Russia’s intervention and recognition of the break-away regions in Georgia. They agreed to send a fact finding mission, to nominate a special representative and to suspend negotiations of a partnership agreement with Russia until Russian troops deployed after 7 August are completely withdrawn.
The day after the summit and the subsequent debate in plenary, we asked a range of MEPs specialising in Foreign Affairs and the Caucasus region in particular for their assessment of the EU’s reaction to the crisis.
Was the response to the Russia-Georgia crisis from the EU summit appropriate?
Marie Anne Isler Béguin is a French Green MEP who Chairs Parliament's delegation to Georgia. She told us that she was "pleasantly surprised by the outcome of the Council, for example nobody expected them to suspend the partnership agreements (with Russia) until Russian troops has left Georgian territory."
Polish MEP Jacek Saryusz-Wolski (PPE-DE) Chairs the Foreign Affairs Committee. He believes that “we, the Union, have a choice – either to be satisfied with our verbal actions or to revise our policy towards Russia, making it clear that we can be assertive in the event of non-compliance by Russia with the rules which we expect".
Karl von Wogau (EPP-ED) of Germany chairs the security subcommittee. He welcomed the fact that the EU decided to act jointly and to send an observer mission to Georgia. "The EU can only make a real difference in international conflict resolution when it acts under joint leadership and a common flag" he said.
Bulgarian Socialist MEP Evgeni Kirilov: "I think that the EU's reaction to the conflict in the Southern Caucasus was a very timely, balanced and mature one. There is no better alternative for the Union than to continue dialogue and cooperation with Russia”, while making clear “that we are no more in a situation of business as usual.”
Ona Juknevičienė (ALDE, Lithuania) : “I am glad that now a common opinion of Europe is clear, and targeted to seek an effective resolution. I am not convinced that suspending of the negotiations of Partnership and Cooperation Agreements is an adequate measure. Russia knows very well that it is equally important to both sides."
For the UEN group, Latvian MEP Inese Vaidere told us she is in favour of freezing the simplified visa system with Russia and stopping the partnership agreement: “We shouldn’t be afraid to interrupt the dialogue. …. If Russian aggression and the recognition of the separatist regions do not receive an adequate reaction it will be a signal to carry on as before.”
Milan Horáček, German Green member of Czech origin was “not totally satisfied with the reaction by the EU summit. I would have hoped for a reaction more clearly based on our values of democracy, rule of law, human rights and most of all freedom. There is too much, even explicit, consideration for our dependence on oil and gas. When Russia says this is temporary, it reminds me of 1968 in Prague, where the troops ended up to remaining for 22 years.”
How should the EP position itself?
Esko Seppänen (GUE/NGL) of Finland is Vice-chairman of the EU-Russia delegation: "I want a balanced approach giving due attention to Mr Saakashvili´s terribly wrong risk assessment when preparing his adventurous military attack. At the same time, the EP should request Russia to obey international law and provide help for the civilians suffering in South Ossetia and Georgia."
Belgian Socialist MEP Saïd El Khadraoui “It's obvious there's no military solution to the conflict. More cooperation, not more confrontation is the response. Although we need to condemn vehemently the Russian military response, we have to acknowledge that we need Russia if we want a lasting solution for the problems in the area."
What of Georgia's future?
Ms Isler Béguin "I'm happy to see that colleagues in this parliament have changed its mind in relation to Georgia for him to open the door in a perspective that they can hope to one day join the EU."
Hungarian Member György Schöpflin for the EPP-ED told us that "it is still too early to say anything. On the one hand the Russians' game is still going on, on the other hand we cannot still see how the Georgian political elite relates to Saakashvili."
Ona Juknevičienė went on to say that "Russia will do anything in order not to withdraw from South Ossetia and Abkhazia. Georgia on it's own can do very little. Georgia's future depends mainly on the position and actions of the EU and NATO."
Bulgarian Socialist Evgeni Kirilov said "the strong willingness of the EU to engage more closely in the Black Sea region and the Caucasus makes me optimistic about the future of this troubled European neighbourhood.”
Tabled resolutions - Georgia MEPs debate the situation in Georgia President Pöttering’s speech at the summit Interview Isler Beguin
Africa comes to the European Parliament Sept 8 to 12
Parliament is gearing up to host African week Africa week at the European Parliament (8-12 September) will bring the politics and culture of Africa to Brussels. A series of seminars, parliamentary debates, workshops and exhibitions will bring issues that matter to Africans to the forefront of debate. MPs from Africa and around the world will join MEPs to discuss issues such as immigration, the brain drain and the food crisis. The event is being held as part of the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue.
Europe's relations with Africa discussed
The emphasis on African issues will be stressed by parliament's Committees whose agendas will reflect issues of relevance to Europe and Africa. There will also be a session of the Africa, Caribbean and Pacific-European Union (ACP-EU) Parliament Assembly.
The world food crisis will also be discussed this week with the Development Committee debating recent proposals by the European Commission to release an extra €1 billion euros from the Common Agriculture Policy to fund agriculture inputs like seeds and fertilizers. Jacques Diouf - head of the UN's Food and Agriculture Organisation - will also attend the event on Wednesday.
The same Committee will separately debate the influence that the African Diaspora has had and the role it continues to play in Europe.
The main event will be a joint meeting of Members of the Pan-African Parliament (PAP) and Members of the ACP-EU Joint-parliamentary Assembly, together with Nigerian winner of the Nobel Prize for Literature Wole Soyinka. This will bring the week to a close with parliament's President Hans-Gert Pöttering and PAP President Gertrude Mongella speaking to delegates.
Art, Elephants, Music
Contemporary Africa's art will be also presented through an array of visual and aural installations, photographs, sculptures, tapestry and videos. On the glass and metal facades of the Parliament projections of works by iconic Mali photographer Malick Sidibé will be displayed
In addition a huge elephant sculpture by the South African sculptor Andries Botha will be displayed at the entrance of the Paul Henri Spaak building during the week.
In cooperation with the Ixelles Commune (the Brussels district with the largest African population in which the Parliament is based), a concert will take place on Wednesday with many African musicians, between them the famous Bonga of Angola and Bai Kamara Jr from Sierra Leone.
Programme of African week 2008: Year of Intercultural Dialogue ACP - EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly
Can EU funds be put to use to help food crisis?
Gay Mitchell on food aid: "it is a matter of life or death" A plan to boost food production in developing countries and provide urgent food aid will be discussed by the Development Committee Wednesday. The aim is to use surplus money from the EU’s agriculture budget to help the poor. Joining the debate are key figures from the UN's Food and Agriculture Organisation and the World Food Programme. Parliament's rapporteur is Irish MEP Gay Mitchell of the centre right EPP-ED bloc. Ahead of the debate we asked him to talk us through the issues.
Last year the world food index rose by 40%, putting intolerable strain on the world's poorest people. With billions dependent on staples such as rice and maize, prices rises have caused hunger, food riots and endangered gains made by aid programmes.
Mr Mitchell, you support the proposal to use funds that were budgeted for the EU’s agricultural policies to help developing countries through the food crisis. Why is there a need for this money and how should it be used?
First of all, this money is available in the EU budget for subsidies if prices for agricultural products are falling. But food prices haven’t fallen, so this money isn’t going to be spent and normally would go back to EU members.
There is a huge problem in the developing world; there have been food riots. Some countries that have been net exporters of rice are now importing, they had to drop tariffs to bring in those food products, which means that they are now losing money.
The food price index rose by more than 40% last year, we can all see that in our supermarkets - imagine what it means for people in the developing world who are already suffering from malnutrition! It has been estimated that to deal with the problem in the medium term it would probably require an extra €18 billion.
What the EU said is that we will try to find €1.8 billion over the next 2 or 3 years - this billion from unspent agricultural money should be matched by money from the Member States.
Some of it will be used to get food to people, because the stocks of grain for example have dwindled to the lowest in living memory. But most of it will be used for things like seeds and fertiliser and irrigation; to actually help these countries to develop and to grow their own food.
How can the EU ensure that this money will actually reach those in need?
The Food and Agriculture Organisation of the UN, the European Union and various international parties are already identifying the poorest countries with the greatest needs. We need to do this very quickly otherwise it's not going to reach those people. We have a harvest coming up and next March is an important deadline. If we vote this money through Parliament now, we would be able to commit to spend €750 million this year, in time for the harvest next year.
How will the use of the funds be monitored?
I say in my report that we want to have full transparency and accountability and independent evaluation of how this money is spent. We will insist on regular reports and while Parliament does not want to be involved in micro-management, we do want to be involved in a way where we are given the papers before decisions are made and there is accountability to the Parliament.
Europeans are affected by rising food prices as well… why not help poor families here?
First of all, there are people dying in developing countries - it is matter of life and death, literally. Secondly, we are really falling back on the Millennium Development goal to end hunger and malnutrition. We seem to have taken our eyes off malnutrition.
Thirdly, if we can get the developing world's to start growing more food, it will take pressure of the international situation that would in turn assist us. So there are selfless and selfish reasons for doing this.
Some would say that this is money budgeted for European agriculture and that it sets a dangerous precedent to shift it around for other purposes. How would you respond?
Well there is a precedent for the funding of Galileo. So people get concerned that we will keep getting proposals of that kind. The Budgets Committee believes that the correct way would be to first transfer the funds to the budget heading for development aid. Others say it should be given back to Member States. These are valid points. I will be meeting with government ministers this month to talk about the concerns.
However, the reality is that we need to act quickly. Food riots are not something that one can ignore. The EU has to show that we are capable of reacting to events in the world. We have the help these people, they are in a very difficult situation.
Gay Mitchell, Josep Borrell (Chair of the Development Committee) and Josette Sheeran of the World Food Programme will hold a press conference after the meeting at 1030-1100 CET. This will be shown on the EBS network at 1400 Wednesday.
Food crisis - how do we feed the world now and in 2050? Millenium Develpment goals Programme of the special meeting Draft Mitchell report MEPs profile EBS
Sakharov Prize 2008 awarded to Hu Jia
Chinese political activist Hu Jia: 2008 Sakharov Prize winner The European Parliament's Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought has been awarded this year to Chinese political activist Hu Jia, EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering announced in Strasbourg today. The prize ceremony will take place in Strasbourg on 17 December.
Hu Jia is a prominent human rights activist and dissident in the People's Republic of China. He has embraced a wide range of causes, including environmental issues, HIV/AIDS advocacy and a call for an official enquiry into the 1989 Tiananmen Square massacre. He has also acted as a coordinator of the "barefoot lawyers movement".
Mr Pöttering said: "By awarding the Sakharov Prize to Hu Jia, the European Parliament firmly and resolutely acknowledges the daily struggle for freedom of all Chinese human rights defenders."
20th anniversary of Sakharov Prize
The Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought, named in honour of the Soviet physicist and political dissident Andrei Sakharov, has been awarded by the European Parliament every year since 1988 to individuals or organisations who have made an important contribution to the fight for human rights or democracy. To mark the 20th anniversary, a special event to which all previous winners of the prize are being invited will be held in Strasbourg on Tuesday 16 December.
This year's prize, consisting of a certificate and a cheque for €50,000, will be awarded in Strasbourg the next day, Wednesday 17 December.
Sakharov prize Subcommittee on Human Rights Sakharov press release
EN
1
PHOTO
20081209PHT44044.jpg
EN
2
PHOTO
20080901PHT35733.jpg
EN
4
LINK
/members/public/yourMep/view.do?name=Svensson&partNumber=1&id=28134&language=EN
EN
5
PHOTO
20080902PHT35916.jpg
EN
6
LINK
/activities/plenary/motion.do;jsessionid=17F470E7747F6B4C8EBFEEF7A3F9A5A3.node1?language=EN
EN
8
LINK
/president/defaulten.htm#speeche
EN
10
PHOTO
20080905PHT36322.jpg
EN
11
LINK
/document/activities/cont/200809/20080904ATT36229/20080904ATT36229EN.pdf
EN
13
LINK
/intcoop/acp/10_01/default_en.htm
EN
14
PHOTO
20080909PHT36627.jpg
EN
16
LINK
http://www.un.org/millenniumgoals/http://www.europarl.europa.eu/activities/committees/draftReports.do?language=DE&committeeBean.comId=809#
EN
17
LINK
/document/activities/cont/200809/20080908ATT36595/20080908ATT36595EN.pdf
EN
19
LINK
/members/public/yourMep/view.do?name=mitchell&partNumber=1&id=28112&language=EN
EN
20
LINK
/eplive/expert/freetext_page_prog/20070906FTX10151-2202/default_en.htm
EN
21
PHOTO
20081022PHT40463.jpg
EN
22
LINK
/sakharov/default_en.htm
EN
23
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=DROI
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A6-2008-0199 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080829IPR35626 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080825STO35399 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080211FCS20948 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080627STO32886 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT COMPARL PE-409.786 01 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081020IPR39973 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
