Eurobarometer poll shows economic fears ahead of June European elections
2009 elections
Institutions
2009-01-08 - 09:25
Eurobarometer, Statistics, flags, opinions Economic volatility , rising prices and a general pessimism about what the future holds were all opinions voiced in a recent "Eurobarometer" European survey. With the 2009 European elections scheduled for June, voters will be keen to see how the European Union can collectively turn the tide on rising economic uncertainty.
Europeans pessimistic about economic future
As the majority of European countries enter prolonged periods of negative growth, more commonly known as a recession, it's clear that these troubling times are affecting voter priorities. According to the survey, opinion across Europe is starkly in line with the harsh reality.
Europeans appear particularly pessimistic about the global economic situation, which 71% of respondents consider to be bleak. However, the state of the European economy is seen more positively with 33% of citizens believing it to be fairly good.
Individual differences
Contrasts in optimism levels relating to economic matters were also noted by the survey. Slovakia, which recently joined the euro on 1 January reported that public opinion on the national economy is more positive that it was two years ago. However, in contrast Portugal and Hungary were two of the least economically optimistic countries.
Individual citizens remained positives on the whole. When asked to comment on their personal situation, 64% were positive about the financial situation of their household and 56% found their current job situation good.
Inflation, unemployment, pensions
In autumn 2008 rising prices and inflation and the economic situation were the two most frequently mentioned concerns in Europe. In 15 Members, inflation is seen as the top national concern with Austrian citizens voicing the most concern. The Netherlands registered the highest anxiety over the economic situation.
Other concerns include unemployment, healthcare, immigration and pensions.
EU membership: 'a good thing'
Membership of the European Union is still seen as a good thing by a majority of Europeans with 53% showing support. Only 15% of Europeans consider their country’s membership as a bad thing, though all figures vary strongly between individual countries.
A majority of Europeans think that their country has on balance profited from membership (56%) with around a third of respondents (31%) feeling that their country has not benefited. Countries holding this negative outlook include Hungary, Cyprus and the United Kingdom.
The survey was conducted across the 27 members of the European Union in October and November 2008.
20090106STO45484 Eurobarometer
EN
1
PHOTO
20090107PHT45518.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/public_opinion/index_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
