1st Strasbourg session of 2009 opens: Pöttering on Gaza, safer pesticides debated
Institutions
2009-01-13 - 12:20
On Monday Parliament's President made a plea to halt the suffering in Gaza An immediate call to end the continued fighting in the Gaza strip and a plea on behalf of the civilian population in Gaza: These were the words with which Parliament's President Hans-Gert Pöttering opened the first Strasbourg sitting of 2009. MEPs also debated two reports which aim to make pesticides less toxic.
In his opening remarks Mr Pöttering told MEPs that he hopes the European Parliament would be a force for peace in the year ahead. He also said that events during the European year of intercultural dialogue last year had shown that "there is no need for a clash of civilizations".
Pöttering on Gaza: "unacceptable for the civilian population to suffer"
Speaking on the escalation of conflict in Gaza he told the House that "there is a terrible case of déjà vu" in the whole situation. "The life of a Palestinian has the same value as the life of an Israeli" he said as he reiterated his earlier statement criticising Hamas for breaking the ceasefire and Israel for its disproportionate reaction. "It is unacceptable for the civilian population to continue to suffer" he added.
He called for an "immediate end of violence on both sides", urging a "viable and lasting" two-State solution "with Israel and Palestine as sovereign States within secure borders". He emphasised Parliament's support for the legally binding UN Security Council resolution of 8 January, which he said is currently not being respected by either side.
Against this background he nevertheless recalled that 2008 had been the European Year of Intercultural Dialogue, a year "offering a sign of hope", demonstrating that there is "no need for a clash of civilisations".
MEPs will debate the situation in Gaza on Wednesday afternoon and vote on a resolution on Thursday.
Less toxic pesticides
Monday also saw MEPs debate two new EU-wide rules on pesticides. One aims to regulate the production and licensing of pesticides and another which will reduce the use of those pesticides already in existence.
The draft legislation will in due course ban the use of certain dangerous chemicals in these products. Measures to ensure the safer use of pesticides in daily life will also be introduced.
Hiltrud Breyer is the German Green MEP who steered the measure in Parliament. She said in Monday's debate that "this agreement is not only a milestone for the protection of both the environment and the consumer: it marks an historical moment. This agreement is the first of its kind in the whole world. Europe is a pioneer on a global scale".
Christa Klass is Parliament's rapporteur on reducing pesticide usage. The German EPP-ED Member said "the use of phyto-sanitary products must be reduced or blocked in residential areas and that this directive aims at protecting users, consumers and the environment". The issue will be put to the vote on Tuesday.
Other issues
Other issues debated on Monday included:
Urban Mobility/State aid for public broadcasting (oral questions)
Trade and economic relations with Western Balkans (report)
The Common Agricultural policy and Global Food Security (report)
Developing civil dialogue under the Treaty of Lisbon (report)
Equal treatment for men and women as regards access to employment, vocational training and promotion, and working conditions (report)
20090108STO45591
EN
1
PHOTO
20090113PHT46001.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
