Human Rights: persecution of Shirin Ebadi, coup in Guinea, censorship in Kenya
Human rights
2009-01-15 - 17:49
In three resolutions on democracy and human rights adopted at the end of this week's Strasbourg plenary session, the European Parliament strongly condemns the persecution of Nobel Peace laureate Shirin Ebadi in Iran, denounces the "seizure of power" by junta in Guinea and voices its regret at the signing of a bill, which could lead to direct media censorship in Kenya.
Call to end persecution of Nobel Peace laureate Shirin Ebadi in Iran
Parliament, in a resolution adopted by a large majority, strongly condemns the "repression, persecution and threats" against the Iranian lawyer and 2003 Nobel Peace laureate Shirin Ebadi and expresses its grave concern at the intensified persecution of human rights defenders in Iran.
On 21 December 2008, Iranian police and security officials closed the Centre for the Defence of Human Rights (CDHR) led by Ms Ebadi as it was preparing to hold a celebration marking the 60th anniversary of Human Rights Day. Eight days later, her office was searched and documents and computers were removed.
The closure of the CDHR is "not only an attack on Shirin Ebadi and human rights defenders in Iran, but an attack on the entire international human rights community of which she is an influential and leading member", say MEPs
There is increasing evidence that the Iranian authorities' persecution of Shirin Ebadi has intensified because of her contact with UN human rights officials and their use of information provided by her centre in a UN report of 2 October 2008 on the situation of human rights in Iran.
MEPs urge that the Iranian authorities put an end to the repression, persecution and threats against Shirin Ebadi, authorise the re-opening of the CDHR, and allow the CDHR, the HROK and other human rights associations to function unhampered.
Intimidation of political opponents and human rights defenders
The EP also reiterates its concern regarding the persecution and imprisonment of citizens who engage in the defence of human rights and who campaign against the death penalty, which frequently leads to them being charged with so-called activities against national security.
One case for serious concern is that of Mohammad Sadiq Kaboudvand, a prisoner of conscience whose health has deteriorated since imprisonment. The resolution calls both for his immediate and unconditional release, and for an end to the "harassment, intimidation and persecution of political opponents and human rights defenders, including by releasing persons imprisoned arbitrarily or on the basis of their political views".
Appeal to respect religious minorities
Observing that believers of the Baha'i faith are harshly persecuted in Iran, the EP appeals to the Iranian authorities to "live up to the government's requirement to respect religious minorities". The resolution asks that Bahia' leaders who have been imprisoned solely on the basis of their belief be promptly released.
EU Trade Agreement depends on improvement of human rights situation
The resolution emphasises that any future conclusion of a Cooperation and Trade Agreement between Iran and the EU depends also on a substantial improvement in Iran's human rights situation.
Looking to the future, Parliament urges the Council and Commission to continue their examination of the human rights situation in Iran and to submit to it in the first half of 2009 a comprehensive report on the matter and to continue to raise specific cases of human rights abuses.
* * *
The coup in Guinea
In a resolution on Guinea, MEPs condemn the seizure of power "by a group of officers" one day after the death of President Lansana Conté, and welcome the decisions of the African Union and Economic Community of West African States to suspend the country for "as long as it has no democratically elected parliament or government".
Guinea is classified by Transparency International as one of the most corrupt countries in Africa. On 23 December, 2008, a group of officers from the military seized power the day after the death of President Lansana Conté, a president who had himself taken power by force in 1984.
The resolution demands that "free and transparent parliamentary and presidential elections complying with international norms" be held within the next few months, with the cooperation of African Union (AU) and the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), and with EU support.
MEPs also call for an inter-Guinean national dialogue with the participation of all political parties, trade unions and civil society organisations, to "pave the way for a democratic transition".
Measures to tackle corruption
Noting the political undertakings of the new Guinean leaders concerning, in particular, "a serious attempt to tackle corruption and the introduction of a transparent electoral system in Guinea", the EP calls for these undertakings to be acted on and for the opening of a political dialogue between the EU and the transitional authorities now in power in Guinea. This would be in the framework of Articles 8 and 96 of the Cotonou Agreement.
In the event that there is no democratic transition, the EP asks the Commission to be prepared to freeze all aid other than humanitarian and food aid, and to consider targeted sanctions against the members of the entities which have seized power.
* * *
Press freedom threatened in Kenya
Reiterating its commitment to press freedom and the fundamental rights of freedom of expression, Parliament, in a resolution adopted by 46 votes with 1 abstention, regrets the signing of the Kenya Communications (Amendment) Bill by President Kibaki a bill which, according to the East African Journalist's Association, would introduce direct media censorship by the Kenyan government.
The two main problematic clauses are Sections 88 and 46 of the bill. Section 88 gives the Information Minister considerable powers to raid media houses that are deemed to be a threat to national security and to dismantle their broadcasting equipments, while Section 46 gives the state the power to regulate contents to be aired and published by electronic and print media respectively.
At the time of signing the bill, which amends the Kenya Communications Act of 1998, President Kibaki neglected to take widely reported reservations into consideration. Prime Minister Odinga has joined widespread opposition to the legislation and officials from the Orange Democratic Movement (ODM) recently held crisis talks, claiming that the President had failed to consult the Prime Minister over the media law.
Call for bill to be compatible with freedom of expression
MEPs press the Kenyan Government to initiate stakeholder consultations in order to "build consensus on how to better regulate the communications industry without interfering with press freedom". President Kibaki and Prime Minister Odinga are asked to do their utmost to guarantee that any updated version of the new media bill be compatible with the principles of freedom of expression and information.
Kenya's culture of impunity to be addressed
Flawed presidential elections in Kenya last year led to street demonstrations which escalated into riots and ethnic clashes across the country, killing more than 1 000 people and leaving another 350 000 homeless. Parliament underlines the need to address the culture of impunity in Kenya in order to bring those responsible for the post-election violence to justice.
The EP also calls for the setting-up of an independent commission, consisting of local and international legal experts, to carry out investigations and prosecutions. While President Kibaki and Prime Minister Odinga have agreed in theory to create such a commission, it has yet to be formed.
Finally, MEPs welcome President Kibaki's recent move to revise the media law and his gesture to consider amendments to the legislation proposed by members of the media.
20090114IPR46213 Full text of adopted resolutions will appear here (click on 15 January 2009)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
