REACH: reducing chemical risks without penalising industry
2009 elections
Institutions
2009-01-16 - 11:06
Ambitious legislation on chemicals, placing the onus on industry to show that its products are safe, was passed by Parliament in December 2006. The "REACH" (Registration, Evaluation and Authorisation of CHemicals) regulation requires the registration of some 30 000 of the 100 000 chemical substances on the market. The legislation aims to increase the safety of chemical products and promote alternatives to animal testing, while enhancing competitiveness and facilitating trade. When it entered into force in June 2007, it replaced some 40 previous laws.
In three years' debate with the European Commission and Member States, Parliament made important changes to the draft regulations, which include an obligation to replace the most hazardous substances with safer alternatives where these exist, a manufacturer's "duty of care" for health and the environment, and a requirement to promote alternatives to animal testing.
The REACH regulation, formally proposed by the Commission on 29 October 2003, replaces some 40 previous pieces of legislation. It aims to gather more information on the safety or otherwise of around 30 000 substances first placed on the market before 1981 (since when formal applications for authorisation have been required) and manufactured or imported in quantities of over one tonne per year.
20090115TMN46347
Public health vs. chemical industry competitiveness
Modern society cannot do without chemicals and the industry is crucial to the EU economy. But chemical production and use may also pose risks to health and the environment. Chemicals are thought to be at least partly to blame for the rise in ailments such as allergies, asthma, some forms of cancer and reproductive problems. But information is inadequate, because in many cases, insufficient research has been done.
The most controversial question in long and intensive debates in Parliament was how to balance protecting public health and the environment with safeguarding chemical industry competitiveness. At the outset, views differed markedly between political groups and committees, particularly on registration and authorisation requirements. Compromise amendments were gradually hammered out to win the backing of a majority in Parliament.
Alleging that extreme positions on both sides of the issue had endangered the talks, Parliament's rapporteur Mr Guido Sacconi (PES, IT) said: "Parts of the industry lobbied heavily to have the proposal rejected or watered down so that it would not work. Against this, the most radically pro-environmental positions could have jeopardised the chances of the project seeing the light of day".
Commenting on the vote, EPP-ED group spokesperson Ria Oomen-Ruijten MEP (NL) said "the chemical industry is of vital importance to the EU. It is worth €440bn per year. Around 1.3 million people are employed in 27 000 companies. The new chemical regulation will restore confidence in the sector and in the use of chemical substances. As a result of the regulation, more than 30 000 substances, including their most important characteristics, will be registered at the European Chemical Agency within 11 years."
The Helsinki-based European Chemicals Agency (ECHA), started work in June 2007 and has been able to accept registrations since 1 June 2008.
Registration and safety reports
The approved text requires EU manufacturers and importers of chemicals produced or imported in quantities over one tonne per year to demonstrate their safety with evidence in a registration dossier submitted to the European Chemicals Agency. Failure to register will mean the substance must not be imported or manufactured in the EU.
MEPs and the Council finally agreed to reduce information requirements for the registration of substances produced in quantities of less than 10 tonnes per year. For quantities over above 10 tonnes per year, a Chemical Safety Report is also required, to document the safety assessment of the substance, but such a report is not needed for lesser quantities.
Authorisation of hazardous substances
REACH also requires authorisation of substances rated as being “of very high concern”. This authorisation was one of the most controversial issues in Parliament, whose compromise restores environment and health protection to the heart of the system by limiting the duration of authorisations for the most hazardous substances and requiring that they be replaced with safer alternatives as these become available.
It is estimated that of the 30 000 substances to be registered with REACH around 3 000 are considered hazardous and hence are subject to the strict authorisation procedure – with no guarantee that they will be able to remain on the market. Hazardous substance manufacturers are required to submit plans to replace them with safer alternatives. Where no alternative exists, manufacturers must present a research plan to find one.
"More than 17 000 chemicals produced in very small quantities will not have to undergo rigorous examination, but hazardous products will be subjected to greater control than ever before. Persistent, bio-accumulative and toxic chemicals, plus hormone disrupters, will now have to be taken off the market if suitable alternatives are available", said ALDE environment spokesman and REACH negotiator Chris Davies (UK).
The most hazardous and largest volume chemicals must be registered by 1 December 2010, while safer and lower-volume ones may wait until 1 June 2013 or 1 June 2018. depending on the degree of risk and annual production volumes.
Burden of proof
REACH transfers the burden of proof (i.e. testing and evaluating chemicals to establish their safety) from the authorities to industry. The old regulatory structure had failed to assess the estimated 100 000 chemicals already on the market. Over 20-25 years about 140 had been identified as needing a full risk assessment ; of those, only 40 had been studied.
Duty of care and animal testing
At Parliament's request, the regulation also imposes a "duty of care" on manufacturers to ensure that human health and the environment are not adversely affected and to inform the public of dangers. It also includes safeguards for confidential information and provisions to prevent the duplication of animal testing. Promoting alternatives to testing chemicals on animals was a prime concern for MEPs, and is now a REACH goal.
Implementation
Its ambition, scope and technical complexity made REACH one of the most substantial pieces of legislation ever examined by the European Parliament. No fewer than 10 parliamentary committees were involved and the text, which exceeded 1,000 pages at first reading in November 2005, was still 750 pages long at the end.
"In looking carefully at the practicability of the rules, we paid special attention to small and medium sized businesses. REACH will secure the 'One Substance One Registration' principle. This means that producers of the same substance can use a shared registration system and share costs proportionately. By avoiding duplication of scientific tests, the system will also cut overall costs for industry. There is more flexibility for small-scale production – and the Commission will have to offer small firms guidance on how to implement the system", said Mr Sacconi.
Irish MEP Liam Aylward (UEN) felt that the Parliament and the Council of Ministers had "worked hard to ensure that the burden for industry, and particularly smaller companies, is not too costly, (...) whilst still delivering a win-win situation for citizens, workers and our ecosystem."
Other MEP views
Not all political groups were happy with the final outcome. The Greens and the GUE/NGL group had put forward an alternative plan with more stringent requirements on the substitution of dangerous chemicals and tougher demands on industry to provide information on the chemicals they produce. "Today the European Parliament has failed citizens" said Swedish GUE/NGL member Jens Holm. "What appears to be an adequate legislative package is actually full of loopholes.
And Carl Schlyter, another Swedish MEP but from the Greens, said that "the EP has rubber-stamped the deal on REACH. (...), though it is far too early to judge if the new regulation will offer much greater protection to EU citizens from hazardous chemicals."
By contrast, Dutch MEP Hans Blokland (IND/DEM) consoled critics by saying that "the better is the enemy of the good. Without a compromise the entire proposal might have been withdrawn or rejected."
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 TMN DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 TMN DOC XML V0//EN
