Thursday's session: animal transport, the Mediterranean diet and human rights
Institutions
2009-01-16 - 10:16
MEPs vote on a resolution on the crisis in the Middle East, Thursday 15 January Animals are still being transported across Europe in terrible conditions. That was the damning claim raised before the House in Thursday's session. Later MEPs discussed the details of the "Mediterranean Diet" and its possible recognition by the UN in acknowledgement of its healthy qualities.
The day concluded with human rights debates, and the adoption of 11 July as the day to commemorate the victims of Srebrenica.
Animal transport reform needed
Having already passed special European legislation on the welfare of animals during transportation, some countries are not obeying the rules.
Chair of the agriculture committee, British Conservative Member Neil Parish expressed special concern in relation to conditions of horse transportation. Reports highlight the long distances, overcrowded trucks and lack of water that the horses endure. He said: "a civilised society is judged not only according to how it treats people, but also animals".
Call to remember Srebrenica
MEPs adopted a resolution calling on all its members are countries that made up former Yugoslavia to mark 11 July a day of remembrance for the estimated 8,000 Bosnian men and boys murdered by Serb paramilitaries in Srebrenica in 1995.
The House also discussed breaches of human rights and the rule of law in Iran, Guinea and Kenya.
Echoing sentiments stressed all through the week, MEPs also called for a permanent ceasefire in the Middle East from both Israel and Hamas.
UNESCO and the Mediterranean Diet
In 2009 UNESCO will decide whether the Mediterranean Diet should be included on the list of Intangible Cultural Heritage of Humanity.
The Chair of the agriculture committee and Christian democrat, Neil Parish urged the support of the Mediterranean (and other diets across Europe) as a part of cultural diversity of the EU. He added: "The Mediterranean diet helps to reduce all cardiovascular disease risks, Alzheimer's disease and cancer”.
MEPs committed themselves to safeguarding local and regional European food heritage in the face of the rising fast-food wave, calling the Mediterranean diet one of the "various elements of the European cultural model helping to survive against globalization and American foods."
20090108STO45646
EN
1
PHOTO
20090115PHT46416.jpg
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
