Does the EU get Russia? Have your say
2009 elections
External relations
2009-01-20 - 12:25
The Kremlin's spires have often cast a long shadow over Europe The January shut-down of Russian gas to many European homes and businesses is the latest twist in EU-Russia relations. Dealing with Russia is a component in many of the Union's domestic and external policy concerns. Russia's military move against Georgia in August provoked strong condemnation and led to an EU-brokered ceasefire. The status of Kosovo and future EU enlargement in the Balkans are other big geopolitical dossiers. Closer to home, energy security and trade effect citizens directly.
MEPs deal with these issues daily, both in set-piece external policy debates and in nitty-gritty legislative and petitions work such as the NorthStream pipe line that would connect Russia to Europe through the Baltic Sea.
Relations with Russia are complex in themselves and complicated by history - history which has been experienced differently across the EU. Hence the question: does the Union - as a political and economic player - really understand Russia? Does it have an effective policy towards its largest neighbour? Does it need a new attitude or direction?
You have heard the views of a number of MEPs. Now let us know what you think. The debate is open on our election website only.
If you want to add a comment, click on the first link below and that will take you to a version of this article where you can leave comments at the bottom.
Gas - MEPs call for energy policy
On Wednesday 14 January MEPs debated the gas crisis. They agreed that both Russia and Ukraine had lost credibility as reliable partners. Many MEPs called on the EU to diversify its energy supply mix and develop a common energy policy.
Here is a selection of some of the comments from the debate:
Polish MEP Jacek Saryusz-Wolski of the centre-right EPP-ED: "Supply disruptions like these are dramatic for citizens, industry and jobs. In the elections, we shall have to answer questions about what we have done".
Rebecca Harms , German Green asked: "What is the EU going to do vis-à-vis countries that are sitting on the fence somewhere between Russia and the EU?"
Another Polish Member - Hanna Foltyn-Kubicka of the UEN group said: "Behind Gazprom's demands is the political machinery of the Kremlin and the Kremlin is attempting to extend its dominance across the countries of Central and Eastern Europe."
Georgia: EU alarmed by Russia's move
MEPs debated the Russian invasion of Georgia on 1 September last year. During the debate in Strasbourg most MEPs underlined the need to respect Georgian territorial integrity and said that Russia's reactions were disproportionate.
The leader of the largest group in Parliament, the EPP-ED, Joseph Daul described the situation in Georgia as "intolerable". He said Europe must "use its political and economic clout" to pressure Russia into an immediate and total withdrawal from Georgian territory.
British Liberal leader Graham Watson told fellow MEPs that "we will not persuade the Russian bear by backing President Medvedev into a corner".
For the Socialist group Austrian Member Hannes Swoboda said that " Russia is strong at the moment because of energy prices, but this may not last and Russia also has a lot to gain from proper cooperation with Europe".
You have heard the views of a number of MEPs. Now let us know what you think. The debate is open on our election website only.
20090115STO46440 Access the debate - leave comments at bottom of this article MEPs debate Georgia Georgia resolution 03-09-08 Commission of the Europan Union (EU) - Russia
EN
1
PHOTO
20090120PHT46680.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/elections2009/headlines/product.htm?language=EN&ref=20090115STO46440
EN
5
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/external_relations/russia/index_en.htm
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20080829IPR35626 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT TA P6-TA-2008-0396 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
