Strife in the Balkans must not obstruct EU accession, say MEPs
External relations
2009-01-21 - 16:33
Bilateral issues in the Balkans should neither obstruct Croatia or FYROM's progress towards joining the EU nor take precedence over EU integration, says the Foreign Affairs Committee in two resolutions, adopted Wednesday, on Commission progress reports. The committee also adopted a resolution welcoming the Serbian government's agreement to the deployment of an EU Rule of Law mission in Kosovo.
The committee is confident that negotiations with Croatia can be concluded in 2009, in line with the indicative roadmap published by the Commission. The fight against organised crime and corruption is highlighted as a key sensitive issue in the resolution drafted by Hannes Swoboda (PES, AT) on the report on Croatia.
MEPs regret that accession negotiations have been blocked for a considerable time due to bilateral issues such as the dispute over the placing of land and sea borders with Slovenia. Slovenia blocked the opening of new chapters in the accession negotiations in December 2008.
The Croatia resolution was adopted with 55 votes in favour, 2 against and 1 abstention. The Swoboda report is to be put to a plenary vote at the March I session in Strasbourg.
FYROM
Bilateral issues also loom large in the resolution on the FYROM progress report. The resolution, drafted by Erik Meijer (GUE/NGL, NL), voices the hope that the Greek government will no longer use its veto against the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and will support its integration into the European Union and NATO.
On FYROM's obligations, the resolution reiterates the importance for this country of continuing to foster good neighbourly relations and seeking to resolve outstanding issues with its neighbours, including a negotiated and mutually acceptable solution on the FYROM name issue.
MEPs urge the Council to decide on a date for starting accession negotiations before the end of 2009.
The Fyrom resolution was adopted with 64 votes in favour, 7 against and 2 abstentions.The Meijer report is to be put to a plenary vote at the March I session in Strasbourg.
Kosovo
A resolution drafted by Joost Lagendijk (Greens/EFA, NL) welcomes the Serbian government's agreement to the deployment throughout the territory of Kosovo of the EULEX European Union Rule of Law (EULEX) mission in Kosovo, one of the largest civilian missions ever launched under the European Security and Defence Policy (ESDP). MEPs encourage Serbia to continue to show this constructive attitude, which is consistent with its aspirations to join the EU.
While welcoming the improved security situation, the resolution underlines the need for a multi-ethnic police force in all areas of Kosovo. MEPs urge the Kosovo authorities to support the reintegration of the Serbian police officers who have yet to return.
The Kosovo resolution was adopted with 45 votes in favour, 7 against and 1 abstention. The Lagendijk report is to be put to a plenary vote at the February I session in Strasbourg.
2009-01-21 Committee on Foreign Affairs In the chair Jacek SARYUSZ-WOLSKI EPP-ED PL
20090121IPR46787 Foreign Affairs Committee web site
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=AFET
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
