Ireland: What does the general public want to know about the European Parliament?
2009 elections
Institutions
Ireland
2009-01-26 - 11:08
Ireland: What does the general public want to know about the European Parliament? Every year, tens of thousands of citizens from all parts of the European Union and elsewhere throughout the world write to the European Parliament to make suggestions, ask questions or make complaints. Residents of the Republic of Ireland are among the most interested and their varied contributions give an indication of their main preoccupations. The most frequently raised subjects are as follows.
1. Questions concerning the powers, organisation and activities of the European Parliament and its Members.
Arrangements for the forthcoming European Parliament elections (4-7 June 2009), electoral procedures and the activities of MEPs are attracting increasing attention as the election date gets closer. Many requests take the form of "Petitions" asking the EP to take a position on a specific question and there are also large numbers of requests directed to individual Members relating to their specific areas of interest. There are also numerous applications for employment (as an official or as a Member's assistant) and requests to organise visits to the EP in Brussels, Strasbourg and Luxembourg.
2. European Union legislation and internal market rules.
Many correspondents are interested in the details of EU law and how it is applied in practice in Member States. Social affairs (notably employment and pensions), energy and environmental concerns and cross-border educational opportunities attract particularly high levels of interest. Indirect taxes and commercial questions are also regularly raised.
3. Questions relating to national or local government responsibilities.
A significant proportion of the total relates to citizens' individual problems with their national or local government authorities or agencies or their involvement in legal proceedings. Many complaints and observations concern, for example, the application of criminal or family law while others relate to the rights and responsibilities arising from the internal market and free-movement (Schengen area) rules. Problems with non-EU Member States are also frequently reported.
4. EU institutional affairs and EU enlargement.
Many people seek information on the Institutions of the EU and their respective roles in the legislative process. Questions about EU citizenship, the use of official languages within the EU and Turkey's application for membership are also often raised. The Lisbon Treaty and the Irish referendum result have naturally attracted much comment in recent months.
5. Human Rights and EU foreign policy.
Human Rights throughout the world are a major concern of our correspondents, as is the fight against all forms of discrimination. Trade policy and foreign aid also figure strongly. Topical matters include security measures and the fight against terrorism, and immigration and asylum policy.
6. Financial and economic affairs.
The EU's role in the monetary and economic policy area is topical. Attention focuses particularly on the single currency (Euro), the European Central Bank and measures relating to taxation and prices. Requests for financial support are also received from individuals and organisations.
7. Animal welfare issues.
A relatively small but constant level of correspondence relates to animal welfare. The concerns are wide-ranging but include the treatment of farm animals, animals used for scientific purposes, bull-fights, the care of stray dogs and the trade in dog and cat fur.
20090126IPR47080 The European Parliament Office in Ireland
EN
1
PHOTO
20090126PHT47116.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.europarl.ie/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
