Parliament calls for proportionate regulation in general and business aviation
Transport
2009-02-03 - 12:16
In answer to the Commission Communication on General and Business Aviation, the European Parliament calls for proportionate regulation, increased airport and airspace capacity, and measures to further environmental sustainability for all civil aircraft operations which do not fall under the commercial air transport sector. The report was adopted with 524 votes in favour, 74 against and 6 abstentions.
The fastest growing sector in civil aviation in Europe, general and business aviation comprises high value activities, ranging from specialised aerial works (aerial cartography, agricultural flights, firefighting, air traffic surveillance) to aerial training and recreational flying.
Proportionate regulation
The European Parliament report by Luís Queiró (EPP-ED, PT) "broadly welcomes" the Commission's communication of 11 January 2007 entitled "Agenda for Sustainable Future in General and Business Aviation", but stresses that the Commission must ensure that proportionality and subsidiarity principles are applied "in the design and implementation of both existing and futures aviation legislation".
"General and Business Aviation in Europe comprises mainly privately owned aircraft and small and medium-sized enterprises having limited resources to keep up with the ongoing regulatory changes," the report argues.
Simplified security procedures for business aviation passengers
MEPs ask the Commission to examine the possibility of "laying down simplified security procedures and screening processes for business aviation passengers without in any way compromising their security and safety", and suggests that the Commission facilitate the exchange of best practice on security measures at small and medium-sized airports.
Increase and optimise airport capacity
Pointing out that it is "increasingly difficult" for General and Business Aviation to access major and regional airports, due to the growing demand from commercial air transport , MEPs urge the Commission and Member States to optimise the use of existing capacity through "better planning" and "the deployment of modern technologies", and to use helicopters as a "short-haul connecting tool".
They also encourage Member States and regional and local authorities to modernise and establish small and medium-sized airports and to invest in "specific infrastructure necessary for the operation and stationing of aircraft in the field of General and Business Aviation".
Environmental sustainability
The House believes that the environmental performance of smaller aircraft can be "enhanced" by "using cleaner fuels and by promoting research, technological development and innovation". It stresses the importance of initiatives such as "Clean Sky" and the Cost Effective Small Aircraft (CESAR) project.
In terms of noise pollution, MEPs consider that "noise mapping is one of several tools providing for a balanced methodology to ensure airport development without causing significant noise pollution to local citizens".
Recreational and sport aviation essential
Finally, MEPs call on the Commission to take appropriate measures to facilitate access of the EU's General and Business Aviation manufacturing industry to world markets. They also consider the promotion of recreational and sport aviation, including of European aeroclubs, as "essential", because this sector constitutes "an important source of professional skills for the entire aviation sector".
20090202IPR48072 Text, as adopted by the EP,will be available here (click on 3 February)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
