The week ahead online 9-15 February
Institutions
2009-02-09 - 12:46
MEPs in Brussels move from the hemicycle to their respective committees The state of the economy, Turkey's EU hopes and proposals to charge lorries for using roads are among issues being debated by MEPs this week in Brussels. Online you will be able to read Members' views on e-voting and on the use of new media in election campaign. You can also catch up with a health check of Europe's fisheries policy. Read our interview with Evangelin Tzampazi about her report on mental health.
Some of the issues on the agenda in Committee this week include:
Recovery plan: Wednesday the Economics Committee will discuss proposals to boost the EU economy. EU-Turkey: MEPs on the Foreign Affairs Committee look at Turkey's progress in EU membership negotiations on Wednesday. Heavy goods vehicles: The "Eurovignette" law, which would allow countries to charge lorries for road use partly on the basis of the congestion and air and noise pollution they cause will be put to the vote in the Transport Committee on Wednesday. EP-Gaza: The EP delegation for relations with the Palestinian Legislative Council will be in Gaza and the West Bank for meetings with their Palestinian counterparts from Tuesday to Saturday. EU-Russia: A Foreign Affairs Committee hearing on EU-Russia relations will bring a range of experts and a representative of the Russian Duma to the EP Thursday. Copyright extension: The Legal Affairs Committee votes on proposals to extend to 70 years the current 50-year copyright protection for music recordings and performers on Thursday. Video game safety: The Internal Market Committee will set out a series of recommendations to improve the protection of children from potentially harmful video games on Wednesday. Genital mutilation: The Women's Rights Committee will give its views on how best to prevent female genital mutilation from taking place in the EU on Tuesday. EP-Finland: EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering makes an official visit to Finland Tuesday. His schedule includes meetings with Prime Minister Matti Vanhanen and Foreign Minister Alexander Stubb, a former MEP.
20090205STO48538 Press service
EN
1
PHOTO
20090206PHT48692.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/news/expert/default_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
