Prague to Strasbourg: Czech European Affairs Minister Vondra on his new role
Institutions
2009-02-12 - 10:51
48-year old Czech Deputy Prime Minister for European Affairs Alexandr Vondra pictured in Strasbourg In a Parliament of so many faces it can be difficult to stand out. But one face that will become well-known to MEPs over the next six months is that of Alexandr Vondra. As the Czech Deputy Prime Minister for European Affairs during his country's presidency of the EU his job is to brief the Parliament on what European Ministers are discussing at the Council. As he explains here, the Gaza and Gas crisis gave the Czechs an early taste of a challenging six-month term.
Mr Vondra, as a prominent dissident, founder of the Civic Forum and a key figure in Czech foreign policy during the last 20 years, you are now at the helm of the EU. How does it feel?
It is a lot of fun. We are enjoying it. It is entertaining. Of course in the beginning it was a whirlwind. Because of the gas crisis, there was not even time for the traditional New Year celebrations, at midnight I was in a TV studio for the opening of the Czech EU presidency. The two "G" (Gas and Gaza) were a test of fire. But I believe that it is better to go for it head first than to have a slow start, turtle-style. After all, I have always done everything with total determination and I would be bored if this were different.
Relations between the Council presidencies and the European Parliament are not always easy. How would you evaluate your experience so far with MEPs?
I think that everything is going OK. I am not a newcomer to the Parliament, since the autumn I have been coming dutifully to the plenary sessions and developed contacts with the key players. I think that the communication is positive and enriching for both sides.
Aren't the MEPs too tough on you?
It is a Parliament like any other. I know this from the Czech parliament and it would be strange if this Parliament behaved differently. Parliament is always sovereign; every member wants attention, especially when there are only a few months left before the next election. We were expecting this, it is nothing new under the sun and it is the juice of democracy.
The French media have criticised the Czech Republic for not being sufficiently proactive. They have also said that as it is not part of the euro-zone it is unprepared to deal with issues like the global financial crisis.
We shall see in half a year or in a year's time. We compensate by communicating with all the key players. In the past, the Britons, the Swedes and the Danes have managed, and so will we.
As for French criticism, last week the French president had a million protesters out in the streets and so he needed to tell the journalists something to assuage them, that is common practice in politics. It is no reason for us to get nervous. I can say today that the Czech presidency is hard at work, so that at least some of our plans can be brought to fruition, without ruining public finances in the whole of Europe. We should not succumb to emotions but rationally follow common sense.
Your country's "enfant terrible", artist David Černý, has attracted a lot of attention with the controversial Entropa art installation in Brussels. Would you consider humour an essential part of the Czech presidency as well?
Humour is not only part of the Czech presidency, but part of the Czech mentality. It does no harm to let the fresh air of humour into the corridors of some European institutions. As for Entropa, it is a piece of art. We gave art free space of expression. We decided against any kind of censorship. The author, David Černý, used this freedom not a 100, but 120%. He is a maximalist and it is not this first time that he has made a mark. I am happy about the fact that nowadays every time I come to the Council atrium - which is usually empty and devoid of people - I meet groups of people standing under the art installation. They converse, laugh, react vividly ...Simply speaking, Entropa is provocative artwork, which facilitates communication and that is the way it should be.
Vondra CV
Alexandr Vondra was born in Prague in 1961. He graduated in geography from Charles University in Prague in 1984.
In the mid-1980s he was a dissident and Charter 77 signatory. After organising a demonstration in January 1989, he was imprisoned for two months. In November 1989, while the Velvet Revolution was underway, he co-founded the Civic Forum and became a foreign policy advisor to President Václav Havel.
From 1997 to 2001 he was the Czech Ambassador to the US, He was Foreign Minister from 2006-2007 and was subsequently appointed Deputy Prime Minister for European affairs.
He is married to Martina a primary school teacher and they have three children.
20090206STO48712 Czech EU Presidency website Website - Office of Alexandr Vondra Entropa - description
EN
1
PHOTO
20090212PHT49258.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.eu2009.cz
EN
3
LINK
http://www.vlada.cz/en/evropske-zalezitosti/default.htm
EN
4
LINK
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Entropa
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
