Focus on the long term while tackling immediate economic crisis
Economic and monetary affairs
2009-02-16 - 18:20
Stimulus measures to tackle the economic crisis should not be at the expense of long term sustainability for public finances, while spending should focus on areas that will enhance the long-run performance of the EU economy, MEPs and national MPs heard on Monday.
MEPs and national parliamentarians from the 27 Member States and the candidate countries began a two-day Joint Parliamentary Meeting on Monday, organised by the European Parliament and the Czech EU Presidency, to discuss “A New Deal for European Economic Recovery?”
Sticking to EU principles – no to protectionism
Opening the meeting, Přemysl Sobotka, President of the Czech Senate, called for Europe to remain faithful to its principles: “We should not panic and imagine that new social engineering, Napoleonic visions or national selfishness and a twin speed Europe will solve out problems.” While populists or bureaucrats might try to use the crisis for their own ends, “Europe through its entrepreneurial effort will strengthen its place in the world.” The Speaker of the Czech Parliament’s Chamber of Deputies, Miloslav Vlček, called for action to improve confidence in financial institutions: “Self regulation has been shown not to work. The EU must monitor regulation in the Member States, and we should clearly delimit responsibilities: fragmented regulation in the United States was one of the problems that led to the crisis,” he said, adding that better rather than more regulation was what was needed.
Social market and the Lisbon Treaty
EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering stressed his, and Parliament’s, support for the social market economy model, as set out in the Treaty of Lisbon: “This is an economy which is there to serve the people,” he said. He later added that allowing the Lisbon Treaty to fail would be a political, psychological and economic blow to the European Union at a time when we could ill afford it. “Those seeking to have the Treaty fail would also be responsible for the failure of future enlargement of the EU,” he said.
Almunia: vigilance for sustainability of public finances, but no risk of euro split
Economic and Monetary Affairs Commissioner Joaquín Almunia stressed that action to stimulate the economy should be “targeted, timely and temporary”, he said. “Some widening of the spreads in government bonds reveal that the risks perceive in public finances are not the same.” While only the public sector could provide the necessary fiscal stimulus, “we need to be vigilant not to threaten the medium and long term sustainability of public finances.”
On the other hand, he added: “The euro is helping us weather the storm. It is providing protection. Some so-called experts are discussing whether there will be a split in the eurozone. The probability of this is zero. Zero. In fact the list of countries seeking to join the zone has grown in recent months.”
Trichet: no return to previous status quo
ECB President Jean-Claude Trichet said that while the primary task was to resolve the immediate crisis, governments and the private sector also needed to tackle the root causes and avoid laying the ground for further crises in the future: “We should not go back to the status quo ante, but should focus on medium term stability,” he said.
As far as financial markets were concerned, this meant avoiding incentives for purely short term returns, increasing transparency and dampening pro-cyclical tendencies. On fiscal policy, he said it was vital that are “credible exit strategies planned and implemented once the stimulus has had its effect.” He said stimulus packages should be aimed at fostering longer term structural adjustment. “Stability-oriented policies are a European trademark,” he said. “This crisis has shown their value and we should not abandon them.”
One aspect of international governance that needed reform was to recognise that institutions like the IMF needed to focus as much attention on industrialised countries in terms of risk to the world economy as on emerging markets.
Kalousek: “we can only borrow from children and grandchildren”
Czech Finance Minister Miroslav Kalousek also warned of the need to ensure current stimulus spending did not get out of hand: “Some Member States cannot afford any further fiscal stimulus, and the public finances will have to be reined-in in future. We are now facing a sudden crisis, but in the long run an ageing population will be very expensive and we should not lose sight of the medium-term sustainability of public finances... all we can do now is borrow money from our children and grandchildren” He warned politicians against lending an ear to those calling for protectionist measures, describing this as a “road to hell”.
Lisbon Strategy and the economic crisis
The European Parliament’s co-rapporteurs on the Lisbon Stategy, Klaus-Heiner Lehne (EPP-ED, DE) and Edit Herczog (PES, HU) also took the floor. Mr Lehne argued that “Europe is doing relatively better in the crisis compared to some economies – partly because of what we have already achieved under the Lisbon process.” He warned against falling back into protectionism – or the sort of high national debts which would just lead, he said, from one credit crisis to another. Ms Herczog stressed the need for the EU to take concrete action to serve its citizens: “We need a close connection between funds spent on economic stimulus and the investment in people, research and innovation that set out in the Lisbon Strategy.” There should be more funding for retraining and against social exclusion for those hardest hit by the crisis, she said.
The Joint Parliamentary Meeting continues on Monday evening with three workshops on competitiveness, a social affairs and environmental sustainability. On Tuesday it concludes with contributions from the Czech Prime Minister, Mirek Topolánek, and the Commission President José Manuel Barroso. The event will help inform the European Parliament’s contribution to the Spring EU summit on economic matters, to be held in Brussels on 19-20 March.
20090216IPR49523 Website of the Joint Parliamentary Meeting
EN
1
LINK
/webnp/cms/lang/en/pid/1061
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
