Highlights of Brussels plenary session 18-19 February
Institutions
2009-02-18 - 15:19
Selected highlights of the Brussels plenary: Formal sitting with Czech President Klaus, Javier Solana on EU's role in the Middle East,
EU-NATO relations, Vote on resolution on CIA renditions, Reduction in VAT? Call for action to eliminate whaling, Awareness of mental health in the EU.
Formal Sitting with Czech President Václav Klaus The Czech President and Head of State Václav Klaus will address the European Parliament at 11.00am on Thursday 19 February in Brussels. The Czech Republic currently holds the Presidency of the Council from 1 January to 30 June 2009. MEPs to debate the role of the European Union in the Middle East with Javier Solana MEPs will debate the role of the European Union in the Middle East after hearing a statement from the High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy Javier Solana . Given the recent crisis in Gaza and the elections in Israel's general election, the EU's role is key. Parliament will vote on a resolution on this topic. The European Parliament has a working group on the Middle East. EU-NATO Relations: strengthen cooperation say MEPs MEPs in the Foreign Affairs Committee say that the EU and NATO could strengthen each other by avoiding competition and developing greater cooperation in crisis management operations. The report supports the establishment of a permanent EU Operational Headquarters. The first report of the European Parliament on NATO comes a few months ahead of the Alliance's 60th anniversary Summit to be held in Strasbourg and Kehl in April 2009.The report recognises the fundamental role of NATO in the security architecture of the Europe and takes the view that the future collective defence of the EU should as far as possible be organised in cooperation with NATO. MEPs call for a stronger Common Foreign and Security Policy MEPs in the Foreign Affairs Committee call for a stronger Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP), in a motion for a resolution on the annual report from the Council to the European Parliament on the CFSP in 2007 drafted by Committee Chairman Jacek SARYUSZ - WOLSKI (EPP-ED, PL). MEPs in the committee reiterate that the CFSP must be guided by the values of the European Union and its Member States: these values are democracy, the rule of law and respect for the dignity of the human person, for human rights and for fundamental freedoms, and the promotion of peace and effective multilateralism. MEPs promote a strong and effective foreign, security and defence policy MEPs in the Foreign Affairs committee point out that the European Union needs to develop its strategic autonomy. This strategic autonomy will help the EU to promote peace and international security, to defend its interests in the world, to protect the security of its own citizens, to contribute to effective multilateralism, to advance respect for human rights and democratic values worldwide and to safeguard world peace. Alleged use of European countries by the CIA for the transport and illegal detention of prisoners - vote on resolution Parliament will vote on a resolution on the alleged use of European countries by the CIA for the transport and illegal detention of prisoners following on from the debate of 4 February 2009. In February 2007, MEPs adopted a report saying that over one thousand CIA-operated flights used European airspace from 2001 to 2005 and temporary secret detention facilities "may have been located at US military bases" in Europe. 'Barcelona Process: Union for the Mediterranean' contributes towards peace and prosperity Opening up the 'Barcelona Process: Union for the Mediterranean' to countries not involved in the partnership "increases the likelihood of establishing parity in relations between the EU and the Mediterranean partner countries and of tackling the problems of the region in a comprehensive way". So says the Foreign Affairs Committee in a report drafted by Pasqualina NAPOLETANO (PES, IT). Provided that the proposal entitled 'Barcelona Process: Union for the Mediterranean' adopted by Heads of State and Government on 13 July, 2008 "delivers its promises and yields concrete and visible results", it contributes towards peace and prosperity and constitutes "a step towards economic and regional integration as well as ecological and climatic co-operation between the Mediterranean countries", the report states. Review of the European Neighbourhood Policy Instrument Konrad SZYMANSKI (UEN, PL) for the Committee on Foreign Affairs is proposing an own-initiative report drafted on the review of the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument (ENPI). Members call on the Commission, together with the partner governments, to develop further mechanisms for consultation with civil society and local authorities, in order better to involve them in the design and monitoring of the implementation of the ENPI and of the national reform programmes. MEPs will vote on legislative resolution on crackdown on employers of illegal immigrants Parliament will vote on the legislative resolution on the crackdown on employers of illegal immigrants, following the vote on the amendments in Strasbourg on 4 February. At the time, MEPs decided to postpone the final vote at the request of the rapporteur Claudio FAVA (PES, IT) to allow the addition of a declaration providing reassurance that this directive will not prevent further legislation on subcontractors. Between 4.5 and 8 million illegal immigrants work in the construction, farming, hotel and other sectors in the EU. One of the factors encouraging illegal immigration into the EU is the possibility of finding work. This legislation aims to reduce that pull factor by targeting the employment of third-country nationals who are illegally staying in the EU. Permanent reduction on VAT for local goods and services welcomed Member States should be allowed to reduce VAT rates for a new category of goods and services, such as restaurant services, children's car seats, audio books, beauty treatments, and locally supplied services, if there is no distortion to competition in the EU Internal Market, says the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs. Follow up of the energy efficiency national action plans Member States' failure to submit national energy efficiency plans highlights deficiencies that might "endanger the attainment of the EU's efficiency and climate protection objectives", says the Committee on Industry, Research and Energy in a report drafted by András GYÜRK (EPP-ED, HU). According to the report, the European Union wastes more than 20 % of its energy due to inefficiency and, if the saving objective of 20 % were met, the EU would use about 400 Mtoe (million tonnes of oil equivalent) less primary energy and the CO2 emissions reduction would be about 860Mt. A social economy "would reduce speculation in financial markets" Businesses which focus on people rather than capital play an essential role in the European economy and could help regulate financial markets, says the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs. But, the Committee warns, this "social economy" sector "remains little-known and is often the target of criticism stemming from misguided technical approaches".The Committee report, drafted by Patrizia TOIA (ALDE, IT), considers that "social economy enterprises should not be subject to the same application of competition rules as other undertakings" and that "they need a secure legal framework, based on recognition of their specific values". Adopt framework on informing and consulting employees or face consequences Noting that a significant number of Member States have yet to fully adopt a framework for informing and consulting employees, the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs is urging those countries to do so "as soon as possible" or face possible infringement proceedings. Various Member States have failed to take account of some young workers, women working part-time or workers employed for short periods on fixed-term contracts, says the report by Jean Louis COTTIGNY (PES, FR). Awareness of mental health in the EU One in four people experience mental health problems at least once in their lives, and many more are indirectly affected. The Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Food Safety is calling on Member States to develop awareness-raising campaigns, to combat stigma and social exclusion and to improve mental health legislation. In its report, drafted by Evangelia TZAMPAZI (PES, GR), Member States are called on to draw up "up-to-date mental health legislation, which is in line with international obligations as regards human rights … and which codifies and enshrines the basic principles, values and objectives of mental health policy". Call for action to eliminate whaling The Fisheries Committee is arguing for the elimination of lethal whaling for scientific purposes and the maintenance of the global moratorium on commercial whaling. In a report, MEPs call for the EU to work towards obtaining a "universal agreement" on whaling. Almost one in four cetacean (whale, dolphin and porpoise) species are currently regarded as under threat, with nine species listed as either endangered or critically endangered, and the status of others remains unclear. According to the report drawn up by Elspeth ATTWOOLL (ALDE, UK), although some whale populations have recovered somewhat since the introduction of the moratorium in 1986, others have not and their ability to adapt to changing environmental conditions remains unknown. Need for responsible, high-quality fisheries research In a report on applied research relating to the Common Fisheries Policy, the Fisheries Committee calls on the Commission to review the 7th framework programme when the mid-term evaluation is carried out, scheduled for 2010, paying greater attention to the specific problems of fisheries and aquaculture. The Fisheries Committee is convinced that both policy-makers and operators in the fisheries sector have a "crucial need for a more practical type of research" and, given the duration of the seventh framework programme, "it is imperative to include the objectives to be achieved". North-East Atlantic Fisheries This proposal aims to transpose into Community law the amendments to the Convention adopted by the North-East Atlantic fisheries (NEAFC) at its 23rd annual meeting in November 2004, allowing it to adopt recommendations establishing procedures for the settlement of disputes arising from the Convention. Given that the amendments made to the Convention "are likely to facilitate its application, in particular as regards the settlement of disputes, and that they also improve the sustainable management of fisheries resources", the rapporteur, Philippe MORILLON (ALDE, FR), is in favour of the proposal for a decision. European professional card for service providers Charlotte CEDERSCHIÖLD (EPP-ED, SE) for the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection will be putting forward an own-initiative report on the creation of a European professional card for service providers. The report stresses that greater mobility of persons and services between Member States and between regions is an essential element in achieving the Lisbon agenda for growth and jobs. There are still major obstacles for persons wanting to work in another Member State: 20% of complaints received by SOLVIT in 2007 concerned the recognition of professional qualifications required to pursue a regulated profession. Community participation in the European Audiovisual Observatory Ivo BELET (EPP-ED, BE) for the Committee on Culture and Education will be putting forward an own-initiative report by on Community participation in the European Audiovisual Observatory. It recognises that the Observatory plays a vital role by providing detailed information on the sector to both public and private bodies in the field. The report stresses that multimedia and new technologies will play an ever greater role in the audiovisual sector and that the Observatory must, in due course, strengthen its capacity to follow these new developments in order to continue to play an important role in the sector. Crop statistics Elisabeth JEGGLE (EPP-ED, DE) for the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development will be putting forward a legislative report amending the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council concerning crop statistics. The main amendments refer to the reference to land use, inclusion of definitions and variables with a low prevalence and evaluation of the report's quality. A special place for children in EU The Committee on Development, in a report by Glenys KINNOCK (PES; UK), welcomes the Commission's Communication on “A Special Place for Children in EU External Action” and the accompanying Council Conclusions as "important steps forward towards an EU strategy on the Rights of the Child", but underlines that "much remains to be done to put the political commitments into practice". The Committee report notes that despite the recent positive developments at EU level, the EU institutions and staff resources devoted to children’s rights remain inadequate. MEPs stress that "none of the plans will be realised unless adequate funding is available". Financing of actions other than Official Development Assistance Thijs BERMAN (PES, NL) for the Committee on Development is proposing an own initiative report by (PES, NL) with recommendations to the Commission on financing of actions other than Official Development Assistance in countries falling under Regulation (EC) No 1905/2006 (DCI), calling on the Commission to review this Regulation. The new legal framework requested covers all EU activities with third countries under the DCI which do not fulfil ODA criteria, such as cultural, scientific and economic exchange programmes, citizen-to-citizen contacts, or political dialogue. It is also suggested to limit the geographical scope of the requested legislation to those countries covered by DCI. New "European Research Infrastructure" status for research projects of pan-European interest The new regulation aims to facilitate the establishment of pan-European research infrastructures, to be jointly funded by several Member States. Under the new legislation, the European Commission will be able to confer the legal status of a "European Research Infrastructure (ERI)" to research projects submitted by Member States which fulfil certain conditions. The Industry Committee stresses that not only new research projects - as proposed by the Commission - but also already existing European projects should be able to apply for the new status of ERI.
20090216IPR49566 Briefing - 18-19 February 2009 Final draft agenda EuroparlTV EP live
EN
2
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?reference=2009-02-2&language=EN
EN
3
LINK
http://www.europarltv.europa.eu/StartPage.aspx
EN
4
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/frd/live/live-video?language=en
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20090210BRI49051 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
