Adopt framework on informing and consulting employees or face consequences
Employment policy
2009-02-19 - 11:57
Noting that a significant number of Member States have yet to fully adopt a framework for informing and consulting employees, the European Parliament is urging those countries to do so "as soon as possible" or face possible infringement proceedings. The report was adopted with 598 votes in favour, 21 against and 32 abstentions.
Many Member States are late in transposing a directive adopted in March 2002, which seeks to strengthen the process of informing and consulting employees within the EU. While some countries have "confined themselves to transcribing certain aspects of its minimum applicable provisions".
Various Member States have failed to take account of some young workers, women working part-time or workers employed for short periods on fixed-term contracts, says the report by Jean Louis COTTIGNY (PES, FR).
The report stresses that Member States cannot "invoke subsidiarity" to justify not imposing sanctions on employers who do not meet the requirements of the legislative framework.
Measures for Member States to take
The report calls on Member States to define precisely the term 'information', leaving no scope for alternative interpretations. It also asks that workers' representatives be allowed to scrutinise the information provided, that information be provided in good time before consultation, and that trade unions be involved in the process, in order to "consolidate social dialogue".
It suggests that those Member States "in which protection for employees' representatives is traditionally guaranteed by means of an agreement negotiated between trade unions and employers' associations provide for a high level of subsidiary protection for such employees' representatives should the negotiations fail".
Member States face possible infringement proceedings
MEPs are urging the Commission to take immediate measures to guarantee effective transposition of the directive and to initiate infringement proceedings against those Member States which have failed to transpose the directive or which have not done so correctly.
20090218IPR49790 Text adopted by the EP (click on 19 February)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
