The Week Ahead 2-8 March 2009
Institutions
2009-02-27 - 10:32
Committee meetings and political groups week
Women/European elections. Ahead of International Women’s Day on Sunday, EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering and other MEPs will join national MPs for a debate on women and the European elections (Thursday). The EP Press Service is organising a parallel debate with journalists and MEPs (Wednesday).
Hillary Rodham Clinton. The US Secretary of State will join President Pöttering for a "town hall" style meeting with young Europeans (Friday).
Seal products. The Internal Market Committee considers legislation which could ban or more closely regulate trade in seal products (Monday). The proposal originates from a Parliament resolution in 2006.
Financial reforms. A discussion with Peter Praet of the ECB Banking Supervision Committee gives the Economics Committee a first chance to debate the de Larosière report on financial market supervision (Monday).
President’s activities. President Pöttering will be meet both Nika Gilauri, Prime Minister of Georgia, and Sergei Stanishev, Prime Minister of Bulgaria (Thursday).
Altiero Spinelli anniversary. MEPs, including President Pöttering, will hold an event to celebrate the life and work of Altiero Spinelli (Thursday).
Preparing for the plenary. Parliament’s political groups will devote most of the week to preparations for the 9-12 March plenary session in Strasbourg. The main items on the agenda include a debate on preparations for the EU Spring Summit, including a vote on Parliament’s reaction to the Commission’s economic recovery plan. MEPs will hold the final vote on the maritime package and will decide on the ‘eurovignette’ proposal to include charge lorries for road use partly on the basis of the pollution.
Pre-session press briefing. Any changes to the plenary agenda will be announced at the regular press briefing. (Friday midday, Anna Politkovskaya room PHS 0A050).
20090227IPR50486
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
