EU-Russia cooperation agreement: MEPs’ recommendations
External relations
2009-03-10 - 08:02
The renewal of the EU’s cooperation agreement with Russia should be used as an opportunity to raise the human rights situation in the country, improve the security of gas supplies from Russia and seek assurances that Moscow will no longer use force against its neighbours, argues the EP Foreign Affairs Committee.
The committee adopted on Monday its recommendations for the negotiations on the agreement, following the resumption of talks between the EU and Russia on 2 December 2008.
The report, drafted by Janusz Onyszkiewicz (ALDE, PL), calls on Moscow in particular to respect freedom of expression and association by introducing legislation that complies with its European and international commitments as a member of the Council of Europe and the OSCE.
Intimidation and harassment of human rights activists must stop, say MEPs. The regular six-monthly human rights consultation between the European Union and Russia, which has failed to produce any tangible results since its establishment in 2005, must be reformed, they add.
Russia’s role in external affairs
The current negotiations on a new cooperation agreement between the EU and Russia must not be seen as legitimising the status quo in Georgia, argues the committee. Russia should be asked, under the new agreement, to provide assurances that it will not use force against its neighbours.
The talks on renewing the EU-Russia partnership agreement, which expired at the end of 2007, started on 4 July 2008 before being suspended following the war in Georgia. The resumption of talks was decided at the EU-Russia summit in Nice last November.
MEPs also call on Russia to contribute to finding sustainable political settlements for Kosovo, Transdniestria and Moldova.
Energy security
The principles of the Energy Charter (signed but not ratified by Moscow) and the charter’s protocol on transit (not signed by Russia) should be incorporated into the new cooperation accord, say MEPs. The protocol bans the suspension or reduction of energy flows in the event of a dispute on transit modalities until dispute settlement procedures have been completed.
Membership of the WTO
MEPs, who support the Russia’s membership application to the WTO – it has been a candidate since June 1993 – call on the Russian authorities to scrap all discriminatory taxes such as those applied to rail freight and to abolish their export taxes on untreated timber. They also want Russia to eliminate gradually the charges its levies for overflying Siberia.
In addition, Russia is urged to guarantee the property rights of foreign investors and to revise the 2008 law on strategic sectors, which defines 42 sectors in which the taking of controlling shares by foreign investors must be submitted for prior approval.
The Russian authorities should bring their intellectual property rules into line with WTO rules and international agreements, in particular TRIPS (the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights), and should seek to ensure that they are fully implemented so as to combat counterfeiting and piracy.
A more flexible visa regime needed
Lastly, members of the committee call on the Russian authorities to undertake to reduce administrative obstacles applied non-reciprocally to all travellers, especially the requirement for Europeans to have an invitation and to register upon arrival.
Vote:: 35 in favour, 16 against and no abstentions -- Procedure: own-initiative -- Plenary: April I, Brussels 2009-03-09 Committee on Foreign Affairs In the chair Jacek SARYUSZ-WOLSKI EPP-ED PL
20090309IPR51291 Foreign Affairs committee web site Legislative Observatory file - the adopted text will appear here in due coursee
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=en&body=AFET
EN
2
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5625832&noticeType=null&language=en
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
