Facing up to the challenges of shrinking oil reserves - doubts over biofuels
2009 elections
Energy
2009-03-11 - 12:50
In its report on possible solutions to the challenges in relation to oil supply, Parliament tackles the EU's reliance on oil imports, international co-operation, price hikes and renewable energy, suggesting a shift to more carbon-neutral solutions. Parliament expresses doubts regarding the medium- and long-term suitability of first-generation biofuels as a substitute for oil and calls for increased efforts in researching synthetic fuels.
MEPs adopted a joint alternative resolution from the EPP-ED and PES political groups with 471 votes in favour, 190 against and 16 abstentions.
The European Union's dependence on oil imports will rise to 95% by 2030, says the report, and conventional oil reserves will be increasingly concentrated in "countries in the strategic ellipse". The Committee regrets that "the Commission has not learnt lessons from the economic crisis".
"Only a complete shift in EU energy policy will lead to a solution as regards security of supply, solidarity among Member States and employment, and in social, environmental and economic terms," MEPs say. They also express their regret at the lack "of a clear commitment to further change in energy policy and structure".
Sufficient oil for coming decades
According to the various estimates, it will still be possible to extract sufficient oil to meet demand in the coming decades, says the report, "even though consumers may have to pay a higher price for it".
Noting the exclusion of oil pipelines from the trans-European energy networks (TEN-E), MEPs call on the Member States and the Commission to consider including oil infrastructure in the TEN-E in view of current developments. They also emphasise that new oil infrastructure projects such as the Odessa-Gdansk and Constanța-Trieste pipelines should continue to be "high-priority projects of European interest".
High price to pay
Turning to the price of oil, MEPs consider that the main reason for the oil price rise in the past eight years lies with a strong growth in demand that has led to bottlenecks in the extraction, transport and refining of oil and to large windfall profits made by a few big oil oligopolies. Monitoring of competition in the processing and sale of oil and petroleum products is a priority, while improving market transparency is vital, say MEPs.
Biofuels doubts?
Parliament expresses doubts regarding the medium- and long-term suitability of first-generation biofuels as a substitute for oil and calls for increased efforts in researching synthetic fuels.
20090310IPR51406 Adopted text (click on 11 March)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
