The Week Ahead 23-29 March 2009
Institutions
2009-03-20 - 14:25
Plenary Session – Strasbourg
Spring Summit. MEPs debate the outcome of the latest meeting of EU leaders with Council President-in-Office and Czech Prime Minister Mirek Topolánek plus Commission President José Manuel Barroso. Mr Topolánek will join EP President Hans-Gert Pöttering for a press conference (Wednesday).
Gordon Brown on G20. The British Prime Minister will join a debate on the forthcoming G20 London summit, which will aim to find global answers to the financial crisis. He will also have a bilateral meeting with President Pöttering (Tuesday).
Cosmetics. Parliament votes on an update to rules dealing with the content and labelling of cosmetics, including the issue of nanomaterials (debate Monday, vote Tuesday).
Single sky. Legislation to improve the capacity and performance of air traffic control systems will be put to the vote (debate Tuesday, vote Wednesday).
Biometric visas. Rules on how biometric identifiers are incorporated into visas for third country nationals visiting or residing in Europe have their second reading in Parliament (debate Tuesday, vote Wednesday).
EU-US relations. MEPs debate transatlantic relations after the election of a new US President (debate Wednesday, vote Thursday).
Car industry. The impact of the economic crisis on the car industry will be debated with the Commission (Tuesday, vote on resolution Wednesday).
Trade/EPAs. Parliament debates a series of Economic Partnership Agreements with African, Caribbean and Pacific states, and will vote on whether to approve agreements with CARIFORUM and Côte d’Ivoire (debate Monday, vote Tuesday).
Petitions/Spanish urbanisation. A report based on citizens’ petitions on the effects of controversial Spanish planning laws will be put to the vote (Thursday).
Credit rating agencies. Away from the plenary, the Economics Committee votes on new rules to improve transparency and reduce conflicts of interest at credit rating agencies (Monday).
20090320IPR52255 For details of all the week's events, see "The Agenda"
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20091300AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
