How to maximise EU cohesion policy
2009 elections
Regional policy
2009-03-24 - 13:17
Parliament's views on how to get the best out of EU regional policy spending are set out in five own-initiative reports adopted by the European Parliament in Strasbourg on 24 March.
These reports explore the concept of "territorial cohesion" (which the Lisbon Treaty, if ratified, would make a treaty objective), call for a clearer division of regional policy powers and responsibilities among EU Member States, regional and local authorities, recommend ways to help cities to tackle their economic, social and environmental problems, advocate closer co-ordination of rural and regional development measures, and analyse regional policy's contribution to the "Lisbon" (jobs and growth) strategy.
Territorial cohesion
Pointers to a reformed EU regional development policy, built around the concepts of (economic) concentration, connection and co-operation, are set out in this report, which responds to the Commission's Fifth progress report on economic and social cohesion and Green Paper on territorial cohesion. Parliament's report calls inter alia for a more comprehensive system of "transitional" assistance to regions about to rise above the full structural funding eligibility threshold (75% of EU average GDP) and a formal multi-level system of governance, to involve all stakeholders in regional policy design and implementation. (Green paper on territorial cohesion and the state of debate on the future reform of cohesion policy - Lambert van Nistelrooij , EPP-ED, NL). Adopted by 606 votes in favour, 50 against and 29 abstentions.
Powers, responsibilities, and best practices
Regional development projects need simpler procedures and a clearer division of powers and responsibilities among the EU, Member States and regional and local authorities, says this report, which proposes possible common criteria for defining best practices in regional policy, with a view to overcoming obstacles to use of the structural funds. It also suggests instruments to make these practices more accessible and visible to potential stakeholders. (Best practices in the field of regional policy and obstacles to the use of the Structural Funds - Constanze Angela Krehl , PES, DE). Adopted by 585 votes in favour, 35 against and 42 abstentions.
Getting the best out of urban development spending
Cities, which are home to 80% of the EU's 492 million people, need fully integrated urban development plans to tackle their economic, social and environmental problems, says this report, which urges EU Member States to delegate the management of EU money for urban sustainability projects to cities, and calls for more flexibility to combine funding from different sources.
Parliament calls for the integrated approach to urban development planning to be made a binding condition, as soon as possible but no later than the next programming period, for granting and implementing Structural Funds and also for receiving loans from the European Investment Bank(The urban dimension of cohesion policy in the new programming period - Oldřich Vlasák , EPP-ED, CZ). Adopted by 592 votes in favour, 47 against and 48 abstentions.
Getting the best out of rural development spending
Rural per capita income and access to goods and services are best improved by supporting non-agricultural activities in rural areas, without depleting farmers' incomes, says this report, which calls for figures on the take-up of rural development funding under the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP), and advocates closer co-ordination of rural and regional development measures, so as to enhance their combined impact. Complementarities and co-ordination of cohesion policy with rural development measures - Wojciech Roszkowski UEN, PL). Adopted by 626 votes in favour, 34 against and 7 abstentions.
Regional policy and the Lisbon strategy
This report responds to a Commission Communication on regional policy programmes for 2007-2013, which, with investments of €347 billion, make up the second-largest item in EU budget. 81.5% of investment funds go to "convergence" (i.e. fully eligible - under 75% of EU average GDP) regions, which are home to 35% of the EU population. MEPs note that the Member States' "Lisbon" (growth and jobs) allocations account for 65% of funds available in the convergence regions and 82% in the regional competitiveness and employment ones (i.e. all the rest).
Although these shares are bigger than initially requested (60% and 75% respectively), still more needs to be spent on Lisbon aims, e.g. at least 5% of structural funding should be spent on improving the energy efficiency of existing homes, says the report. (Implementation of the Structural Funds Regulation 2007-2013: the results of the negotiations on national cohesion strategies and operational programmes - Miroslav Mikolášik - EPP-ED, SK). Adopted with 565 votes in favour, 75 against and 39 abstentions.
Support microcredit to help disadvantaged people, says Parliament
Parliament adopted a legislative report on a proposal to support the growth of microcredit institutions in the EU. The report drafted by Zsolt Laszlo Becsey (EPP-ED, HU) was approved by 574 votes in favour, 23 against and 12 abstentions.
Microcredit to help people out of the crisis
The current financial crisis shows the need to provide financing to firms when access to capital is reduced due to liquidity crunch.
According to the approved resolution, microcredit is often granted not only for profit-making, but also for cohesion purposes, to reintegrate disadvantaged people into society. Therefore, it can represent an alternative source of credit, particularly in economically and socially disadvantages regions say MEPs.
Parliament calls on the Commission to put forward a legislative proposal to support the establishment of microcredit institutions throughout the EU. The approved resolution also provides detailed guidelines for the future legislation. In doing so, MEPs ask the Commission to analyse, in the light of the last sub-prime crisis, the advantages and disadvantages of microcredit against securitised credit facilities.
EU funding for microcredit for disadvantaged people
The financing of microcredit projects through the EU budget should favour persons and businesses without direct access to credit, say MEPs. Particularly, they should target disadvantaged people such as the Roma society, immigrants, people living in deprived rural areas, people with precarious work situations, and women.
Promoting microcredit
Among the proposed measures to support microcredit growth in the EU, MEPs ask the Commission to elaborate a communication strategy to promote self-employment as an alternative to wage earning and a way to escape unemployment for disadvantaged target groups.
As far as national authorities are concerned, MEPs call on Member States to adopt tax incentives for private involvement in the microcredit business. Moreover, the Commission should ask Member States to analyse and report on their efforts to support microcredit growth in their annual reports on national reform programmes, says the Parliament.
Need to update definition of microcredit
MEPs criticise current definition of microcredit put forward by the Commission since it does not allow a clear distinction between microcredits and microloans to microenterprises, microcredit for non-bankable borrowers and microcredit for bankable microenterprises.
Commission's current definition of micro-credit is a loan of EUR 25 000 or less and a microenterprise is one that employs fewer than 10 persons and whose annual turnover or annual balance sheet total does not exceed EUR 2 000 000
20090323IPR52339 Adopted texts (click on 24 March) Verbatim debate in plenary (click on 24 March)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
2
LINK
/activities/plenary/cre/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
