EU partnership accord with the Caribbean: green light from MEPs, with conditions
Development and cooperation
2009-03-25 - 16:04
The European Parliament gave its assent to the economic partnership agreement between the Cariforum States and the EU. MEPs insist that a real review clause and that extra aid for trade are included in the agreement. The EPA should contribute, through development goals, poverty reduction and respect for fundamental human rights, to the achievement of the MDGs. MEPs voted 460 votes in favour to 82 with 43 abstentions.
The draft resolution tabled in plenary, drafted by David MARTIN (PES, UK) and adopted on Wednesday, states that the economic partnership agreement (EPA) can only be described as "satisfactory" if it offers the Cariforum countries support for their economic development, promotes their participation in world trade and strengthens the regionalisation process.
Of the six groups of ACP countries taking part in such negotiations with the EU, the Caribbean region was the only one to sign, in December 2007, a full EPA covering areas such as investment, competition policy, public procurement, current account balances, the environment, social issues, cultural cooperation and greater protection for intellectual property. Thirteen Cariforum member states signed the agreement on 15 October 2008 and Guyana signed up on 20 October. Haiti has until 2010 to sign.
MEPs call on the Commission to clarify its stance on the stated EU objective of discouraging existing tax havens. Eight out of the 14 CARIFORUM signatory states of the EPA are listed as tax havens by the OECD.
Aid for trade
Regarding measures to accompany the EPA, which will include compensation for the net loss in customs revenue, MEPs ask the Commission to clarify the distribution of funds in the region within the "aid for trade" budget. These funds represent additional resources and are not merely a repackaging of the European Development Fund (EDF) funding). They also call on EU Member States to outline additional funding beyond 2008-2013 budget commitments.
The ACP states are asked to describe what additional EPA-related funds are needed, particularly with regard to regulatory frameworks, safeguard measures, trade facilitation and support in meeting international sanitary and phytosanitary and intellectual property standards. The EU is committed to increasing its trade-related assistance to €2 billion annually by 2010 (€1 billion from the Community, €1 billion from the Member States).
MEPs support the agreed tariff line exclusions focused on agricultural goods and some processed agricultural goods, given that they are based chiefly on the need to protect infant industries or sensitive products in these countries.
Parliament stresses that, if necessary, substantial changes to rules of origin should accompany the duty-free, quota-free (DFQF) initiative to produce a significant increase in goods exports.
Review clause and regional integration
Parliament welcomes the fact that a review of the Agreement will be undertaken no later than five years after the date of signature and at subsequent five-yearly intervals, in order to determine the costs and consequences of implementing the Agreement. It requests that the European Parliament and the Cariforum parliaments be involved in any revision of the EPA. An "independent monitoring mechanism within the Cariforum states endowed with the necessary resources" should also be set up to determine the extent to which the EPA is achieving its objectives.
MEPs stress that the implementation of the Agreement must take into account of the integration processes in CARIFORUM, including the aims and objectives of the CARICOM Single Market and Economy (CSME) as outlined in the Revised Treaty of Chaguaramas .
To stimulate intra-regional trade, MEPs call for the selective application of most-favoured nation treatment to the European Union by Cariforum and other sub-regional groups.
The interests of the outermost regions have not been sufficiently taken into account. Their short-term inclusion in interregional trade has been neglected, says the resolution. The European Council is asked to consult the regional councils of the outermost regions of the European Union in the Caribbean (Martinique, Guadeloupe and French Guiana) prior to ratification of the EPA.
They also call for further lowering of tariffs between developing countries and regional groups, which today account for 15 to 25 percent of the trade value.
Parliament oversight of implementation of the EPAs
Lastly, implementation of the EPAs should be scrutinised by the European Parliament's relevant parliamentary committee and involving members of the Committee on International Trade and of the Committee on Development, ensuring an adequate balance between the maintenance of the leading role of the International Trade Committee and overall consistency on trade and development policies.
20090325IPR52553 Adopted text (click on 25 March)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
