Highlights of the Brussels plenary session
Institutions
2009-04-01 - 15:52
The highlights of the Brussels plenary session are listed below. At the request of the Greens/EFA group and agreed by all political groups, MEPs will also debate the issue of many African migrants dying after their boat sank off the coast of Libya following a statement from the Commission.
Combating multiple discrimination Discrimination occurs, not only in employment but also in access to goods and services such as banking, education, transport and health. A directive aiming to guarantee equal treatment in these areas is backed by the EP Civil Liberties Committee, which particularly highlights the need to tackle multiple discrimination. The directive put forward by the European Commission is intended to reduce discrimination on grounds of religion or belief, age, gender or sexual orientation, whether direct or indirect, and whether based on real or presumed criteria. It comes on top of three other directives: one on discrimination based on racial or ethnic origin, both within and outside the labour market, one on discrimination on the labour market and one on equal treatment between men and women. All these goals are reaffirmed by members of the Civil Liberties Committee in the consultation report by Kathalijne Buitenweg (Greens/EFA, NL). MEPs to vote on resolution on European conscience and heroes of the fight against totalitarianism Following the debate which took place in Strasbourg plenary on 25 March 2009, Parliament will vote on a resolution on European conscience and totalitarianism. The debate was based on an oral question to the Council. Union citizenship and freedom of movement: MEPs slam Member States Practical application of the right to freedom of movement and residence of citizens and members of their families in the territory of the Member States is disappointing, say members of the Civil Liberties Committee in an own-initiative report by Adina -Ioana Vălean (ALDE, RO). In fact, no Member State has fully enacted the whole directive in its national law. Member States have erected many obstacles to the free movement of EU citizens, according to the Committee. The public still has little awareness of its rights, including the right to vote in local and European elections in the country where they live. Regional development funding for energy efficiency investment in housing Rules proposed by the Regional Development Committee would mean European Regional Development Fund (ERDF) money could co-fund national, regional or local authority schemes to install e.g. double glazing, wall insulation or solar panels in housing, or to replace old boilers with more energy efficiency ones, in all Member States. The ERDF currently funds such schemes only in the new (EU-12) Member States, and only in common parts of a building (or the entire building, if it's social housing), in deprived urban areas. European Regional Development Fund, European Social Fund, Cohesion Fund - updating the financial rules Parliament's assent is requested to a series of amendments to structural fund rules (i.e. the "General Regulation"), on the one hand to accelerate funding and boost liquidity for projects, and on the other to simplify rules, so as to enable faster project implementation. Iratxe GARCÍA PÉREZ (PSE, ES) for the Regional Development Committee recommends Parliament give its assent. Step up eco-labelling, design and management, says Environment Committee A first reading agreement has been reached aiming at the voluntary EU Ecolabel ("EU flower") system for environment-friendly products to become less costly and bureaucratic to use. The label has so far been awarded to over 3,000 products such as detergents, paper and shoes. The vote will take place tomorrow (Thursday). MEPs call for increased participation in EU's Eco-Management and Audit Scheme (EMAS) A first reading agreement has been reached aiming at simplifying the EU's voluntary Eco-Management and Audit Scheme (EMAS - which helps organisations to identify, monitor, measure and report on their environmental impacts) in order to attract new participants. The new regulation aims at further attract organisations to register EMAS without harming its environmental integrity. The Committee on Environment, Public Health and Food Safety, in a report drafted by Linda McAVAN (PES, UK), recommends approving the majority of the Commission's proposals concerning the Eco-Management and Audit Scheme, which helps organisation to identify, monitor, measure and report on their environmental impacts. International Treaty for the protection of the Arctic MEPs will debate a possible international treaty for the protection of the Arctic after hearing statements from the Council and Commission. The European Parliament will also vote on a resolution on Thursday 2 April. On 9 October 2008, MEPs suggested that the Commission should be prepared to pursue the opening of international negotiations designed to lead to the adoption of an international treaty for the protection of the Arctic. However, they believe that, as a minimum starting-point, such a treaty could at least cover the unpopulated and unclaimed area at the centre of the Arctic Ocean. EU-Russia cooperation agreement: MEPs’ recommendations The renewal of the EU’s cooperation agreement with Russia should be used as an opportunity to raise the human rights situation in the country, improve the security of gas supplies from Russia and seek assurances that Moscow will no longer use force against its neighbours, argues the EP Foreign Affairs Committee.The committee is putting forward recommendations for the negotiations on the agreement, following the resumption of talks between the EU and Russia on 2 December 2008. MEPs to vote on resolution on EU-Belarus relations Following the debate in Strasbourg plenary on 25 March, Parliament will vote on a resolution on the bi-annual evaluation of the EU-Belarus dialogue. Avoiding potential risks of electromagnetic fields Antennas, mobile phone masts and other electromagnetic emitting devices should be set within a specific distance from schools and health institutions, according to a report to be voted on next week by the European Parliament. The Commission should make more reliable information available about the effects of exposure to electromagnetic fields to citizens who feel that they are not well informed. The report acknowledges the wide use of wireless technologies and other electromagnetic emitting technologies and their benefits to society, but also raises concerns over their "continuing uncertainties about possible health risks." In particular, there are concerns about the exposure of children and young people to electromagnetic fields. The establishment of residue limits of pharmacologically active substances in foodstuffs of animal origin Avril Doyle (EPP-ED, IE) for the Environment Committee will be recommending the Parliament approve the common position for adopting a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council laying down Community procedures for the establishment of residue limits of pharmacologically active substances in foodstuffs of animal origin. Migration and mobility: challenges and opportunities for European education systems Migration can be greatly beneficial to schools as it can enrich them both culturally and educationally, but at the same time it can present significant problems if cultural differences hamper understanding between pupils or between pupils and teachers. The report, drafted by Hannu Takkula (ALDE, FI) wants to encourage a more effective means of incorporating migrant children in national education systems, as he believes that workers within the Union will be less likely to move abroad "if there is a risk that their children will suffer educationally." European cooperation for better schools The disparities between education systems in Member States and their possible knock-on consequences in economic and social disparities are of particular concern. The Council has adopted three targets for 2010 relating to school education which focus on "early school leavers, reading literacy, and the completion of upper secondary education." These goals are vital for reaching the aims of the Lisbon agenda, but more importantly they will help to ensure higher educational attainment amongst young people, which will improve their future employment prospects. Union citizenship: problems and prospects This report highlights the problems and the future prospects of Union citizenship. MEPs in the Civil Liberties Committee point out that enlargement has led to a considerable rise in the number of EU citizens resident outside their Member State of origin but that very few are aware of their rights. The committee is disappointed at the low number of EU citizens resident in a Member State other than their own who make use of their right to vote in European or local elections. MEPs call for a moving towards a clear and transparent visa policy The question of visas was made a European issue by the creation of the Schengen Area, brought into effect by the Amsterdam Treaty. The aim was to create a common set of rules across the EU for visa applications. The Community Code on Visas will integrate into a single text, all of the legal instruments governing the procedures and conditions of short term visas (less than three months). It aims to guarantee equal treatment for people applying for visas, and will simplify and harmonise the rules regarding visa applications, and will create a more transparent system.
20090331IPR53010 Briefing - 1-2 April 2009 Final draft agenda EuroparlTV
EN
2
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?reference=2009-04&language=EN
EN
3
LINK
http://www.europarltv.europa.eu/StartPage.aspx
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20090318BRI52118 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
