Boosting social protection of the self-employed and assisting spouses
Women's rights/Equal opportunities
2009-04-01 - 13:36
The EP Women's Rights Committee wants to make it compulsory for assisting spouses to have social security cover. MEPs are also keen to strengthen the maternity leave rights of self-employed women and assisting spouses.
The EP has called repeatedly on the European Commission for a revision of the existing EU directive, to improve the social security cover of assisting spouses and strengthen the maternity rights of self-employed women and assisting spouses, says the report by Astrid Lulling (EPP-ED, LU) adopted at first reading under the co-decision procedure by 23 votes to 0 with 2 abstentions.
Social security of assisting spouses: compulsory cover
The draft directive defines "assisting spouses" as the spouses or life partners of self-employed workers, when recognised by national law, not being employees or business partners, where they habitually participate in the activities of the self-employed worker. They are often found in farming, commerce, SMEs and the liberal professions.
The Commission is proposing that social security cover should be voluntary but the EP committee argues that Member States should ensure that assisting spouses become members in their own right of the same social insurance schemes as self-employed workers, covering sickness, invalidity and old age.
The contributions paid by assisting spouses should, say MEPs, be tax-deductible as operating expenditure, like the spouse's remuneration, if the services have been correctly provided and the remuneration is appropriate.
Maternity leave in adapted form
MEPs say Member States should ensure that female self-employed workers and assisting spouses are entitled to a period of maternity leave adapted to their needs.
The maternity leave should be of the duration of their choice provided that the total length does not exceed that specified in Directive 92/85/EEC on pregnant workers. This directive is currently being revised and the Women's Rights Committee will vote on it on 16 April.
Procedure: Co-decision - first reading -- Committee vote: 23 for, 0 against, 2 abstentions -- Plenary vote: May 2009-03-31 Committee on Women's Rights and Gender Equality Chair Anna Záborská EPP-ED SK
20090330IPR52910 Website of Women's Rights Committee The self-employed and assisting spouses: Legislative Observatory file
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=FEMM
EN
2
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5697052
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
