Parliamentary reform: third package adopted by Constitutional Affairs Committee
Parliament's Rules of Procedure
2009-04-22 - 20:06
Amendments to Parliament's rules of procedure, taking up changes agreed by the political groups in a third package of reforms to update its internal procedures, were approved by the Constitutional Affairs Committee on Wednesday. These reforms complete a process begun two years ago. The first two packages, adopted in 2007 and 2008, dealt with plenary sessions, EP reports, the legislative process and inter-institutional relations.
The Committee also approved another report providing in Parliament's rules of procedure for changes that would come into force if and when the Lisbon Treaty is ratified by all Member States.
Both reports were drafted by Richard Corbett (PES, UK). The report on the third reform package was approved in committee with 19 votes in favour, three against and two abstentions. The one on the Lisbon Treaty was approved with 20 votes in favour, three against and one abstention.
The changes approved include reforms to:
allow the use of joint committee meetings for complex legislative dossiers that cross committee boundaries,
make it mandatory for the Conference of Committee Chairs to give a recommendation to the Conference of Presidents on how to resolve any conflict of competences between committees,
generally increase co-operation between committees, notably by enhancing the role of opinion-giving committees;
formalise EP s consultation with European civil society,
clarify the role of "intergroups", i.e. unofficial groupings formed on specific issues with Members from different political groups,
modify existing rules on debates in plenary,
introduce a motion to reject the Commission's proposal in first reading; and
formalise the negotiating procedure with other EU institutions (e.g. for "first reading" agreements).
These reforms complete a process begun two years ago, when a working group on EP Reform was proposed by Parliament President Hans-Gert Pöttering and established under the chairmanship of Dagmar Roth-Behrendt (PES, DE).
The first two packages, adopted in autumn 2007 and autumn 2008, related to the organisation of plenary sessions, the handling of EP reports, the operation of the legislative process and improvements in inter-institutional relations.
Changes relating to the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty
The approved amendments, which cannot enter into force unless the Treaty ratification process is successfully concluded, include reforms to:
regulate role of observers from accession countries,
establish a procedure to ensure respect for the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality,
establish a procedure for Treaty revision, including the Convention,
set up a procedure for the election of the President of the Commission, and introduce a secret ballot vote, and
set up a procedure for approving the withdrawal of a Member State.
2009-04-22 Committee on Constitutional Affairs In the chair Jo LEINEN PES DE
20090422IPR54224 Constitutional Affairs Committee web site
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=AFCO
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
