Western Balkans: reaffirmed European perspective to stabilise the region
External relations
2009-04-24 - 14:02
The prospect of future EU membership for countries of the Western Balkans is the primary guarantor of stability and a driver of reforms, say MEPs in a report drafted by Anna Ibrisagic (EPP-ED, SE) and adopted on Friday in Strasbourg with 305 votes in favour, 23 against and 12 abstentions . Full membership to the EU of countries that satisfy the Copenhagen criteria must not be delayed or denied, says MEPs to the Commission and to the Member States.
The EU's leverage in the Western Balkans depends on the credibility of its commit ment to a European future for the region.
The accession process must be based on a fair and rigorous application of the principle of conditionality whereby each country will be judged solely in the light of its capacity to meet the criteria laid down. Efforts must be made to avoid a situation whereby differences in the pace of integration result in the erection of new barriers in the region, in particular with regard to the process of visa liberalisation.
Bilateral issues to be solved
The opening of accession negotiations with the countries of the Western Balkans and the opening and closing of individual negotiation chapters should not be obstructed or blocked over questions relating to bilateral disputes . The EU should make every effort to assist and facilitate a comprehensive and lasting settlement of the pending issues. Certain Western Balkan countries have lodged complaints or sought advisory opinions from the International Court of Justice.
Critera for visa liberalisation to be fulfilled
The Council and the Commission are urged to conduct the dialogue on visa liberalisation transparently. MEPs stress the importance of a liberalisation of the Schengen visa regime for the citizens of the Western Balkans as a means of acquainting the people of the region with the European Union.
A cumbersome visa procedure, compounded by understaffed EU consulates and embassies in the region, is liable to generate hostility towards the EU among the people of the region, say MEPs. Countries of the region have to accelerate their efforts to fulfil the requirements set out in the individual roadmaps, so as to ensure the removal of the visa regime for their countries as rapidly as possible.
Cooperation with the ICTY needed
Full cooperation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY), is an essential requirement of the accession process. This includes the arrest and extradition of the remaining fugitive inductees, the transfer of evidence and full cooperation before and during the trial process.
A coordinated abolition of all prohibitions and legal obstacles prohibiting the extradition of their own nationals facing indictment in other states of the region, and of the legal obstacles which hamper the transfer of serious criminal proceedings between courts in different countries of the region is asked by MEPs. These provisions restricting extradition can foster impunity for high-level crimes including crimes against humanity, violations of the laws or customs of war, trans-national organised crime, illicit trafficking, and terrorism.
Inter-parliamentary dialogue to be strengthened
MEPs stress the importance of fully involving the national parliaments of the countries of the Western Balkans in the process of European integration. They call on the Parliaments of EU Member States to give their assent promptly to those Stabilisation and Association Agreements which are currently in the ratification process.
The report asks to promote inter-ethnic and intercultural dialogue. The legacy of the wars of the 1990s continues to be a significant impediment to the establishment of security and political stability in the region. The report also expresses concern at the political interference suffered by the media in all Western Balkan states and the intermingling of business, political and media interests.
Efforts to establish by 2010 a comprehensive Western Balkans Investment Framework for the coordination of grants and loans offered by the Commission, by international financial institutions and by individual country donors are backed by Parliament.
MEPs ask to have increased funding and number of scholarships for study and research in the EU available to students and researchers from the Western Balkans under the Erasmus Mundus programme. Participation of the countries of the Western Balkans in Community programmes and agencies is suggested.
Participation of the countries of the Western Balkans in Community programmes and agencies is suggested.
20090422IPR54270 Adopted text (click on 24 April)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
