European Parliament to vote on EU asylum policy
Immigration
2009-04-30 - 13:46
A package of measures to improve the way the EU asylum system works and strengthen asylum seekers' rights will come before the plenary of the European Parliament in Strasbourg next week. MEPs have proposed amendments to increase solidarity between Member States in the management of asylum applications.
Ten years ago, EU governments at the Tampere summit decided that asylum should be dealt with as a policy of the European Union. Since then the Union has sought to align national law in this area through a number of directives that harmonise the reception conditions for asylum seekers and the procedure for granting refugee status.
In 2003, with the Dublin II regulation, the Union incorporated into EU law the 1990 Dublin Convention, which aims to identify swiftly the Member State responsible for examining an asylum application and prevent abuses of asylum procedures whereby one person lodges simultaneous applications in several Member States.
This system uses a fingerprint database known as Eurodac, which allows Member States to check whether an asylum seeker has already made an application in another EU Member State.
Insufficient harmonisation in practice
Experience has revealed shortcomings in this system. An assessment by the European Commission published in 2007 pointed out that the significant discretionary powers the directive gives Member States ran counter to the main aim of the directive, which is to guarantee adequate reception conditions for asylum seekers.
For their part, MEPs have pointed to major differences between Member States' treatment of applicants with the same background as well as great variations in reception conditions. The Civil Liberties Committee reported on this phenomenon after making a series of visits to detention centres across Europe.
The "asylum package" put forward by the European Commission takes up a number of points requested by MEPs, such as a clearer definition of the rules to ensure national laws are properly harmonised, and stronger rights for asylum seekers in terms of legal aid, family unification, education and health care. MEPs also repeatedly stressed the need for greater solidarity between Member States, in particular with countries in the south of the EU, who have to deal with a large number of asylum applications.
Thus, the package includes a proposal to revise the "reception directive", which is amended for the EP in a report by Antonio Masip Hidalgo (PES, ES), and a proposal to improve the Dublin system, amended in a report by Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert (ALDE, NL). The Commission also puts forward a proposal to revise the Eurodac regulation (EP report by Nicolae Vlad Popa (EPP-ED, RO)) and another to set up a European Asylum Support Office to assist Member States in managing asylum applications (EP report by Jean Lambert (Greens/EFA, UK)).
These four co-decision reports will be debated and put to the vote at first reading at Parliament's plenary session in Strasbourg next week.
20090429BKG54732
Revision of "reception directive": MEPs urge stronger rights for asylum seekers
The first piece of legislation, which is broadly endorsed in the report by Antonio Masip Hidalgo (PES, ES) adopted by the EP Civil Liberties Committee by 33 votes to 1 with 1 abstention, is intended to beef up the right of asylum seekers to adequate reception conditions: it lays down standards that must be guaranteed in terms of housing, food, clothing, health care, financial benefits, freedom of movement and access to work. The text also includes provisions on the protection of vulnerable people, such as minors, unaccompanied minors, pregnant women and victims of torture and violence.
Rules on the use of detention
According to the draft legislation, the use of detention should be decided on a case-by-case basis, and asylum seekers should not be held in prisons but in specialised detention facilities. Legal guarantees against arbitrary detention must be introduced. The detention of unaccompanied minors must be banned.
Free legal assistance for asylum seekers
Only the judicial authorities should have the power to order detention, according to the directive. Administrative authorities can do so only in emergency cases and their decision must be confirmed by the judiciary within 72 hours. In the absence of a decision, the asylum seeker concerned must be freed immediately. Asylum seekers placed in detention must be informed in a language they understand, or that it is reasonable to assume they understand, and receive legal assistance and free representation if they wish it. They must also be able to receive medical care and appropriate psychological support.
MEPs believe that the administrative procedures for asylum applications must be carried out swiftly and that delays which are not the fault of the asylum seeker cannot justify an extension of the detention period.
In addition, they believe that access to work must be guaranteed within six months after a request for international protection has been lodged. Minors must have access to education within three months.
Vulnerable people
Member States are required to check, as soon as a request for international protection is lodged, whether the applicant has special needs: vulnerable people, including minors, pregnant women and victims of torture and violence, or victims of female genital mutilation, must receive adequate attention, say MEPs. They add that torture victims must be directed quickly towards a suitable care centre. Member States must also assist with family unification and guardians must be designated to advise and protect unaccompanied minors. Legislative Observatory file - Masip Hidalgo report
Dublin regulation: aiming for a better balanced asylum system
A second proposal in the asylum package seeks to improve the Dublin regulation of 2003. The purpose of this regulation was to ensure access to the asylum application procedure and guarantee swift processing of applications, while preventing multiple applications by on person in several different Member States.
The proposal seeks to guarantee higher standards of protection for individuals and cope better with situations in which the reception capacity of asylum systems of the Member States is under particular pressure. It lays down deadlines to make the procedure for determining responsibility more efficient and quicker. It also includes provisions guaranteeing that all the needs of those applying for international protection are covered and that sufficient legal guarantees are laid down, such as the right of appeal against transfer decisions, including the right to legal aid, to representation and to family unification. It also reaffirms the principle that nobody may be placed in detention simply because they are applying for international protection.
The report by Jeanine Hennis-Plasschaert (ALDE, NL), which was adopted unanimously by the Civil Liberties Committee, backs these principles. However, it proposes that solidarity between Member States be increased by means of compulsory instruments such as the formation of teams of national experts to assist Member States confronted with a large number of asylum applications, and the creation of a re-housing programme to enable beneficiaries of international protection to be received by a Member State other than the one that granted them this protection.
Improving the Eurodac fingerprint database
The Dublin system could not work without a system for identifying foreign nationals who have already lodged an asylum application in another Member State. This system is Eurodac, a digital set-up for comparing fingerprints, which has been in operation since 2003. The proposal in the asylum package seeks to improve the general functioning of the system, to clarify the different stages of its operation and to lay down rules on data protection. Member States will be required to delete data no longer needed for the purposes for which it was collected. The report by Nicolae Vlad Popa (EPP-ED, RO), adopted in the Civil Liberties Committee by 28 votes to 4 with 3 abstentions, supports this proposal with some technical improvements. Legislative Observatory file - Hennis-Plasschaert report Legislative Observatory file - Popa report
An office to encourage cooperation among Member States
Lastly, the Commission proposes the creation of a European Asylum Support Office, which will be a regulatory agency. Its task will be to facilitate and strengthen practical cooperation between Member States in asylum matters and thus contribute to better implementation of the common asylum regime.
The draft regulation is accompanied by a draft decision which facilitates the funding of the Office by redeploying some of the funds currently allocated to the European Refugee Fund. This redeployment is approved in a report by Barbara D端hrkop D端hrkop (PES, ES) that will also come before the full Parliament in this session.
The Civil Liberties Committee adopted, unopposed with one abstention, the report by Jean Lambert (Greens/EFA, UK) approving the creation of the European Asylum Support Office. This body will provide expert assistance to help implement EU asylum policy. It will also increase cooperation between Member States and help those subject to particular pressures.
Early warning system
MEPs want this office to develop, in conjunction with the UN High Commissioner for Refugees and relevant NGOs, training programmes on asylum for national civil servants.
The office will also put in place an early warning system to enable Member States and the Commission to anticipate large-scale influxes of applicants for international protection, as well as a system of mandatory solidarity for re-housing recipients of international protection of any Member State whose national asylum system is overloaded. Legislative Observatory file - D端rkhop D端rkhop report Legislative Observatory file - Lambert report
EN
1
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5723652
EN
2
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5723522
EN
3
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5723532
EN
4
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5749232&noticeType=null&language=en
EN
5
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5749242
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
