Support programme for financial services, financial report and auditing
Economic and monetary affairs
2009-05-06 - 14:32
A new Community Programme to support specific activities in the field of financial services, financial reporting and auditing was approved by the Parliament on Wednesday. with 537 votes in favour, 20 against and 5 abstentions.
By approving the report by Karsten Friedrich HOPPENSTEDT (EPP-ED, DE), MEPs back the Commission proposal to establish a programme to support the activities of certain European and international institutions that contribute to achieve supervisory convergence and cooperation in the field of financial reporting and auditing.
The Community programme is established for the period from 1 January 2010 to 31 December 2013, with a financial envelope of EUR 38.7 million. Initially, the Commission had proposed a slightly smaller figure, EUR 36.2 million.
The approved decision reflects an agreement reached by the European Parliament with the Council of Ministers.
Beneficiaries of the fund
Beneficiaries of the fund will be the European Financial Reporting Advisory Group (EFRAG), the International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation (IASCF) and the Public Interest Oversight Board (PIOB). (Annex)
In addition, the Parliament asks the Commission to put forward a proposal to provide interim financing to the three EU Committees of Supervisors in 2009, namely the Committee of European Securities Regulators (CESR), the Committee of European Banking Supervisors (CEBS) and the Committee of European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Supervisors (CEIOPS).
The total amount of this interim funding for 2009 will not exceed EUR 500 000 and should cover part of the cost of the identified projects and trainings put forward by the EU Committees of Supervisors for 2009
Extra funding is due to exceptional circumstances
MEPs made clear that a decision on interim funding for 2009 is justified because of the exceptional circumstances of the ongoing financial crisis. Moreover, they stress that that decision is not intended to constitute a precedent.
Indeed, according to MEPs, the worsening of the financial crisis emphasised the need to strengthen supervisory convergence and cooperation at the EU level. The development of common information technology tools and a common supervisory culture by the three EU Committees of Supervisors, are two instruments by which to achieve that aim, says the approved report.
Finally, MEPs ask the Commission to present, by 1 July 2010, a report on the need for further reforms of the financial supervisory system in the European Union and on reinforcing European audit firm oversight cooperation.
20090505IPR55121 Adopted text (click on 6 May)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
