Preparations for EU summit debated...with EP elections just around the corner
2009 elections
European Council
2009-05-05 - 17:14
In today's debate ahead of the European Council of 18-19 June in Strasbourg, MEPs, the Council and Commission spoke not only about the summit agenda but also their hopes for ratification of the Lisbon Treaty and in particular the importance of the upcoming European elections of 4-7 June.
Opening the debate on behalf of the Council presidency , Alexandr VONDRA , the Czech deputy prime minister for European affairs, spoke first about institutional issues. He was optimistic about ongoing efforts to finalise an agreement giving Ireland guarantees on various issues of concern to the Irish people, so that Ireland could ratify the Lisbon Treaty. He was also hopeful about tomorrow's vote on the treaty in the Czech Senate.
Choice of next European Commission after the EP elections
Mr Vondra then spoke cautiously about the appointment of the next European Commission, and in particular its president, after next month's European Parliament elections, saying "I am fully aware of the views expressed here on the desirability of associating the European Parliament in this process in an adequate manner. The matter is of course complicated. The Presidency will therefore need to carefully reflect, together with its partners, on how to proceed".
Economic crisis, climate change, foreign policy
Turning to the economic and financial crisis, the minister said the summit would look at the issue of better supervision and regulation of financial institutions and measures to support the real economy and employment. It would also discuss preparations for the Copenhagen summit on climate change and he stressed that the EU was committed to shouldering its fair share of the funding that would be needed. Lastly, EU leaders would probably discuss various external relations issues: this week's summits on the Eastern Partnership and the "Southern Corridor - New Silk Road" and the troika summits with Japan and Canada.
Commission President Barroso
Commission President José Manuel BARROSO spoke first of the European elections, saying they were an opportunity to "renew our values" and he hoped all citizens would understand why it was important to vote. A great deal of legislation adopted in the last five years "bears the European Parliament's stamp", he said, listing areas such as climate change, energy security, security and freedom, and the internal market. "We need to speak clearly and with conviction to voters about this Europe of results", he argued.
Europe also needs "the benefits of the Lisbon Treaty", said the Commission President. In addition, it was important to "keep up the momentum" ahead of the Copenhagen climate summit.
Turning lastly to the economic crisis, Mr Barroso identified two key areas. First, the reconstruction of the regulatory and supervisory regime for financial services, where "the current system of national supervision has failed". He wanted Europe to be the "first mover" at global level on this front. Secondly, employment, where he stressed the need to "rebuild Europe's social market economy".
Political group speakers
The leader of the EPP-ED group, Joseph DAUL (FR), focused first on the choice of the next Commission president, which he expected to be "in accordance with the election results", in other words that it should be an individual from the biggest political group in the EP.
The EPP-ED group, he said, "appreciated" the Czech presidency, which had had to deal with difficult situations such as the Ukraine-Russia energy problems and the financial crisis. Mr Daul looked forward to a debate at the European Council on "a more ethical financial regulatory system" and he welcomed the Commission's proposals on this, as a way of "helping us back on the path to growth and employment".
"We want you to dwell more on social issues", Hannes SWOBODA (PES, AT) told Mr Vondra, stressing that Commissioner McCreevy's proposal on hedge funds was not what PES President Poul Nyrup Rasmussen had advocated, but a "Swiss cheese" directive, with more holes than substance. "We have no faith in McCreevy", he added.
The PES stands for a "Europe of social progress, from the posted workers directive to the social chapter" - if you compare its manifesto to the EPP paper hatched in Warsaw, "you'll see that it's us who favour the social market economy", said Mr Swoboda, adding that the PES "recognises that the lack of economic policy co-ordination has been partly responsible for our weakness in dealing with the crisis". Mr Swoboda then called on the Commission, Council and Member State governments to act together to prevent mass youth unemployment, by creating training and employment opportunities.
"We approach the European Council with anxiety tempered by ambition", said ALDE Chairman Graham WATSON (UK), noting that "the Commission President needs to be underpinned by Commissioners", and that "when we ask citizens to choose MEPs, we run the risk of opportunism - filling a vacuum with the EU's opponents". "The next Commission President must know the legal basis and time frame for appointing Commissioners", he continued, stressing that for certainty's sake, this basis needs to be "all Nice, or all Lisbon". The Czech Senate would vote on the Lisbon Treaty the following day, and if it is in favour, then President Klaus should sign it, and confirm this decision when he takes over the PM's chair at the summit, said Mr Watson. Voters, he said, are less interested in constitutional problems than practical ones, and need to see how "Europe can lead the fight back" in areas such as the economy, climate change and human rights abuses, concluded Mr Watson.
Proposals put forward at this Council to improve the economic situation will need to be implemented without delay, said Brian CROWLEY (IE) for the UEN group, because "99% of the people we talk to care more about their own future than Europe's".
Rather than getting stuck on "ideological fixes", we need practical proposals to restore stability to the banking system, confidence in the markets and ambition for the future, he continued, stressing the need not to point at individual Commissioners, but to find a collective response. "To err is human, but to forgive is divine", he noted. "We also need to be honest about what we are capable of doing", he stressed, noting that "even when lying in the gutter, you can look at the stars". Collectively, Europe can set an example for the world, he concluded.
Monica FRASSONI (IT) for the Greens/EFA, spoke of the "tricky situation" surrounding the Lisbon Treaty. She believes that "the idea of unanimity is a mistake" and that the idea of "showing countries politely to the door" would have been a "proper constitutional reform." However, this Parliament has now "lost its opportunity to make itself an engine of integration and an engine of the positive reform of the treaties by settling for this procedure." Concerning, the environment and the upcoming Copenhagen Conference, Ms Frassoni stated that: "if we don't bring out the money, then there will be no deal and Europeans will be mostly to blame for that."
"We must have an urgent change of course, and a break from neo-liberal policies at Community level, which have made the crisis of capitalism worse", according to Ilda FIGUEIREDO (GUE/NGL, PT). Citing a number of statistics, she stated that, "We have a fall in the GDP of something like 4% this year, with stabilisation only in 2010 forecast, with a loss of more than 2.5 million jobs and the unemployment rate reaching something like 12%." Speaking in relation to the Lisbon Treaty, Ms Figueiredo believes that the EU needs "to respect the sovereign will of the people of Ireland" and instead put its primary focus on dealing with the financial industry.
Hanne DAHL (DK) of the IND/DEM criticised the EU for giving unemployed people "the impression that the EU leaders really are not interested in unemployment, and workers aren't being heard at top level." She believed that the economic crisis presents "a strong challenge to the euro", and that "a series of countries, have serious problems with the euro; Ireland, Mediterranean countries and Eastern European countries, and this has been aggravated by the international financial crisis. Countries which are outside, the United Kingdom, Denmark and Sweden are doing fairly well. Therefore, Ms Dahl called on the June Council Summit to "take a stand on countries with such serious problems, so that they can get out of the iron grip of the euro"
Jana B OBOŠÍKOVÁ (NI, CZ), speaking on behalf of the unattached MEPs, criticised the attitude of the Czech Presidency towards the Lisbon Treaty, and called on Mr Vondra "to cease the undemocratic and mendacious practice of railroading through the Lisbon Treaty and instead to tell the citizens the truth." Ms Bobosikova stated that the "EU is ticking along nicely even amidst the economic crisis; it's taking the necessary measures and the Member States are able to cooperate amongst themselves and they don't need the Lisbon Treaty to do it." She also condemned the Czech Presidency for its statement that "anyone who doesn't adopt the Lisbon Treaty should leave the EU." This was condemned as "outrageous" by Ms Bobosikova, as "nobody can be kicked out of the Union against their will."
20090505IPR55033 Czech Presidency of the European Union
EN
1
LINK
http://www.eu2009.cz/event/1/1674/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
