Clear and easily-understandable energy label for TV sets
Consumers
2009-05-06 - 12:50
The new energy efficiency classes for household goods proposed by the European Commission could mislead consumers buying a new TV, said the European Parliament today when it blocked the Commission's proposal to sub-divide the highest energy class A. MEPs did, however, approve the new label for household fridges and freezers.
Parliament blocked - by 399 votes in favour, with 260 against and 12 abstentions - the Commission's plan to change the format for the energy labelling of TV sets. The Commission proposed an implementing measure which would have sub-divided the highest energy class 'A' by adding new classes such as 'A-20%', 'A-40%', 'A-60%' etc.
MEPs oppose this new format since it could "add to confusion about whether class 'A' represents an efficient or an inefficient product". Instead the Commission should reserve A-label status for the top 10 – 20 % best performing equipment", say MEPs.
MEPs recognise that "televisions are high-energy consuming appliances and consequently there is considerable potential for saving energy by adding this category to the energy labelling scheme". Parliament, therefore, calls on the Commission to submit new draft measures based on a closed 'A-G' scale by end of September 2009.
New label for fridges and freezers
A similar resolution opposing the Commission's plans of introducing the new format for household refrigerating appliances was not backed by the necessary majority of MEPs. In future a new fridge labelled "A-20%" will mean that this product consumes 20% less energy than an "A" model product.
"Regulatory procedure with scrutiny"
Under the current energy labelling directive, adopted by Parliament and Council in 1992, the Commission may set technical requirements, such as the energy classes for household appliances such as freezers, washing machines, driers, dishwashers, or air-conditioners. Parliament and Council may block such implementing measures under a "regulatory procedure with scrutiny". Parliament can do so by an absolute majority of its members (i.e. at least 393 MEPs).
20090505IPR55125 Adopted text (click on 6 May)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
