Human rights: arrest of Roxana Saberi, authoritarianism in Venezuela, coup in Madagascar
Human rights
2009-05-07 - 17:10
In three resolutions on human rights and democracy adopted at the end of this Parliament's final plenary session, MEPs condemn the arrest in Iran of journalist Roxana Saberi and the political persecution of opposition figures in Venezuela, and issue a call for a return to constitutional order in Madagascar following the recent coup d'état.
Imprisonment of Roxana Saberi and other human rights abuses in Iran
In its resolution on Iran, Parliament condemns "the unfounded sentence" handed down against the American-Iranian journalist Roxana Saberi. MEPs also express concern at the general deterioration of human rights in Iran, are "appalled about the continued executions of juvenile offenders" and criticise the treatment of labour rights activists.
Call for immediate release of Roxana Saberi
On 18 April 2009, the Iranian Revolutionary Court handed down an eight year prison sentence against Roxana Saberi for espionage. Ms Saberi's lawyer has filed an appeal against her conviction, as she is pleading innocence on all charges. The appeal is due to be held on 12 May. However, Ms Saberi has had no access to a lawyer for five weeks and has been denied a fair and transparent trial by the Iranian courts.
MEPs express their deep concern at her deteriorating health condition. They urge the Appeal Court at its hearing of 12 May to release her "immediately and unconditionally on the grounds that the trial was held in camera and without legal due process, in accordance with international norms, and to rescind all charges against her."
End the execution of young offenders and change the bail system in Iran
In recent weeks there have been other cases in Iran which have aroused grave concern.
Maryam Malek, a member of the 'One Million Signatures' campaign was arrested on 25 April this year. Her bail has been set at 200 million rials (over €10,000), which her family is unable to pay. MEPs call for the immediate release of Ms Malek and other labour rights activists who are being held "solely on the grounds of their commitment to fair labour practices." Parliament also condemns the bail system used by the Iranian authorities, which is designed to "suppress all public statements by critical citizens or peaceful reform movements."
On 1 May 2009 in Rasht Prison, the Iranian authorities executed Dilara Darabi, convicted of an alleged crime committed whilst under the age of 18. MEPs express their shock at the "unfair trial and execution" of Dilara Darabi, and are appalled by the continued executions of other juvenile offenders, which is in complete disregard of international law and assurances by the Iranian authorities that this practice had ceased. Parliament calls on the Iranian authorities to comply with all international human rights instruments which have been ratified by Iran, in particular those which guarantee the right to a fair trial. Finally, the Council and the diplomatic representations of all Member States to Iran are called on to take "urgent concerted action with regard to all these cases."
Lastly, MEPs adopted an amendment insisting that the Iranian authorities urgently abolish the practice of execution by stoning. The resolution cites one recent case and expresses concern about two pending executions.
* * *
MEPs condemn coup in Madagascar and call for humanitarian assistance
The recent coup d'état in Madagascar is strongly condemned by MEPs, who want to see the immediate restoration of the legitimate government.
Following two months of bitter struggle in Madagascar, an army backed coup d'état was carried out by the former mayor of the Malagasy capital, Andry Rajoelina. Mr Rajoelina and his self-proclaimed High Authority of Transition suspended the National Assembly and the Senate and forced the democratically elected President Marc Ravalomanana to flee the country.
Response of the international community
The coup d'état has been widely condemned by many international organisations and the new regime has not been recognised by the international community. As a result several states and international organisations, including the European Union and the United States, have ceased sending assistance to Madagascar and the country has been suspended from the African Union and the Southern African Development Community.
The EP resolution backs the demands by several international organisations for the "restoration of constitutional order" and for the rapid holding of new elections. Parliament also calls on the international community to "step up its efforts to bring an end to the political violence in Madagascar" and includes a specific request to the AU Special Envoy for Madagascar to cooperate with the representatives of the international community in order to make contact with all the Malagasy parties to reach an agreement on a speedy return to constitutional order.
Deteriorating humanitarian situation
The resolution draws particular attention to the worsening humanitarian situation, which has been exacerbated by the consequences of the political instability. The UN has launched an appeal for $35.7 million in humanitarian aid for Madagascar, as it anticipates that there will be food shortages as a result of the coup. MEPs support the call to the international community, especially the EU, to increase humanitarian assistance to Madagascar in order to "alleviate the suffering of the people."
* * *
Political persecution and authoritarianism in Venezuela
In the light of the intimidation and harassment of a number of opposition figures in Venezuela, including Manuel Rosales, the elected mayor of the city of Maracaibo, Parliament expresses its "profound concern at the deterioration in the situation and in the quality of democracy in Venezuela", which is being threatened with collapse by "the growing authoritarianism" displayed by President Chávez.
The political situation in Venezuela has recently undergone an alarming slide towards authoritarianism, says the resolution, with increased harassment, threats, intimidation, political and criminal persecution directed at the opposition, students, elected officials and journalists.
Call for an end to political persecution
The case of Manuel Rosales is symbolic of these changes and the increasing political persecution in Venezuela. Rosales is ex-governor of the state of Zulia and the democratically elected mayor of Maracaibo, and has been repeatedly and publicly threatened with imprisonment by President Chávez.
As a result of this political persecution, he was granted political asylum in neighbouring Peru, an act which prompted the immediate withdrawal of the Venezuelan Ambassador to Peru. The charges against Rosales, concerning an alleged discrepancy in income declaration whilst he was governor of Zulia, are clearly politically motivated and demonstrate the increasingly worrying trend that the Venezuelan judiciary is controlled by the executive.
MEPs express their solidarity with all those suffering from political persecution in Venezuela, including Manuel Rosales and others cited by the resolution. Parliament "strongly condemns the use of threats, violence, the abuse of power, defamation and the exploitation of the legal system as a political weapon designed to intimidate and eliminate opponents."
Democracy entails respect for rule of law and right of political opposition
Parliament also points out that, under the conditions of the OAS Inter-American Democratic Charter, in order to exercise power in a democracy, there needs to be "a legitimacy of exercise...founded on respect for the established rules, the constitution, the laws and the rule of law", including a respect for democratic political opposition.
As such, MEPs call on the President and authorities of Venezuela to show respect for the rule of law and constitutional legality, as well as tolerance of political opponents, to carry out political action through dialogue and to comply fully with international agreements ratified by Venezuela.
20090506IPR55234 Full text of resolutions will be available here (click on 7 May 2009)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
