European Charlemagne Youth Prize 2009: award ceremony on 19 May
Youth
Ireland
2009-05-12 - 11:58
The European Charlemagne Youth Prize 2009 will be awarded in Aachen on May 19th at 11am. The Prize is awarded to youth projects that encourage the development of a shared sense of European identity. The President of the European Parliament, Hans-Gert Pöttering, and the Chairman of the Charlemagne Prize Foundation, Michael Jansen, will participate in the ceremony.
Irish winner
In June 2008, a group of 10 young people from a disadvantaged area in Blanchardstown in West Dublin paid a visit to Lieto in Finland as part of a project organised by Foróige, an Irish youth organisation which has as its catchphrase 'empowering youth, enriching communities'. The aim of the project was for the young people to exchange experiences with young people in another country, and to learn about each others countries, cultures, identities and common problems.
A number of preparatory events took place in Ireland before the young people left for Finland - an examination of the problems associated with drug use in the area for example and a European citizenship workshop.
Role models for young Europeans
The European Charlemagne Youth Prize is granted to projects undertaken by people between 16 and 30 years old. The winning projects should serve as role models for young people living in Europe and offer practical examples of Europeans living together as one community. Youth exchange programmes and Internet projects with a European dimension are amongst the projects selected.
The European Charlemagne Youth Prize, which is jointly organised by the European Parliament and the Charlemagne Prize Foundation, is awarded annually. This is its second edition. Last year a Hungarian project, "Students without Borders", was awarded the first prize.
Total prize money of €10, 000
The three winning projects will be awarded funding of €5,000, €3,000, and €2,000 respectively. They will also be invited to visit the European Parliament in the next months.
President Pöttering's initiative
In a speech delivered in the hemicycle in February 2007, the President of the European Parliament, Hans-Gert Pöttering, called for the creation of a European prize for young people. "We should pay tribute to the commitment of young people to the European idea", the President told the assembly. "High-ranking European awards have had such a positive effect on public awareness; it is time to create an award for the younger generation, for young Europeans who show particular dedication to the European ideal", he added.
Selection procedure
National juries consisting of at least two MEPs and one representative of a youth organisation have selected a national winner from each of the 27 Member States. In April, the European jury, consisting of three MEPs, the President of the European Parliament, Hans-Gert Pöttering, and four representatives of the Foundation of the International Charlemagne Prize, selected the three winners from the 27 projects.
Representatives of the 27 projects have been invited to the award ceremony in Aachen.
Practical information
The award ceremony will take place in Auditorium I of the RWTH University (Templergraben 55, 52062 Aachen) on May 19th. The event is scheduled to start at 11:00 and finish at 13:00. It will be followed by a reception.
All journalists with a press badge are welcome.
20090508IPR55514 European Charlemagne Youth Prize
EN
1
LINK
http://cyp.adagio4.eu/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
