UK winners of the EP prize for journalism go forward
Institutions
United Kingdom
2009-05-29 - 15:55
The UK nominations for the European Parliament Prize for Journalism have been selected and will now go forward to compete for the overall €5,000 prizes against entries from other EU Member States. The UK winner in the internet category was Mark Mardell for his blog on the BBC website; and in the written press category, Justin Stares, for his piece in Lloyd's List shipping newspaper on the impact of EU laws on the shipbreaking industry across the globe.
The UK judging panel did not make any nominations in the TV or radio categories.
This is the second year of the European Parliament Prize for Journalism. Entries this year had to have been published or broadcast between May 2008 and March 2009. The overall winner in each of the four categories (TV, radio, internet, written press) has to have made an outstanding contribution to clarifying major issues at European level or have promoted a better understanding of EU institutions or policies. Altogether EU-wide there has been some 266 applications. The application period started on 15 January and ended on 31 March 2009.
Internet
The UK nomination for the internet section is an entry on Mark Mardell's BBC blog entitled 'German identity angst'. Published in November 2008, it looks at perceptions of modern Germany and what it means to be German today.
Based in Brussels for the last four years, Mark Mardell's blog has developed a wide audience - this entry received 487 comments - and is not only well-written, but engaging and insightful.
Written
Justin Stares' piece for Lloyd's List won the UK nomination for the written press category, beating off entries from national, local and other specialist trade publications. His article 'The human factor' looked at the impact of EU maritime safety legislation on the shipbreaking industry both in the EU and the rest of the world, with a particular focus on South Asia.
Lloyd's List is a daily newspaper for the shipping industry which has been running without a break since 1734. Justin Stares' article was accessible, avoiding the use of jargon even though written for a specialist audience, and raised an important ethical dimension to issues arising from the unforeseen consequences of EU legislation.
The UK judging panel
There were three members of the UK judging panel, from the Association of European Journalists, the Reuters Institute for Journalism and a former BBC European affairs presenter.
All nominees will be invited to the award ceremony in Brussels on 16 October.
20090526IPR56306 European Parliament Prize for Journalism UK Office of the European Parliament
EN
1
LINK
http://www.eppj.eu/
EN
2
LINK
http://www.europarl.org.uk/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
