EP elections - political leaders give their reaction
Hearings
Institutions
2009-06-09 - 17:21
In the wake of the result Parliament's outgoing President Hans-Gert Pöttering called for a greater public role for the European Parliament. Among the reactions of political leaders in the European Parliament the triumphant mood of the centre-right EPP contrasted with bitter disappointment in the Socialist camp. There is agreement however that the new distribution of power in the Parliament asks for novel, more permanent political cooperation. For many in the larger political groups the prime concern is the election of members representing strongly nationalist and "extremist" ideologies rather than the turnout.
Here are some reactions:
EPP: Joseph Daul (263 seats): "Such a victory means responsibility.”
The centre-right European People's Party emerged as the clear winner in Sunday's poll. They will have 263 out of 736 seats in the new parliament - comfortably the largest group.
Speaking in Parliament's Chamber on Sunday night their leader Joseph Daul said that the EPP-ED group had "largely gained" from the night. Speaking later in a press conference on Monday he said: "We have at least 100 seats more than the Socialists. Such a victory means responsibility.”
He also said he was pleased that the "Polish plumber had disappeared" from European politics saying that people had voted against protectionism and what he called the "populist rhetoric" used by the left.
Mr Daul noted that in the coming term the aim of the EPP would be "to clean up the financial system and improve security for all, food security and energy security".
PES: Martin Schulz (162 seats): "a bitter evening for social democracy"
One of the most striking tales of the evening was the collapse of the centre left across Europe. This leaves the Socialist PES group in Brussels and Strasbourg on 162 seats - down from 215.
On Sunday night a visibly dejected Martin Schulz told the press: "It is a very bitter evening for social democracy in Europe. We expected better results....However, in a democracy we have to accept that what the voters give us." He went on say that the results "reflect the domestic atmosphere in the member states".
However, he vowed to continue saying "our duty remains the same - we will try to implement the social agenda".
ALDE: Graham Watson (80 seats) "We will continue to hold the balance"
For the Liberal ALDE group Graham Watson said he was pleased with the result of 80 seats saying "we will continue to hold the balance between left and right".
Speaking in a press conference on Monday he noted that: "There is a regrettable increase of the representation of far right and the extremists. We all know the lessons from the economic depression in 1930's. I am convinced this result is also the cause of the current crisis." He blamed voter disillusionment and a failure to integrate immigrants into European societies as two aspects that had helped the extreme right.
Greens/EFA: Daniel Cohn-Bendit 52 seats
"The success of the Greens in the European elections shows that the Europeans have accepted the vision of tomorrow's Europe proposed by environmentalists" said Mr Cohn Bendit. He went on to say that "this is in contrast with the destructive forces of success vis-à-vis Europe, such as Eurosceptic or extreme right".
(UEN) : Cristiana Muscardini 35 seats
Ms Muscardini told us that results show that the EU Institutions must respond in a "less bureaucratic and more timely" way to the needs of business.
She believes that the "centre-right" will respond better to people's concerns if all the countries finally understand that the European parliament "is a motor of development".
Referring to the present crisis, she said that "even with the current severe financial and economic crisis and the crisis of values" - Europe must be "reformed"
GUE/NGL: Francis Wurtz : 32 seats
Commenting on the turnout of 43% - the lowest ever - Francis Wurtz - said "I think it reflects a crisis of confidence of too many citizens vis-à-vis Europe, as it is built today". Speaking about his own group he said "I think we should roughly maintain our relative weight within the EP". (IND/DEM): Nigel Farage: 18 seats For the Independence and Democracy Group Nigel Farage said commented "the great success of the UK Independence Party , in Britain , and of the LA.O.S (Popular Orthodox Rally) in Greece , building upon that of its former delegations , will allow IND/DEM to enlarge and attract new members , in order to fight for a more democratic organisation in Europe, within or without the EU."
On the turnout
Turnout for the election has been provisionally put at 43.1% - just slightly lower than for the last election in 2004.
Mr Watson pointed at "relative lack of the interest shown by the European citizens in these elections."
However, he was far from downcast: "It is very hard to know why people vote and why do not vote. One could just as well assume that people don't vote because they are satisfied and content, as assume that they don't vote because they are dissatisfied."
Mr Pöttering compared the turnout with the US mid-term elections for the House of Representatives where the turnout is always below 50%.
Mr Schulz warned about a decline of interest in the EU elections when the EP's role grows: If the Lisbon Treaty is adopted, 80 further areas will fall under the competences of the EP.
Both Mr Watson and Mr Daul complained about lack of true European debate in many Member States and in order to boost it, they suggested, that the percentage of MEPs should be elected from pan-European lists.
In a democracy we have to accept that what the voters give us
Socialist Martin Schulz
20090608STO56950 Results Centre-right clear winners in European elections EP elections - slight decline in turnout
EN
1
EUROPARL-TV
http://www.europarltv.europa.eu/swf/EmbedPlayer.swf?vid=1326d251-1418-4e2d-8143-f975b57f5636&cid=845a9964-bb23-4116-90f3-87a64976b498&lang=en&bitrate=512&loop=off&autoplay=off&startVolume=medium&showTitle=on&showBottom=on
EN
2
LINK
http://www.elections2009-results.eu/en/index_en.html
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20090608STO56947 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20090608STO56948 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
