Annual Programme of Grants published by Parliament's DG Communication - Call for Proposals
Institutions
United Kingdom
2009-06-10 - 15:34
The aim of this notice is to bring to your attention a Call for Proposals which has been published on the Europarl website (see below)of the European Parliament. Its aim is to find suitable projects from Member-State organisations which aim to enhance understanding of the role of the EP and how it functions, which encourage a wider public interest and participation in the decisional process, and which provide a platform for those citizens to raise issues which are important to them.
The overall budget for this programme: €5 000 000
Implementation of the programme and indicative time schedule:
A call for proposals has been published on the internet site of the European Parliament (see links below) providing full details of the type of projects, per theme, which may be considered for the award of a grant by DG Communication and details of the criteria on which the proposals received will be evaluated. The call for proposals will set out the detailed arrangements for submission of proposals and the application form to be used by interested parties wishing to apply for a grant. (Published in June 2009. The deadline for receipt of proposals will be 1 September 2009).
Proposals received by the closing date will be evaluated by an evaluation committee, according to the criteria published. Those proposals deemed most worthy will be selected for the award of a grant. (Mid/end November 2009).
All unsuccessful applicants will be notified of the reasons for the rejection of their proposal and successful applicants will be offered a grant agreement for signature. (December 2009).
Themes for 2010:
1) Co-financing Television programmes.
2) Co-financing Radio programmes.
3) Co-financing Website and internet activities.
Procedure:
Applications submitted, in due form, and according to the instructions indicated in the published call for proposals will be evaluated in three stages by an evaluation committee. Proposals which successfully pass the exclusion criteria will be assessed according to the selection criteria.
Subsequently proposals passing the selection criteria will be evaluated according to the award criteria.
The European Parliament has Information Offices in each Member-State capital city as well as five satellite offices. These offices will publicise this call for proposals on their websites and provide a link to the application procedures. The European Parliament plays an active and important role in drafting legislation: For example, on environmental protection, consumer rights, equal opportunities, transport, and the free movement of workers, capital, services and goods. Parliament also has joint power with the Council over the annual budget of the European Union.
THE CALL FOR PROPOSALS OF DG COMMUNICATION OF THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT WAS PUBLISHED ON THE EUROPARL WEBSITE ON 28/5/2009 AND IS OPEN TO PROJECTS WHICH WILL COMMENCE ON THE 1/1/2010 AT THE EARLIEST AND WHICH WILL BE COMPLETED BY 30/4/2011 AT THE LATEST.
20090610IPR57032 Annual Programme of Grants 2010 - DG Communication EP Information Offices DIRECTORATE-GENERAL for COMMUNICATION - Call for proposals 2010
EN
1
LINK
/tenders/grants.htm
EN
2
LINK
/parliament/public/nearYou/completeList.do?language=EN
EN
3
LINK
/tenders/subventions_call_proposal_2010.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
