Ten films shortlisted for Parliament's 2009 LUX cinema prize
Culture
2009-06-15 - 12:11
A profile of the LUX prize and some of the entries Asylum seekers risking their lives, the courage of a Bosnian girl and unrequited love are just three themes in the 10 films short-listed for the European Parliament's annual LUX cinema prize. The films are all European productions that deal with issues that Europe faces - in particular those that unite or divide us. A panel of 17 people from the film industry selected the films - which will be shown in the EP before being whittled down to three finalists at September's Venice Film Festival.
35 RHUMs
35 RHUMs is a French film which looks at the close relationship between train driver Lionel and his daughter Joséphine. In particular the closeness of their bond and the exclusion of others as they both struggle to form relations with outsiders. In French and directed by Claire Denis.
Ander
Ander charts the changes brought to the monotonous life of Basque peasant Ander in the Basque countryside at the run of the 20th century when he hires José and develops feelings for him. The presence of José alters the relationship that Ander has for his family and those around him. In Basque and Spanish and directed by Roberto Caston.
Eastern Plays
Eastern Plays looks at the growing problem of neo-Nazi violence in Europe. In these film two brothers - Georgi and Itso - find themselves on opposite sides of the spectrum as one is an active racist whilst the other saves a Turkish girl from a beating. Directed by Kamen Kalev it is in Bulgarian, Turkish and English.
Für ein Augenblick Freiheit
"For a moment Freedom" looks at the journey of three groups of asylum seekers who are fleeing Iran and Iraq. We join them in Ankara where a married couple with a child, two young men with two children and two men anxiously await the results of their visa applications to travel to the west. Directed by Arash T. Riahi the film is in Turkish, English, Persian and Farsi.
Katalin Varga
Katalin Varga is the tale of women's journey through the Carpathians after being banished by her husband and her village. Her search for the real father of her son Orban takes her back to place she vowed she would never again visit. The film is in Hungarian and Romanian and is directed by Peter Strickland.
Lost persons area
Lost persons area charts the desolation of a passionate couple Bettina and Marcus and their 9-year old daughter Tessa who live in the middle of electricity pylons which Marcus services. The arrival of a Hungarian engineer Szabolcs to help him in his job upsets the balance of their mundane and listless existence. The film is in English, Dutch and Hungarian and is directed by Caroline Strubbe.
Nord
A Norwegian former ski champion Jomar Henrikson now lives a feckless and dissolute life as a ski instructor after emerging from deep depression which accompanied the end of his career. The discovery that he has a son, Sami, in the north of the country leads him to embark on a personal and physical journey to find him and come to terms with his new responsibilities. Directed by Rune Denstad Langlo and in Norwegian.
Pandora's Box
Three siblings in Istanbul have to put aside their difference to search for their mother who is suffering from Alzheimer' disease and has disappeared. Along the way a Pandora's box of family memories and rivalries is reopened. In Turkish and directed by Yesom Ustaoglu.
STURM
The Yugoslav war crimes tribunal in The Hague is the scene of this film directed by Hans-Christian Schmid. Prosecutor Hannah Maynard persuades a young Bosnian girl to testify against an alleged Bosnian Serb war criminal. Amid the threats from Bosnian Serb nationalists, Maynard realises that threats and enemies lurk among her own colleagues. In English, German, Bosnian and Serbian.
Welcome
Simon is a swimming instructor working in Calais who decides to try and woo his wife back by helping a young Kurdish refugee swim the English channel to seek asylum in Britain. As they prepare for this hazardous journey a bond develop between this unlikely couple. Directed by Philippe Lioret the film is in French, English and Kurdish.
After three finalists are chosen in September all 736 Members of the European Parliament will be eligible to cast their vote for the winner which will be announced on 25 November. The Parliament will then pay for the leading film to be subtitled in all 23 official languages of the EU and also help in its distribution by DVD.
LUX - facts
LUX means light in Latin
Prize intended to support European film industry
28 June - 5 July: Fuilms shown at Brussels European Film Festival
"Le Silence de Lorna" - 2008 LUX winner by Dardenne brothers
20090612STO57086 LUX LUX 2008 LUX 2007
EN
1
EUROPARL-TV
http://europarltv.europa.eu/swf/EmbedPlayer.swf?vid=1e8ad395-fca0-4e78-a2e2-db2edef8600a&cid=0c8dedcf-1098-46c9-9b85-6f2b0f0b120d&lang=en&bitrate=512&loop=off&autoplay=off&startVolume=medium&showTitle=on&showBottom=on
EN
2
LINK
http://prixlux.eu/
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20081020FCS39962 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20071107FCS12747 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
