New tasks need new resources, Budgets Committee MEPs tell Commissioner-designate Algirdas Šemeta
Budget
2009-09-01 - 21:25
New EU tasks need new resources, Budgets Committee MEPs urged Lithuanian Commissioner-designate for the Budget Algirdas Šemeta at a hearing Tuesday on his portfolio and next year's EU budget.
The need for new resources was stressed by several MEPs, including 2010 budget rapporteur László Surján (EPP, HU) and Anne Jensen, (ALDE, DK). "The Economic Recovery Plan lacks 2.4 billion euros. Have you started to think about how to solve that?" asked Göran Färm (SE, S&D).
"We work on a proposal where we will use resources, which were planned for, but not spent on, agriculture. But for the essential part, we would need to redeploy existing resources", replied Mr Šemeta.
MEPs also cited EU external actions and measures against climate change as new tasks needing new financing. Mr Šemeta said he regretted the budget cuts in Council's first reading earlier this year and defended the Commission's preliminary draft budget.
Mr Šemeta said he wanted to "eradicate politically short-sighted reasoning of 'I paid and I received' or 'I want to get back what is mine'" and get away from the complex revenue system of exemptions, derogations and corrections. "I hold the view that reform of the financial system should be based on the principle of added value... Economic growth and job creation, EU energy security, the response to climate change and the Community as a global player – these issues top the agenda, even of public debates on budgetary reform, and they should be among the top priorities", he said.
He also agreed with MEPs Helga Trüpel, (Greens/EFA, DE) and Reimer Böge, (EPP, DE), on the need to simplify budget implementation and the rules governing the structural funds, and promised new proposals, such as introducing "one-stop-shops".
Committee chair Alain Lamassoure (FR, EPP) reminded Mr Šemeta of his role, representing an institution independent of both the Council and Parliament and hoped that, as a newcomer, he could help the EU to do away with anomalies such as budget lines that are never used and cannot be afforded in times of financial crisis.
MEPs gave Mr Šemeta a lighter hearing than usual, because the present Commission's term will soon expire. Parliament is to vote at its September plenary session on whether to approve the appointment.
2009-09-01 Committee on Budgets In the chair Alain LAMASSOURE EPP FR
20090901IPR60078
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
