EU Member States must deliver on aid pledges, say Development Committee MEPs
Development and cooperation
2009-09-03 - 18:53
EU Member States must meet their international aid commitments to developing countries, and particularly those disproportionately affected by the economic downturn, said Development Committee MEPs in a debate with two international experts on Thursday. The committee also approved a resolution on the effects of the crisis on developing countries and development co-operation.
The economic crisis is having devastating economic and social effects on African countries, including declining export earnings, sharp reductions in capital inflows and large fiscal deficits which make it impossible to use fiscal stimulus measures, stressed African Development Bank Group President Donald Kaberuka .
The forthcoming G20 summit in Pittsburgh "must go beyond statements of principle", deliver on global Official Development Assistance (ODA) commitments and meet the needs of low-income countries by allocating resources flexibly and case by case, he added.
Oxford University professor of international political economy Mrs Ngaire Woods, next presented her study, commissioned by Parliament, on "The international response to the global crisis and the reform of the global financial and aid architecture", which looks at how multilateral institutions such as the G20, the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the World Bank and the EU helped to manage the crisis.
Development emergency
The World Bank estimates that the "development emergency" triggered by the economic downturn threatens to plunge a further 90 million people into poverty and puts the Millennium Development Goals out of reach, she said.
Mrs Woods noted that whereas 82% of recent IMF loans had gone to European countries (including EU Member States Hungary, Latvia and Romania) only 1.6% of its new lending had been to African countries.
She also pointed out that the EU's pledge to "front load" aid meant that whilst it might produce immediate benefits, poor countries would get less in the long run.
Development Committee chair Eva Joly (Greens/EFA, FR), underlined that the funds available from the IMF and World Bank for low-income countries are insufficient and minimal when compared to the financial bonuses offered by Western banks. She also pointed out that African countries are under-represented at international level: "Africa has nearly one billion people and they are not part of the G20 group, they are not allowed to use their voices", she said.
Increased poverty in Africa leads to political instability and even state collapse, which has a direct impact on Europe, such as piracy off the coast of Somalia, said Professor Woods in reply to MEPs.
EP Resolution on the effects of the global financial and economic crisis on developing countries
The G20 did not address the reform of international financial institutions, and particularly of the IMF and World Bank, to put an end to their harmful conditionalities, says the Development Committee in a resolution adopted this morning.
The financial means promised to developing countries in the G20 package will be neither sufficient nor focused on the neediest countries, and will not arrive fast or flexibly enough to make the necessary difference for developing countries, say MEPs.
The resolution welcomes the EU's plans to front load €8,8 billion of development aid, budget support and agricultural financing for immediate action, but MEPs express concern as to how the Commission will fill the funding gap in future years caused by front-loading budget support now.
MEPs also ask the Commission to come up with new proposals for innovative funding mechanisms and urge EU Member States to fulfil their ODA commitments by 2010.
This resolution is likely to be on the agenda of the upcoming Strasbourg session.
2009-09-03 Committee on Development In the chair Eva JOLY Greens/EFA FR
20090903IPR60181 "Supporting developing countries in coping with the crisis" - Commission Communication of 8 April 2009
EN
1
LINK
http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=COM:2009:0160:FIN:EN:PDF
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
