Jerzy Buzek in Ireland: "The referendum is not a test of the popularity of the Irish government; it is about our common future in the EU"
Treaties
2009-09-08 - 19:05
"I am certainly not here to tell the Irish people how to vote. I have lived too long under a dictatorship which told us not only how to vote, but how to think, to ever presume to do that!" said European Parliament President Jerzy Buzek during his one-day visit to Ireland.
Mr Buzek was in Ireland on Tuesday at the invitation of the Irish Institute of International and European Affairs where he delivered a keynote speech.
"The decision on the Lisbon Treaty is a sovereign decision of the Irish people. The referendum is not a test of the popularity of the Irish government, it is about our common future in the EU," said President Buzek.
EP President Jerzy Buzek met Irish Minister for Foreign Affairs Micheál Martin T.D. President Buzek also addressed a packed gathering of young Irish people and members of the Polish community in Ireland.
Key points of the speech delivered to the Institute of International and European Affairs are set out below
(the full speech will be available on President Buzek's website, see the link below)
"I am certainly not here to tell the Irish people how to vote. I have lived too long under a dictatorship which told us not only how to vote, but how to think, to ever presume to do that!"
"I hope that the vote will be on the issues at stake in the Lisbon Treaty, and not a vote on the performance of the current government."
"The Irish Referendum on the Lisbon Treaty on 2 October is too important for the future of Ireland, and the future of Europe, for it to be used as means of sending domestic messages to people here in Dublin. The vote of the Irish people on 2 October is about sending a message about Ireland's place in Europe."
"I believe that this is too important a referendum for the luxury of a low turnout. I urge people to go out and vote, to make their opinions heard. But, ultimately, it is the sovereign decision of the Irish people - a decision that would be reinforced by high participation."
"Ireland's European partners listened to your concerns and Ireland secured a good deal at the June European Council. Most notably Ireland will continue to have the right to designate a member of the European Commission. You have also received legally-binding guarantees on setting your own tax rates, on sensitive ethical issues and on your traditional policy of neutrality."
"I am convinced that when the Irish people examine closely what is at stake, they will find it in their hearts and minds to support the Lisbon Treaty – a treaty which is essential for the continued realisation of our shared European dream of peace and prosperity on our continent."
The Institute of International and European Affairs is a policy think tank in Ireland dedicated to the study of international relations and European Union policies. 20090908IPR60388 TV news footage of the visit is available for download in MPG2 (broadcast quality) as well as an MP3 audio file for radio via this FTP link President's website - including full text of speech
EN
1
LINK
ftp://epavvideoget:mo12ssb@ftpeps01.europarl.eu.int/epavvideo/cabinetpresident/Buzek_Ireland
EN
2
LINK
http://www.ep-president.eu
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
