Environmental impact of landfill sites in Ireland
Petitions
Ireland
2009-10-02 - 12:02
MEPs voiced concern on Thursday about the dumping of waste in two landfill sites, one in Northern Ireland, the other in the Republic of Ireland. Local residents have warned of the environmental and health dangers of not complying with EU rules on waste dumps.
The two cases, examined by the EP Petitions Committee, were the plans to open four landfill sites in County Derry (the Ringsend area) and the impact of an existing site in County Louth (Whiteriver). MEPs urged that a proper environmental impact assessment be carried out in the first case and decided to follow the issue closely in the second.
Four landfill sites planned in County Derry
The first petition warns of the potential cumulative effects of four landfill sites planned in the Ringsend area, County Derry. The petitioner believes these plans violate the spirit of the EU law on the landfill of waste because the four sites are less than 5.6 kilometres apart.
However, the EU directive on landfill of waste lays down no rules on the distance between landfill sites, according to the European Commission.
Moreover, since the four sites are still at the planning stage, "it is too early to assume that an infringement of this law has occurred", said a Commission representative at Thursday's meeting. The Commission also said it believed the Northern Ireland authorities intend to look into the cumulative environmental effects of the sites and follow all procedures required by EU law.
MEP Bairbre de Brún (GUE/NGL, UK) said that it was crucial to have more information on this case. She asked the Commission to investigate further and ensure that impact assessment requirements are complied with: "As we have not been told if there will be an environmental impact assessment, we need to keep an eye on these petitions", she argued.
"We should ask ourselves if our directives do enough to prevent environmental damage", added Csaba Sándor Tabajdi (S&D, HU), who also thought the distance between landfill sites should be spelt out in the directive.
The Petitions Committee decided to contact Northern Ireland authorities for more information.
Whiteriver landfill site
MEPs also heard the Commission's explanation about the environmental impact and the foul odours caused by the Whiteriver landfill site, in the village of Collon (County Louth, Republic of Ireland). Having consulted the Irish authorities, the Commission said that all necessary steps had been taken to deal with the situation and since then no complaints had been reported.
The Petitions Committee decided to keep an eye on the issue until it is sure the problem has been solved.
20090928IPR61373 Read the petitions in detail (points 19 and 20) Petitions Commitee website
EN
1
LINK
/meetdocs/2009_2014/organes/peti/peti_20091001_0900.htm
EN
2
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=PETI
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
