Strasbourg plenary session 23-26 November
Institutions
2009-11-20 - 12:20
Legally binding targets for CO2 emissions and an overhaul of Europe's telecoms market are just two steps MEPs have taken this week The EU membership hopes of countries like Croatia and Turkey were weighed up by MEPs Thursday (26 November) in a parliamentary resolution. The need to fight corruption and strengthen the rule of law were key considerations for the House. With the UN climate conference approaching Members called Wednesday for emissions cuts of 80% by 2050 and funding for developing countries. Tuesday saw MEPs back an overhaul of Europe's telecoms market, which should increase competition between phone companies.
Tuesday afternoon saw Commission boss José Manuel Barroso face questions from MEPs on everything from the new top EU jobs to the state of Europe's economy.
An important milestone related to the eco-labelling of tyres was passed this week when Members gave their approval to new rules that will ensure that energy and fuel efficient tyres are more clearly marked. The aim is to cut fuel bills and CO2 emissions more generally.
Finally, the week also saw the House call for sexual violence within relationships to be more clearly recognised as a crime by governments across the European Union.
The Session formally comes to a close on Thursday afternoon. This feature contains information related to some of the most important debates and votes between 23-26 November.
The next sitting of the Parliament opens on 14 December .
20091113FCS64439
A look at the main issues this week
European telecoms set for major overhaul
A major overhaul of EU telecoms rules, which will strengthen the rights of phone users and internet surfers and boost competition among telecoms firms, will be put to a final vote in Parliament on Tuesday.
Labels for more fuel and cost efficient tyres?
All new car tyres in Europe will in future be labelled to help consumers choose the most environmentally friendly models. An agreement on this issue, hammered out between representatives of Parliament and EU governments, will be put to the vote on Wednesday.
Copenhagen climate summit - a call for leadership
EU government leaders must demonstrate political leadership to make a success of the Copenhagen climate change summit in December, says a draft resolution that comes up for the vote next Wednesday.
MEPs want compensation for stranded air passengers
Passengers who have booked flights with airlines that go bankrupt should receive compensation, according to a draft resolution by the Transport Committee.
EU enlargement strategy for 2009
The whole Parliament will get a chance to state its views on the progress made over the past year by EU candidate countries when it votes on a resolution on the 2009 enlargement strategy drawn up by the European Commission.
Gearing up for the Lisbon Treaty
Parliament is preparing for the increased powers it is set to receive under the Lisbon Treaty, as well as the arrival of eighteen extra MEPs. Members will vote in Strasbourg on changes to the internal EP rules designed to reflect these changes.
Parliament set to approve Council's accounts for 2007
The Parliament is expected to sign off the Council's 2007 budget following a recommendation to do so by the Budgetary Control Committee now that Council has agreed to give the EP access to documents, to answer questions and to hold meetings with MEPs.
Stockholm programme: EP justice and home affairs priorities
EU civil rights need to be strengthened by a European internet court, mutual recognition by EU countries of same-sex couples and a set of prisoners' rights, says a draft resolution to be put to the vote on Wednesday.
MEPs look ahead to Swedish presidency summit
On Wednesday, looking ahead to the 10-11 December European Council, MEPs debate the Lisbon Treaty's entry into force, economic developments, civil rights measures and the Copenhagen climate conference. The Swedish presidency and the European Commission will take part in this preparatory debate.
Smoke-free areas in Member States
MEPs will debate rules on smoke-free areas in different Member States, stressing that tobacco remains the largest single cause of premature death and disease in the European Union.
The spectre of domestic violence
MEPs will urge the Council and Commission to devise an EU policy plan to tackle domestic violence against women, in a resolution marking the tenth anniversary of International Day for the Elimination of Violence against Women.
European Parliament to award LUX Cinema Prize
Parliament's €87,000 LUX Cinema Prize for 2009 will be awarded to one of three shortlisted films: Eastern Plays, Sturm and Welcome, in the plenary chamber on Wednesday at 11.45am. The films' directors or producers will be present.
Financial aid for Serbia, Bosnia, Armenia and Georgia
Parliament will give its view on €400 million-plus in budget aid to be made available to Serbia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Armenia and Georgia. The aim is to urgently help these countries to finance their external balance of payments and state budget deficits.
Forced return of migrants to Afghanistan
Members will debate the forced return of 27 Afghan nationals to Kabul by France and Britain on a shared flight on 20 October. The debate will start with statements by Council and Commission.
Google Book Search Project: does it have an impact on Europe?
MEPs will ask the Commission for its views on the Google Book Search Project and the project's impact on the digitisation of books in Europe and on the rights of authors.
Find out what the MEPs said Press releases Agenda Europarltv Newsletter about the session Watch online
Green light for new EU telecoms rules
French Socialist Catherine Trautmann smiles after the proposed law ('framework directive') she steered through Parliament was passed 510 votes to 40, with 24 abstentions. Parliament has approved a major overhaul of EU telecoms rules, which will strengthen the rights of phone users and internet surfers and boost competition among telecoms firms. The new rules, to be implemented in the next eighteen months, will enhance consumer rights, safeguard internet freedom, protect data, boost competition and modernise radio spectrum use.
The revised EU telecoms framework directive was adopted at the third and final reading by 510 votes to 40, with 24 abstentions.
"This legislative package is a prime example of how the work we are doing as European legislators has an impact on the daily life of citizens. I am delighted that we have contributed to strengthening the rights of users of electronic communications and the internet." said EP President Jerzy Buzek, who will sign the telecoms package on Wednesday together with Swedish minister for communications Åsa Torstensson.
Internet access safeguards
Under the new EU rules, a user's internet access may only be cut off if "appropriate, proportionate and necessary within a democratic society" and only after "a prior, fair and impartial procedure" which gives users the opportunity to state their case and respects the principles of presumption of innocence and the right to privacy.
MEPs thus succeeded in affording internet access an equivalent legal protection to that of a fundamental right by adding the world's first "internet freedom provision" to the EU framework law for electronic communications networks and services. Member States will have to adapt their national legislation to comply with these safeguards by 24 May 2011.
"We wanted to ensure that citizens' rights would never be scorned or ignored (...) This is the first time that a legal text refers to the use of internet as the exercise of fundamental rights and freedoms", said Parliament's rapporteur Catherine Trautmann (S&D, FR).
In addition, said Malcolm Harbour (ECR, UK), who was rapporteur on another part of the telecoms package (the citizens' rights directive), "We have achieved significant advances in the areas of data breach and particularly issues around the use of cookies and the rights that consumers have to refuse devices that may collect information on their computers."
The telecoms directive also includes rules to:
- harmonise radio spectrum management across the EU, especially with a view to the switchover from analogue to digital TV by 2012,
- improve co-operation among Member States' telecoms regulators, and
- allow "functional separation", i.e. rules requiring dominant operators to separate their network infrastructure from business units offering services that use this infrastructure.
Citizens' rights and telecoms regulators
Parliament and Council had already agreed on the other two parts of the telecoms package (telecoms regulators and citizens' rights), which were approved by MEPs on 6 May 2009 and by the Council on 26 October 2009.
The directive on citizens' rights aims to:
- improve consumer rights, e.g. by allowing customers to have their mobile telephone number transferred within one working day when changing operators,
- strengthen personal data and privacy protection, e.g. by requiring the user's consent to the use of cookies.
MEPs also agreed with the EU's telecommunications ministers to set up a European body bringing together all 27 national regulators - the Body of European Regulators for Electronic Communications (BEREC).
Some dates when all this will happen
Deadlines:
- Signature by the Presidents of Parliament and Council: 25 November 15:00 in plenary
- Entry into force of the whole telecoms reform package with publication in the EU's Official Journal: December 2009
- Establishment of the European Body of Telecoms Regulators BEREC: spring 2010
- Transposition of the citizens' rights directive into national legislation in the 27 EU Member States: by 26 April 2011
- Transposition of the framework directive into national legislation in the 27 EU Member States: by 24 May 2011
Results of votes of Tuesday 24 November 2009
Barroso answers questions on the new Commission and energy issues
EC President José Manuel Barroso faces 1 hour of questions from Members, Tuesday 24 November Energy issues and the composition of the new Commission were among issues raised by EP political group leaders when they quizzed José Manuel Barroso during the second Question Hour with the Commission President this Tuesday. Mr Barroso told the House "just today I received the final names of all 27 Commissioners designate", adding that nine of them were women.
French EPP leader Joseph Daul asked whether President Barroso believed there would be another gas crisis this winter and if there were measures in place to protect the public. Mr Barroso replied that the early warning system agreed with Russia should help to identify problems in time.
German Member Martin Schulz (S&D) asked for the Commission's view on the Bulgarian Prime Minister's comment on whether the Bulgarian Socialist party should be banned. President Barroso said he believed all democratic parties have their place in democratic countries.
Regarding the structure of the new Commission, Belgian Liberal Guy Verhofstadt was "not convinced" by the idea of splitting the Environment portfolio. He also he wondered about the future distribution of the present Justice and Home Affairs areas of competence, saying he did not want security to be linked to immigration. "Climate change is a cross-cutting remit, the aim is to mainstream it in all policies", answered Mr Barroso.
German MEP Daniel Cohn-Bendit , co-chair of the Greens/EFA, asked if the composition of the new Commission would be decided by Mr Barroso or if Member States would impose their wishes. Mr Barroso replied that the Commission President decides on the organisation of the Commission and the distribution of portfolios, and that was what he would do.
Polish Member Michał Kaminiski (ECR), said the EU needed to beef up its internal market and competition laws and asked Mr Barroso what he intended to do about this. Mr Barroso said the Commission had launched a public consultation on the internal market and confirmed that Mario Monti would be in charge of the final report.
German Member Lothar Bisky (EUL/NGL, DE), referring to the deep economic crisis and its long-term effects, asked the President whether he was prepared "to get the new Commission to draw lessons from false market economics". Mr Barroso stressed that the emphasis would be placed on education, life-long learning, worker mobility and fighting exclusion and poverty.
Lithuanian Rolandas Paksas (EFD) questioned the President on nuclear energy in Lithuania. Mr Barroso replied that he had discussed the issue of energy supply in the country with Russian President Medvedev and that the Commission was working actively with Vilnius and other partners on the issue.
Copenhagen: MEPs urge EU to continue leading fight against climate change
The aim of the UN's Copenhagen climate summit will be to restrict global warming by less than 2 degrees. ©Belga Parliament's expectations for the Copenhagen climate change summit in December include an ambitious and legally binding agreement that will require emission reduction targets for developed and developing countries as well as funding commitments and sanctions for non-compliance.
EU government leaders must demonstrate political leadership to make a success of the summit, say MEPs in a resolution adopted on Wednesday. Future generations might not be able to control climate change if global action is further delayed.
The Copenhagen summit should at the very least result in a binding agreement on climate change mitigation targets for industrialised countries and on financing. Also, by early next year a formal process should be established to achieve a comprehensive post-2012 agreement which is legally binding. This agreement should become active on 1 January 2013.
A couple of weeks ahead of the COP15 meeting in Copenhagen in December, which is expected to finalise an international agreement on a framework for combating climate change for the period after 2012, MEPs call heads of state and government to give this matter top priority and demonstrate political leadership. They urge the EU to develop an external climate policy and to speak with one voice to maintain a leading role in the COP 15 negotiations.
"The EU has taken up a leadership position in the fight for climate protection and we want to keep it that way in Copenhagen. Therefore we need to stand by our offer: a 30% reduction of Co2 in 2020," said Environment Committee chair Jo Leinen (S&D, DE).
In a resolution adopted by 516 votes to 92, with 70 abstentions, MEPs say the international agreement should ensure that:
developed countries significantly reduce their emissions collectively (at the high end of the 25-40 % range by 2020 and a long-term reduction target of at least 80% by 2050 compared to 1990;
developing countries as a group limit their emission growth to 15 - 30% below "business as usual" but, given their economic weight, China, India and Brazil should commit themselves to targets similar to those of the industrialised countries;
developed countries are made responsible for providing sufficient, sustainable and predictable financial and technical support to developing countries - this support for climate change mitigation and adaptation must be new and additional to Official Development Assistance; about €5-7 billion of this should be fast-start funding for the period 2010 -2012;
the collective contribution of the EU towards developing countries' mitigation efforts and adaptation needs should not be less than €30 billion per year by 2020;
both emission reduction targets and financing commitments need to be subject to a tougher compliance regime, including an early warning mechanism and penalties;
stringent project quality standards must be part of future offsetting mechanisms, to prevent industrialised countries taking away the low-cost reduction options from developing countries and to guarantee reliable, verifiable and real emission reductions;
international aviation and shipping should be integrated into an international agreement with the same binding targets as for other industry sectors and an auctioning of at least 50 % of the allowances;
significant support must be provided to developing countries to halt gross tropical deforestation by 2020 and a Global Forest Carbon Mechanism should be created under the UNFCCC framework.
MEPs emphasise that an agreement in Copenhagen could stimulate a 'Sustainable New Deal' boosting economic growth, promoting environmentally sustainable technologies, reducing energy consumption and securing new jobs in both industrialised and developing countries.
Regarding the input of other developed countries to the Copenhagen conference, MEPs urge the USA to make the goals set during the election campaign binding, thereby sending a strong signal. They stress that it is also extremely important for India to make a contribution, they recognise Japan's commitment to reduce its emissions by 25% by 2020 and they welcome the positive signals from China in the light of these developments.
Environment, Public Health and Food Safety
Airline bankruptcies: MEPs call for better passenger compensation
The arrivals board at Prague-Ruzyne airport records the moment when Slovak company Sky Europe Airlines filed for bankruptcy. ©Belga Passengers who have booked flights with airlines that go bankrupt should be guaranteed compensation and assistance, MEPs told the European Commission today.
In a resolution adopted by a show of hands, Parliament asks the Commission to consider proposing new legislation to ensure passengers are not left stranded without accommodation or a flight home. MEPs suggest that establishing a "reserve compensation fund" and introducing "mutual responsibility" for passengers of all airlines flying in the same direction with available seats, could help to get stranded passengers home.
"Many of these passengers do not have the financial means to deal with this sort of upheaval. They are from those families who spend their savings on a family holiday, only to see their hard-earned money go down the drain through little fault of their own", Transport Committee chair Brian Simpson (S&D, UK), told the Commission in a plenary debate last month.
Existing EU legislation deals with ticket price transparency (Regulation 1008/2008), and compensation for passengers denied permission to board (Regulation 261/2004), but MEPs believe there is still a loophole that needs to be closed in cases where an airline is declared bankrupt after customers have bought their tickets online.
A total of 77 airlines have filed for bankruptcy in the European Union since 2000. The latest to do so, in summer 2009, was Sky Europe, many of whose customers were left without compensation for tickets purchased.
Parliament is ready for Lisbon Treaty
Under Lisbon the number of MEPs will change slightly Parliament is now fully prepared for the increased powers it is acquiring under the Lisbon Treaty. On Wednesday MEPs adopted changes to the EP's internal rules to reflect the arrival of 18 new MEPs, the increase in its legislative powers and a new budget procedure that puts Parliament on an equal footing with the Council.
Rapporteur David Martin (S&D, UK) said: "the Single European Act took the Parliament from being a baby to infanthood, Maastricht took us through puberty, the Nice and Amsterdam Treaties took us into adulthood and I believe the Lisbon Treaty takes this Parliament into the full rights of an adult Parliament".
18 new MEPs to take their seats
Altogether, 18 new MEPs from 12 Member States will take their seats in Parliament after the new Treaty enters into force and a protocol confirming the addition of MEPs has been ratified by all Member States. Until then, the MEPs-designate will not enjoy voting rights but can have observer status, a possibility now added to Parliament' Rules of Procedure.
The rule changes also reflect the significant increase in Parliament's legislative powers. With the Lisbon Treaty, almost all issues fall under the "ordinary legislative procedure", in which Parliament and Council are equal as lawmakers. Budget rules were also revised as Parliament will enjoy full parity with Council in deciding the EU budget.
In addition, the procedure for appointing the Commission President was modified as Parliament will have more power in this matter. Further changes to the EP's Rules of Procedure provide for the legislative impact of the Charter of Fundamental Rights, Parliament's right to propose treaty changes and the increased influence of national parliaments.
Tyre labelling: helping consumers make an informed choice
From 1 November 2012, suppliers of tyres for passenger cars, light and heavy duty vehicles will have to inform consumers about fuel efficiency, wet grip and noise levels. ©Belga From November 2012 all new tyres on sale in Europe will be classified and labelled for fuel efficiency, wet grip and noise performance. The labelling will be similar to that required for household appliances and potential buyers will be able to compare tyre characteristics before making a purchase.
Parliament approved the draft regulation on Wednesday without a vote. MEPs and Council Presidency negotiators hammered out the deal in early October, when rapporteur Ivo Belet (EPP, BE) praised the benefits of the legislation. He said "the new labelling system was a straightforward measure with great advantages for the environment and consumers", adding that the cost to manufacturers should be minimal.
Fuel efficiency, wet grip and noise
Like the European energy label, the tyre label will use classes ranging from best-performance (green “A” class) to worst (red “G” class). Besides indicating how much the tyre affects the car's fuel efficiency, it will also give information about its performance in wet conditions and its external rolling noise in decibels.
As of 1 November 2012, suppliers of tyres for passenger cars, light and heavy duty vehicles (C1, C2 and C3 tyres) will have to inform consumers about fuel efficiency, wet grip and noise classes in any technical promotional material, including websites. Re-tread tyres, off-road professional tyres and racing tyres will be exempt from this requirement.
All C1 and C2 tyres produced after 1 July 2012 must either have a sticker or be accompanied by the label when distributed from the factory to a shop or a garage.
Unlike household appliances, tyres are not always on display in the shops, so MEPs insisted that retailers be obliged to show the label to the buyer before the sale and also on, or with, bills.
Very quiet tyres
To promote very quiet tyres, the Parliament negotiated a re-design of the noise pictogram. The level of external rolling noise will be indicated by ascending numbers of black "waves" emitted from the "speaker". Quiet tyres for cars (producing noise below 68 decibels), for example, will be labelled with one black and two white "waves" next to the value in decibels.
Incentives for fuel-saving and safe tyres
Potential incentives to promote better-performing tyres to consumers would be decided at national level. In principle, Member States would be allowed to provide incentives only for tyres ranked at least "class C" on fuel efficiency and wet grip.
Common position text approved by the Council on 20.11.2009 Tyre labelling: Industry Committee backs draft regulation Draft EP legislative resolution Common position text Profile of Rapporteur Ivo Belet (EPP, BE)
Clear legal basis needed to combat violence against women
A majority of MEPs want sexual violence within relationships more clearly recognised as a crime by European Union countries Sexual violence should be recognised as a crime by all EU Member States, and offenders should automatically be prosecuted, says Parliament in a resolution adopted on Thursday. Male violence against women, irrespective of men's age, education, income or social status, is an EU-wide structural problem and the number of female victims of gender-based violence is alarming, they add.
Parliament urges EU Member States “to recognise sexual violence and rape, including within marriage and intimate informal relationships and/or committed by male relatives, as a crime" and "to ensure that such offences result in automatic prosecution”.
Unequal distribution of power between the sexes
MEPs also call on Member States to take appropriate legal measures to stop female genital mutilation (FGM). Any reference to cultural practices or traditions as a mitigating factor in cases of violence against women, "crimes of honour" and FGM should be rejected, it says, noting that FGM, crimes of honour and forced marriages also happen in the EU.
Men's violence against women is linked to unequal distribution of power between the sexes, says the resolution, adding that this violence also violates human rights and in particular the rights to life, safety, dignity, physical and mental integrity and sexual and reproductive choice and health.
Clear legal basis needed
The resolution calls for a targeted and more coherent EU policy plan to combat all forms of violence against women, as stated in the EU Roadmap for Equality between women and men. A clear legal basis should be established for combating all forms of violence against women, and the relevant national laws and policies should be improved by developing comprehensive national action plans, it adds.
Free legal aid should be made available to enable female victims of gender-based violence and people-trafficking networks to assert their rights everywhere in the EU, it says.
The resolution was adopted by a show of hands.
Women's Rights and Gender Equality Committee
EU membership candidates: Parliament outlines its criteria
The EU membership hopes of countries such as Croatia, Serbia and Turkey were covered in a Parliamentary resolution passed on Thursday, 26 November ©Belga Current and potential candidate countries must continue reforming to stay on track for EU membership. Key issues such as the rule of law, freedom of expression, good neighbourly relations, treatment of ethnic minorities and the fight against corruption and organised crime must still be addressed, says a resolution approved by Parliament on 26 November.
Parliament's resolution on the European Commission's 2009 enlargement strategy for the Western Balkan countries, Iceland and Turkey was adopted this Thursday by show of hands. The resolution was drafted by Gabriele Albertini (EPP, IT).
Overall, Parliament reaffirms its commitment to the enlargement policy, one of the most successful of all EU policies, but says that the Copenhagen criteria should be respected by candidate countries and 1993 by candidate countries as well as by the EU. European citizens concerns and questions about the enlargement should be addressed.
On the rule of law, MEPs welcome efforts made in the region, although some countries continue to face challenges in the fight against corruption and organised crime. On freedom of expression, the resolution considers freedom of media from political interference and the independence of the regulatory bodies as key issues for the Western Balkans and Turkey.
The authorities in Bosnia-Herzegovina and Albania are urged to fulfil all relevant criteria so that visa liberalisation for their citizens can come into force from July 2010. The Commission is asked to start a visa dialogue with the Kosovo authorities "as soon as possible". MEPs also advocate establishing a roadmap for visa facilitation and liberalisation, similar to those with the Western Balkan countries.
Bilateral disputes should be resolved by the parties concerned, says the resolution. These disputes should not constitute an obstacle to progress towards accession, but the EU should endeavour to resolve them before accession, it adds.
Among the criteria that all Balkan countries should respect, MEPs emphasise the need for full co-operation with the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and an improvement of the situation of ethnic minorities, in particular the Roma.
Croatia
On country-specific issues, MEP consider that the accession negotiations can be concluded by mid-2010, provided that Croatia steps up its efforts and fulfils all the necessary criteria and benchmarks, including full cooperation with the ICTY. They welcome the bilateral agreement on resolving the border dispute with Slovenia, which has created the momentum to open further chapters in the accession process.
FYROM
The Council is asked to "act in accordance" with the Commission’s recommendation to open and to set a date at the December summit for starting negotiations with the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (FYROM). This country still has to reform its public administration and its judiciary, fight corruption and improve women’s rights and inter-ethnic relations.
On the issue of the country's name, Parliament calls on the governments of FYROM and Greece to intensify their efforts to find a solution. The FYROM government should avoid actions and statements that could negatively affect relations with its neighbour. The recent establishment of a diplomatic relations with Kosovo is emphasised.
Turkey
The resolution highlights the importance of implementing judicial reform swiftly to improve the functioning of the Turkish state and society. MEPs regret the limited progress made in the area of freedom of religion (non-Muslim and Alevi communities) and freedom of expression, following the unprecedented fine imposed on a media group. The non-fulfilment of commitments stemming from the Additional Protocol to the EC-Turkey Association Agreement is also criticised. Turkey is urged to implement it in full and on a non-discriminatory basis.
MEPs welcome Turkey's signing of the Nabucco gas pipeline agreement and call for the opening of the energy chapter in the accession negotiations. Diplomatic efforts made to normalise relations with Armenia are underlined. The Turkish Grand National Assembly, as well as the Parliament of Armenia, should ratify the relevant protocols, says the resolution.
Western Balkans
The Council should ratify the Interim Agreement (IA) with Serbia without delay, says the resolution. Unilateral implementation of the IA by Serbia shows the country's commitment to moving forward on its path to membership, according to MEPs. The Agreement could be signed by the EU at its December summit.
Parliament welcomes Serbia's additional progress concerning co-operation with the ICTY, as noted in the latest ICTY Chief Prosecutor's report. However, MEPs regret the Serbian authorities' actions in calling on Kosovo Serbs to boycott the mid-November elections. Serbia is also asked to step up its co-operation with the EU rule of law mission EULEX, especially in northern Kosovo.
MEPs note some progress in the area of security and border management by Bosnia and Herzegovina but are dissatisfied overall with the limited progress achieved. The country's unstable political climate and the lack of a common vision shared by the Muslim-Croat Federation and the Serb Republic (Republika Srpska) is a concern for MEPs. The Council should to continue its efforts to pursue a dialogue with political leaders in Bosnia and Herzegovina, in order to help the country and its peoples remain on the path to EU integration, says the resolution.
MEPs welcome the Commission's intention of strengthening relations with Kosovo , including exploring the possibility of Kosovo's participation in Community programmes. They believe the process of decentralisation should be concluded before the end of the year in line with the Ahtisaari Plan. They also welcome the unprecedentedly good turnout of Kosovo Serbs, which they see as an encouraging indication that the Kosovo Serb community is willing to acknowledge its responsibilities.
MEPs recognise the progress made by Albania and Montenegro since the last progress reports and encourage both countries to continue their efforts on the reform path. Parliament welcomes last week's EU foreign ministers' decision to invite the Commission to prepare its opinion on the country's application.
Iceland
Finally, MEPs welcome Iceland's decision of July 2009 to apply for EU membership. The country’s extensive alignment with EU legislation should enable it to be given candidate status in the near future, they say. Iceland’s track record in implementing its obligations under the EEA Agreement should be an essential element of the Commission’s assessment.
Adopted text will be available here (click on 26 November) Joint Parliamentary Committees (JPC)
The battle over the "Made in" logo hots up
The makers of luxury clothes are particularly concerned about counterfeiting from outside the EU The "Made in" logo for goods imported into the EU has been the subject of debate for years. Supporters say it will help protect European industry from counterfeiters and give shoppers clear information. However, countries like the UK and Germany have blocked it fearing it will place burdens on industry and stifle trade. The Treaty of Lisbon gives the EP more say on trade and as the Italian Vice-Chair of the Trade Committee, Cristiana Muscardini (EPP) explains, she wants to press the issue.
This Wednesday (25 November) MEPs in Strasbourg voted in favour of a resolution calling for the issues to be reopened and for the legislative co-decision procedure to be put into effect between the Parliament and the Council of Ministers to try and find agreement. This is likely to start early in 2010.
In many countries in the world, like the United States, Canada, China and Japan, imports are subject to country-of-origin marking. Why not in Europe?
Muscardini : Europe has not managed to find agreement in the Council of Ministers. In 2005 the European Commission came up with a proposal to make the origin marking compulsory and the Parliament backed this Regulation with several resolutions, debates in plenary and declarations.
Unfortunately in the Council there are some Members who are not convinced - probably they have suffered from lobbying pressures. However, the lack of Regulation is causing serious damage both to European consumers, who cannot be sure of the origin and the quality of the products they buy, and to European industries who are suffering unfair competition from competitors who have adopted rules of origin marking. This loophole has to be filled soon if we want the market to be really free.
But most products today already have a "made in" label. What would this proposed Regulation change?
Muscardini : Today it's not compulsory and you don't find it on all the categories of products. In addition, as it is not compulsory, it is not subject to checks. There are many falsifications, manipulations and counterfeiting which results in less transparency for consumers and undermines industry.
With the Treaty of Lisbon, the Parliament gets equal say with the Council on international trade. What will you do to relaunch the "made in" initiative from 1 December?
Muscardini : This is exactly the point raised by the resolution which was broadly approved yesterday. All the political groups in the Parliament agree on the need to fill this gap by approving the Regulation quickly.
The longer we wait, the more harm to our consumers and producers. We will stick to the 2005 proposal of the Commission and begin the co-decision procedure with the Council. The Parliament will play the role of mediator to reach a satisfactory solution.
We would like to add some categories of goods to the proposal of the Commission, for example screws and bolts. This is a category where the security standards for production in the EU are higher than in the rest of the world. Therefore I'm convinced that, when a bridge is built the constructor has the right to choose which kind of screws he wants bearing in mind that the European ones contain twice the amount of nickel as Indian ones.
But of course we're ready to negotiate on the inclusion of some categories and the exclusion of others, bearing in mind that the most important ones, like textile, footwear, jewellery and ceramics cannot be excluded.
Facebook debate: There is now a debate on the Parliament's Facebook page on the merits of the "Made in" case.
Resolution Press release Debate 11 November Facebook debate
MEPs want focus on climate and economic crisis at next EU summit
In today's debate of the forthcoming EU leaders' summit of 10-11 December MEPs outlined three priority topics: the Copenhagen climate change summit, the financial crisis and the Stockholm programme on justice and citizenship. Speakers agreed that with the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon and the appointments of the EU top jobs it is now time to move on to substantial issues.
Top jobs
Several speakers took a moment to congratulate the holders of the two new top jobs in Europe: President of the European Council, Herman Van Rompuy and High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, Catherine Ashton.
Joseph Daul of the centre right EPP welcomed the appointment of Van Rompuy in his new post and quoted Van Rompuy's own remarks saying that "the image of the Council will be built on results" and the approach will be a "step-by-step approach". Daul called this "the Jean Monnet method".
For the Socialists, Martin Schulz told the Parliament "we are happy that Catherine Ashton has the position of High Representative. As the second biggest party in this Parliament - we want the second post in the Commission". He then stressed the important tasks the individuals faced.
Copenhagen
Ahead of the UN climate summit Joseph Daul said that "the Copenhagen conference not only has to come up with political objectives but also firm commitments with figures and targets" and his point was echoed by several other speakers who stressed the need for binding agreement.
Martin Schulz told the Chamber: "I don't think we are discussing climate change enough. Investing in an environment friendly technology, we have a possibility to create jobs. In other words green technology is a future oriented project."
Rebecca Harms for the Greens/EFA echoed this: "climate protection is perceived as a burden, but in fact there are opportunities that arise if we want to combat climate change".
Economic crisis
For the current holders of the rotating EU presidency Cecilia Malmström, Sweden's Europe Minister, told MEPs: "The impact of the crisis is going to continue to be felt for a long time to come, the Lisbon Strategy will expire next year so we need to have a new strategy which can help to promote long term prosperity."
For the European Commission José Manuel Barroso indicated that there is a new "2020" strategy being outlined by the Commission. He urged the "EP to work with the Council” so that “new authorities (Financial supervision package) are in place by the end of 2010”.
Guy Verhofstadt for the Liberal ALDE group noted "a single European supervisor is what we need” pointing out that it was the opinion of the majority in the EP.
Lothar Bisky for the GUE/NGL group noted that "Heads of State and Government have to find a way out of the crisis that binds the development of Europe with social progress".
For the ECR group Timothy Kirkhope said that "the EU must now move on and concentrate of the real work at hand, building dynamic and competitive economies and creating a strong, global trading system".
"Stockholm programme" on justice and citizenship
On the "Stockholm programme" on justice and citizenship Cecilia Malmström told the House "The vision is a safer, more open Europe safeguarding fundamental freedoms".
Mr Barroso spoke of how the Treaty of Lisbon brings “full involvement of the Parliament” in the policy of justice and citizenship. The Stockholm programme should bring "real change, real benefits to our citizens”. Concrete steps are the respect of fundamental rights, better access to courts, more effective action against organised crime, human trafficking, terrorism, effective migration management.
Most speakers agreed that the main point is to strike a balance between freedom and safety, security and protection.
Treaty of Lisbon
Nigel Farage for the EFD bloc voiced his previously expressed concerns about the adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon and said that a "free and fair referendum in the UK to decide whether we stay as a part of this Union or not" is needed.
Swedish presidency Copenhagen summit Link to Stockholm programme article
"Welcome" scoops LUX film prize
French Director of "Welcome" Philippe Lioret receives the 2009 LUX prize A film about a would-be Kurdish immigrant to Britain who is befriended by a swimming teacher has won the annual LUX film prize. Directed by French film maker Philippe Lioret, "Welcome" has received widespread praise from critics since being released earlier this year. It came ahead of "Sturm" and "Eastern Plays", films which looked at the Yugoslav war crimes tribunals and Neo-Nazism respectively.
Prior to awarding the prize EP President Jerzy Buzek said that "the LUX prize is a young and forward-looking initiative. We want the medium of film to spark debate on subjects that attract public attention in the EU Members, and give rise to questions that can be of relevance to us all, questions that are also relevant to this Parliament".
Accepting the award Philippe Lioret told the Chamber that "the impact the film had on French society made me change. We started as filmmakers and then turned into citizens".
The winner was chosen by Members of the European Parliament who could cast their vote for the shortlisted films.
23 languages, 27 prints
The 87,000 euro prize will finance the subtitling of the winning film in the 23 official EU languages and the production of a 35 mm print per EU country or a contribution to the DVD release. The hope is that it will me more accessible to viewers throughout the Union.
Since 2007, the European Parliament has supported the European film industry by awarding the prize annually.
The aim is to help break down language barriers that often hinder the circulation of films throughout Europe. It also helps to contribute to the raising of social issues across Europe.
LUX Prize Focus on LUX Prize Trailer "Welcome" LUX prize photo gallery Ceremony
From Zagreb to Brussels: Swoboda on Croatia's EU ambitions
Austrian MEP Hannes Swoboda, Parliament's rapporteur on Croatia, extending a hand of symbolic friendship to Zagreb. The EU membership hopes of countries such as Croatia, Iceland and Turkey will be raised by MEPs on Wednesday afternoon. Of these, Croatia is held to be first in the queue and is eager to join as soon as possible. The Parliament's rapporteur on Croatia is Austrian Socialist Member Hannes Swoboda. In this interview he explains what Zagreb still has to do to be able to join the European Union.
The former Yugoslav State, Slovenia, joined the EU in 2004, followed by Bulgaria and Romania in 2007. Croatia, relatively well developed economically, is still knocking on the EU's door. Why is it taking so long?
There was a war in Croatia and in the aftermath of that war there where many problems regarding the return of refugees. Besides, under the government of former president Franjo Tuđman (in office 1990-99) the structures in the country were not very democratic and needed to be reformed. On the other hand, we have to be clear that in comparison with other countries it is high time that Croatia got the chance to join the European Union.
Do you have a timetable in mind for Croatia's accession to the EU?
Full membership could start in 2012. The final negotiations should take place towards the middle of 2010. After that the Parliament has to give its consent and it will need some months to study all the details. Therefore the ratification process can start only at the beginning of 2011. This is only one year and three months away which is a very short time. However, it depends very much on Croatia and its willingness to make the necessary effort.
Next week, Chief Prosecutor Serge Brammertz (the International Crimes Tribunal for Yugoslavia) is expected to criticise Croatia at the UN Security Council over its cooperation with the Court. If so, the UK, Netherlands, Belgium and Finland say they will block Zagreb's accession negotiations. What's the problem and is Croatia's EU future at risk?
Well of course it is a problem. The only conflict is still about documents (which relate to the artillery bombardment of Knin) which the Court needs for the trial of former Croatian General Ante Gotovina. There are different views about whether the documents even existed or if they were destroyed. If the latter is the case it is very hard to deliver them.
Everything has to be done so that the documents are either found or it can be proved that the documents have been destroyed. This is an important issue, but on the other hand the membership should not depend on one element of cooperation because in many others Croatia was cooperating well with Court in The Hague.
Do you think Croatia could be able to deliver the document or the proof that they were destroyed before 3 December?
If they haven't been delivered by now, then I don’t think that they are going to be delivered within the next few days. This would also prove that they were hidden and that they in fact exist. In my report I mentioned a proposal which I took up from Croatia: namely that there should be people from outside Croatia, security and police experts who should help Croatia to find the documents. This could be a clear proof if Croatia is cooperating or not.
Are there other issues standing in the way of Croatia's accession?
Traditional reform in general, including all the element of administration reform, the reorganisation of the courts, privatisation of the shipyards. The major problem is also the fight against corruption.
Specially, for high ranking political corruption....?
Yes. There have been some positive signals, some resignations, some lifting of immunity to show that they take it seriously, but we have to follow that up.
By the time Croatia joins the EU would the border dispute with Slovenia be solved as well?
We hope so. What is important now is that both sides agreed that the border issue should be dealt with immediately after the signing of the accession treaty. This issue is out of the negotiations now. Croatia's parliament ratified the agreement on arbitrage already with a huge majority and hopefully the same will be done in Slovenia. If countries ratify this agreement on the arbitration process then there is no obstacle for the ratification of the accession treaty.
Serbia's Foreign Minister, Vuk Jeremić, recently told us that he wants Belgrade to join the EU in about five to seven years. Is it conceivable that Croatia and Serbia and the other Balkan countries could eventually join together at the same time?
No. I cannot imagine that and I don't think it is feasible. Croatia must join as soon as possible. I hope that Serbia will also do everything to join as soon as possible. But they are two different "as soon as possible". The first is very clear before our eyes and for the second there is still a lot of work to be done.
Live from the Chamber Hannes Swoboda MEP EU-Croatia Delegation Serbia's Foreign Minister Vuk Jeremić pledges EU future for Belgrade
EN
1
PHOTO
20091111PHT64313.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/frd/vod/research-by-speaker-mep?language=en
EN
3
LINK
/news/expert/default_en.htm
EN
4
LINK
/sides/indexPartSession.do?reference=2009-11-2&language=EN
EN
5
LINK
http://www.europarltv.europa.eu/
EN
7
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/frd/live/live-video?language=en
EN
8
PHOTO
20091120PHT64928.jpg
EN
9
LINK
/news/expert/tous_les_epvotes/default/default_en.htm
EN
10
PHOTO
20091120PHT64926.jpg
EN
11
PHOTO
20091120PHT64932.jpg
EN
12
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=ENVI
EN
13
PHOTO
20091120PHT64942.jpg
EN
14
PHOTO
20091120PHT64940.jpg
EN
15
PHOTO
20091125PHT65305.jpg
EN
16
LINK
http://register.consilium.europa.eu/pdf/en/09/st14/st14639.en09.pdf
EN
19
LINK
http://register.consilium.europa.eu/pdf/en/09/st14/st14639.en09.pdf
EN
20
LINK
/members/expert/alphaOrder/view.do?language=EN&id=28257
EN
21
PHOTO
20091125PHT65313.jpg
EN
22
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=FEMM
EN
23
PHOTO
20091125PHT65311.jpg
EN
24
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
25
LINK
/activities/delegations/delegationsEUList.do?language=EN
EN
26
PHOTO
20091125PHT65307.jpg
EN
30
LINK
http://www.facebook.com/europeanparliament
EN
31
LINK
http://www.se2009.eu/en
EN
32
LINK
http://en.cop15.dk/#
EN
34
PHOTO
20091120PHT64938.jpg
EN
35
LINK
http://www.lux-prize.eu/index_en.htm
EN
37
LINK
http://www.lux-prize.eu/movies/video_09/welcome.swf
EN
38
LINK
http://www.flickr.com/photos/european_parliament/sets/72157622670282137/show/
EN
39
MULTIMEDIA
20091125MLT65272.mp3
EN
40
PHOTO
20091120PHT64923.jpg
EN
41
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/frd/live/live-video?language=en
EN
42
LINK
/members/public/yourMep/view.do?name=Swoboda&partNumber=1&language=EN&id=2295
EN
43
LINK
/activities/delegations/homeDel.do?body=D-HR&language=EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20091112BRI64327 FULL-TEXT NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20091124IPR65090 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A7-2009-0076 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT MOTION RC-B7-2009-0142 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20091124IPR65100 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT CRE 20091111 ITEM-023 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20090925STO61219 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20091113FCS64416 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20091106STO63894 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
