Barroso answers questions on the new Commission and energy issues
Institutions
2009-11-24 - 17:19
Energy issues and the composition of the new Commission were among issues raised by EP political group leaders when they quizzed José Manuel Barroso during the second Question Hour with the Commission President this Tuesday. Mr Barroso told the House "just today I received the final names of all 27 Commissioners designate", adding that nine of them were women.
EPP leader Joseph Daul (FR) asked whether President Barroso believed there would be another gas crisis this winter and if there were measures in place to protect the public. Mr Barroso replied that the early warning system agreed with Russia should help to identify problems in time.
Martin Schulz (S&D, DE) asked for the Commission's view on the Bulgarian Prime Minister's comment on whether the Bulgarian Socialist party should be banned. President Barroso said he believed all democratic parties have their place in democratic countries.
Regarding the structure of the new Commission, Guy Verhofstadt (ALDE, BE) was "not convinced" by the idea of splitting the Environment portfolio. He also he wondered about the future distribution of the present Justice and Home Affairs areas of competence, saying he did not want security to be linked to immigration. "Climate change is a cross-cutting remit, the aim is to mainstream it in all policies", answered Mr Barroso.
Daniel Cohn-Bendit (DE), co-chair of the Greens/EFA, asked if the composition of the new Commission would be decided by Mr Barroso or if Member States would impose their wishes. Mr Barroso replied that the Commission President decides on the organisation of the Commission and the distribution of portfolios, and that was what he would do.
Michał Tomasz KAMIŃSKI (ECR, PL), said the EU needed to beef up its internal market and competition laws and asked Mr Barroso what he intended to do about this. Mr Barroso said the Commission had launched a public consultation on the internal market and confirmed that Mario Monti would be in charge of the final report.
Lothar Bisky (EUL/NGL, DE), referring to the deep economic crisis and its long-term effects, asked the President whether he was prepared "to get the new Commission to draw lessons from false market economics". Mr Barroso stressed that the emphasis would be placed on education, life-long learning, worker mobility and fighting exclusion and poverty.
Rolandas Paksas (EFD, LT) questioned the President on nuclear energy in Lithuania. Mr Barroso replied that he had discussed the issue of energy supply in Lithuania with Mr Medvedev and that the Commission was working actively with the Lithuanian authorities and other partners on the issue.
20091123IPR65040 Website of the European Commission President Presidency conclusions - 19 November 2009 Question Time with EC President - political group leaders - Part 1 audio, 24:48 Question Time with EC President - political group leaders - Part 2 audio, 39:42
EN
1
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/commission_barroso/president/index_en.htm
EN
2
LINK
http://www.consilium.europa.eu/uedocs/cms_data/docs/pressdata/en/ec/111343.pdf
EN
3
MULTIMEDIA
20091124MLT65168.asf
EN
4
MULTIMEDIA
20091124MLT65172.asf
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
