Lorry drivers' working hours: include the self-employed?
Employment policy
2009-12-01 - 13:01
Rules on lorry drivers' working hours - and the case for including self-employed drivers in their scope, on road safety and fair competition grounds - were the focus of a public hearing of road transport stakeholders held by the Employment and Social Affairs Committee on Tuesday.
"How to identify 'false self-employed' drivers, i.e. those obliged by their employers to be 'self-employed', and what are the positive and negative aspects of the current legislation?" rapporteur Edit Bauer (EPP, SK) asked stakeholders, by way of introduction.
Road safety
"Self-employed drivers must be excluded from the directive. Road safety is not an argument, it's permanent problem for transport companies. In the EU, less than 3% of accidents involve light utility vehicles", said Marco Digioia of the Union Européenne des Transporteurs routiers (UETR), adding that "what's more, we have to take account of self-employed drivers' financial risks and bankruptcies, and besides, it's impossible to check their working time".
"Safety is a modern citizen's right and even a priority. It is essential to extend working time standards to the self-employed. The crisis that these drivers face must be tackled with aid, but not to the detriment of security", said Sergio Cofferati (S&D, IT).
"I don't understand what obstacles there are to checking", said Emilie Turunen (Greens/EFA, DK).
"Accounting for working time will create big administrative burdens", said Henk Kramer, of Tranport en Logistiek.tabilisation du temps de travail entraînera des charges administratives importantes"
"Who can prove that self-employed drivers are more dangerous than employees?" asked Marian Harkin (ALDE, UK).
Competition
"The Commission proposal does not guarantee more safety, but it does distort fair competition and will spur employers to convert their employees into false self-employees" predicted Roberto Parillo of the European Transport Workers' Federation, calling for a revised sector-specific directive on working time and new rules on false self-employment.
"There is a bigger distortion of competition on the roads. This legislation must be revised. With the current proposal, there is no limit on working time for 3.5 tonners - drivers can work up to 86 hours per week" said Andrea Kocis of the Ver.di union. "To achieve competitive conditions, we must improve working conditions for all and take account of driving time and working time", she added.
"The self-employed and false self-employed lead to wage dumping" said Thomas Händel (GUE/NGL, DE).
"We must not jeopardise the right to be self-employed. Regulating self-employed working hours would set a precedent" concluded rapporteur Edit Bauer.
Background
The issue is how to amend Directive 2002/15/EC on the organisation of working time of road transport drivers. This directive has applied since March 2005 to employees, and was to have applied to self-employed drivers from 23 March 2009. In October 2008, the Commission proposed that self-employed drivers should be excluded from the directive's scope and at the same time offered a definition of self-employed driver in order to avoid the problem of "false self-employed" drivers, i.e. those who have no employment contract but are in practice prevented by their sole employer from working for other customers.
Next steps
Presentation of the draft report: 26-27 January 2010
Committee vote: 16 March 2010
Plenary vote: April 2010
Procedure: co-decision - first reading
In the chair: Pervenche Bérès (S&D, FR)
With the Lisbon Treaty, in force as of 1 December 2009, the European Parliament has important new lawmaking powers. Virtually all EU legislation is now decided by the European Parliament and the Council of Ministers together - including agriculture, immigration, energy and the EU budget. As the only directly elected EU institution, Parliament's position in making sure the EU is accountable to its citizens is also strengthened, for example by MEPs having a bigger say in appointments to many of the EU's top jobs. 20091130IPR65563 Committee on Employment and Social Affairs Commission proposal on the organisation of the working time of persons performing mobile road transport activities
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=EMPL
EN
2
LINK
/meetdocs/2009_2014/documents/com/com_com(2008)0650_/com_com(2008)0650_en.pdf
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
