Egyptian Foreign Minister calls full moratorium on West Bank settlement
External relations
2009-12-02 - 11:53
The EU should step up pressure on Israel to stop expanding settlements on the West Bank, Egypt's Foreign Minister Ahmed Abu Gheit told MEPs on Tuesday. Egypt also wants an agreement on the borders of the new Palestinian state.
Egypt wants the Middle East parties, including the EU, US, UN and Russia Quartet, to focus on the "end game", namely an agreement on the borders of the new Palestinian state, Egyptian Foreign Minister Ahmed Abu Gheit told the Foreign Affairs Committee on Tuesday.
Moratorium on Israeli settlements
To revive the stagnating peace process, Israel must first impose a full moratorium on settlement building on the West Bank, he added. Thereafter, the parameters of a peace settlement, including a continuous Palestinian territory, could be set by the Quartet, and endorsed by the UN Security Council. Without these steps, "the two-state solution will be lost, and the ensuing violence will result in chaos", warned Mr Gheit.
Mr Gheit urged the European Parliament to use its enhanced powers under the Lisbon Treaty to put pressure on Israel to relinquish its settlement policy.
Damaging division among Palestinians
The division between Fatah and Hamas is "damaging", and the two sides must co-operate until the next elections are held, said Mr Gheit in reply to questions from José Salafranca (EPP, ES) and Annemie Neyts-Uyttebroeck (ALDE, BE) on Palestinian internal politics.
Union for the Mediterranean
The minister disagreed with a suggestion by Raimon Obiols (S&D, ES) that the Union for the Mediterranian process had been "stagnating", but admitted that its secretariat had not yet been set up. This will happen within weeks, Mr Gheit said, underlining that Palestinians and Israelis would be working together in this organisation.
Minaret ban in Switzerland
The referendum vote in favour of banning minaret building in Switzerland "is sad", and "will affect the way people look at each other in our part of the Mediterranean", said Mr Gheit, adding that the vote demonstrated that "certain European societies are not open enough", and it would be a "sad development" if other European countries were to follow suit. The Minister underlined that the Egyptian Coptic Christian community was not in any way in danger because of the Swiss plebiscite.
Iran, Afghanistan
Mr Gheit defended Iran's right to the peaceful use of nuclear energy, but underlined the need to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region.
The Afghanistan question "will not be settled by the use of force", Mr Gheit told Libor Roucek's (S&D, CZ) in reply to a question. Social, political and economic measures were needed, otherwise violence would continue, and foreign troops would be stuck eternally in Afghanistan, he added.
Committee on Foreign Affairs
In the chair: Gabriele Albertini (EPP, Italy)
With the Lisbon Treaty, in force as of 1 December 2009, the European Parliament has important new lawmaking powers. Virtually all EU legislation is now decided by the European Parliament and the Council of Ministers together - including agriculture, immigration, energy and the EU budget. As the only directly elected EU institution, Parliament's position in making sure the EU is accountable to its citizens is also strengthened, for example by MEPs having a bigger say in appointments to many of the EU's top jobs. 20091130IPR65561 Foreign Affairs Committee web site
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=AFET
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
