Catherine Ashton: EU should do more to “punch its weight” politically
External relations
2009-12-02 - 15:37
Catherine Ashton, the EU's new High Representative for foreign policy, assured MEPs on Wednesday that she had the qualities needed to do the job. During a discussion with the Foreign Affairs Committee she said she would help Europe “punch its weight” politically. Baroness Ashton will face a full parliamentary hearing in January as her appointment - along with that of the rest of the future European Commission - is subject to Parliament's approval.
Lady Ashton said she believed in "quiet diplomacy" and "building confidence", and she wanted to "keep the traffic moving" rather than stopping it. She added however that when needed, "we must be out at the forefront with a loud voice".
"We have a strong reputation in the world", noted Baroness Ashton, stressing that the EU's foreign policy is based on values, and the Union is the biggest provider of humanitarian and development aid in the world.
Ways to cooperate with Parliament to be developed together
Responding to José Ignacio Salafranca (EPP, ES), Lady Ashton said that the way in which Parliament and the High Representative would cooperate would have to be determined together. She planned to seek "to reach the highest common factor" among the 27 Member States, instead of the "lowest common denominator", she added. The High Representative told MEPs that she was counting on their expertise.
Kristian Vigenin (S&D, BG) asked about EU-Russia relations, notably energy disputes and the situation of human rights and democracy. Lady Ashton insisted that continuing dialogue with Russia was crucial.
Annemie Neyts-Uyttebroeck (ALDE, BE) warned against institutional turf wars between the Council and the Commission over foreign policy management. She added that the EEAS would be "the opportunity to build a new form of diplomacy". Lady Ashton stressed the importance of "using the energy of rotating presidencies wisely and clearly".
“Not an arm of the UK government”
Ulrike Lunacek (Greens/EFA, AT) stressed that "Europe needs a strong, united voice, a single face, a clear and transparent foreign and security policy". Lady Ashton reassured MEPs that she wouldn't be "an extended arm of the UK government". She added she was proud to be known as a pro-European in Britain and elsewhere.
Charles Tannock (ECR, UK) was concerned about Lady Ashton's experience in foreign affairs and wondered why she was selected over others "better qualified for this job". Baroness Ashton said she had been the choice of 27 heads of state or government: "The skills I have are appropriate for this work", she added.
Sabine Lösing (GUE/NGL, DE) warned against a possible discrimination against smaller Member States as jobs were allocated in the European External Action Service (EEAS). Lady Ashton agreed that smaller member states were "extremely important", and their involvement in the external service as well as in other projects must be ensured.
Past role in CND questioned
David Campbell Bannerman (EFD, UK) referred to Catherine Ashton’s past as treasurer of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament (CND) in the early 1980s, as he asked if she "did or did not take money from any Soviet block country" or from any other communist source. Lady Ashton insisted she had not taken any “direct money from communist countries”. Much of the organisation’s funds had been “collected in buckets" at marches and demonstrations, she said, adding that she was the first to order an audit of CND’s finances.
Transatlantic relations “strategically important”
Lady Ashton referred to the transatlantic relations as "strategically important", and underlined that NATO and member states must work together on the questions of Afghanistan and the Middle East. "On Iran we need to show unity", she added.
Starting with a "blank sheet of paper"
On a number of specific issues raised by MEPs, such as the Nordstream pipeline, Latin American relations or Arctic issues – and on issues of how the EEAS would function administratively, Catherine Ashton indicated that it was too soon since her appointment for her present a considered view. She said she looked forward to addressing more issues at her hearing in January.
"It could be an advantage to you that I come to this with a blank sheet of paper," said Lady Ashton at the end of the meeting. Speaking of the creation of her role and the setting up of the EEAS, she said: "This has never been done before, and I intend to make this work as best I can. Please work with me to help me get it right."
Background
According to the Lisbon Treaty, which entered into force the day before this committee meeting, the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy will also be a Vice President of the European Commission. She will be in charge of conducting the Union's common foreign and security policy, supported by the new European External Action Service. She will chair meetings of EU ministers in the Foreign Affairs Council.
Prior to the new Commission taking office, the team as a whole , including the Vice-President in charge of foreign affairs, needs to receive the European Parliament's approval. This vote is scheduled to take place at the end of January after hearings of the Commissioners-designate by the relevant EP committees from 11 to 19 January. Wednesday’s discussion with the committee neither replaces nor pre-judges the outcome of Lady Ashton’s hearing in January.
With the Lisbon Treaty, in force as of 1 December 2009, the European Parliament has important new lawmaking powers. Virtually all EU legislation is now decided by the European Parliament and the Council of Ministers together - including agriculture, immigration, energy and the EU budget. As the only directly-elected EU institution, Parliament's position in making sure the EU is accountable to its citizens is also strengthened, for example by MEPs having a bigger say in appointments to many of the EU's top jobs. 20091130IPR65640
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
