Climate change: European Parliament at COP15 - a voice of ambition
Environment
2009-12-08 - 13:15
The Copenhagen Climate Conference is the most important meeting this decade for global climate protection. The European Parliament will be represented there by an official delegation. Over the years Parliament has become a voice of ambition, calling for EU leadership in the fight against climate change.
The Copenhagen conference takes place from 7 to 18 December 2009. Parliament will be sending a 15-strong official delegation to the high-level segment of the 15th UN Conference of the Parties (COP) on Climate Change in Copenhagen, between 14 and 18 December. Parliament's President, Jerzy Buzek will also attend the conference, from 17 December.
MEPs will be in Copenhagen to follow the negotiations and support efforts to reach a follow-up agreement for the Kyoto Protocol. Parliament already co-legislates with Member State governments on EU environment policy, but the Lisbon Treaty's entry into force, on 1 December 2009, has given it an even more prominent legislative role: its consent is now required for international treaties, so as well for any new Copenhagen climate protection agreement.
MEPs will be meeting parliamentarians from the US, Japan, Brazil and South Korea, government representatives, NGOs, international organisations, such as the International Civil Aviation Organisation, the World Bank, the Council of Europe and other players from across the world as part of a joint effort to create a strong global basis for climate protection.
EP demands ambitious and legally binding international agreement
The mandate and position of Parliament's delegation are outlined in an EP resolution titled "EU strategy for the Copenhagen climate change conference" which was passed by an overwhelming majority on 25 November 2009.
Parliament's expectations include an ambitious and legally binding agreement to prevent the world warming up by more than 2ºC and to ensure that economic growth becomes sustainable. The agreement should require emission reduction targets for developed and developing countries as well as financial commitments to mitigate emissions and to adapt to the impact of climate change, says the resolution.
"The EU has taken up a leadership position in the fight for climate protection and we want to keep it that way in Copenhagen. Therefore we need to stand by our offer: a 30% reduction of CO 2 in 2020," said EP delegation chair Jo Leinen (S&D, DE).
EP delegation vice-chair Karl-Heinz Florenz (EPP, DE) said: "Copenhagen is also important for the technical competence and the innovation of our economy. Remaining leader in climate protection will create employment in our industries and help us to become less dependent on energy imports". He added: "Climate protection is no 'green dream', it is an economic imperative!"
EP side event - linking cap and trade systems - a global carbon market -
The European Parliament will be holding a side event on the role that international carbon trading can play in reducing the emissions that cause climate change. The event will provide an overview of existing and planned '"cap and trade" systems, including the EU emission trading system (ETS) and the planned "cap and trade" scheme in the USA. It will also look at how to link up carbon trade systems to create a common global market. (17 December, 15.30h - 17.30h, EU Pavilion).
Members of the official EP delegation
Members of the official delegation were chosen under the d'Hondt procedure. This means that places were distributed to the political groups according to their weight in the full Parliament. Delegation chair Jo Leinen and vice-chair Karl-Heinz Florenz will be speaking on behalf of the delegation.
The full list of members of the EP delegation is as follows:
Mr Jo LEINEN (S&D, DE), chair
Mr Karl-Heinz FLORENZ (EPP, DE), vice-chair
Ms Pilar DEL CASTILLO VERA (EPP, ES)
Ms Romana JORDAN-CIZELJ (EPP, SL)
Ms Iva ZANICCHI (EPP, IT)
Ms Corien WORTMANN-KOOL (EPP, NL)
Mr Dan JØRGENSEN (S&D, DK)
Ms Linda McAVAN (S&D, UK)
Ms Marita ULVSKOG (S&D, SV)
Ms Corinne LEPAGE (ALDE, FR)
Ms Satu HASSI (GREENS/EFA, FI)
Mr Miroslav OUZKY (ECR, CZ)
Ms Bairbre DE BRUN (GUE/NGL, UK)
Ms Anna ROSBACH (EFD, DK)
Nick GRIFFIN (NI, UK)
Offsetting
The climate impacts of the flights by the official European Parliament delegation (and the EP staff accompanying the delegation) will be offset.
Press conferences
The following press conferences have been confirmed (please check for updates on the EP's special climate change web site at the link below):
Monday, 14.12.09 - 17.30h: Commissioner Dimas and Jo Leinen on EU expectations of the conference (UNFCCC press room)
Thursday, 17.12.09 - 17.30h: Jo Leinen and Karl-Heinz Florenz on the EP side event (UNFCC press room).
Audiovisual coverage
EbS will broadcast daily summaries of the delegation's key activities and press conferences starting on 14 December until the final joint press conference with the EP, Council and Commission on 19 December. Please check the EbS daily schedule (link below) for details.
With the Lisbon Treaty, in force as of 1 December 2009, the European Parliament has important new lawmaking powers. Virtually all EU legislation is now decided by the European Parliament and the Council of Ministers together - including agriculture, immigration, energy and the EU budget. As the only directly elected EU institution, Parliament's position in making sure the EU is accountable to its citizens is also strengthened, for example by MEPs having a bigger say in appointments to many of the EU's top jobs. 20091207IPR66098 EP delegation web page: press releases, audiovisual material, programme, contact details, updates EBS schedule Press release - MEPs urge EU to continue leading fight against climate change
EN
1
LINK
/climatechange/
EN
2
LINK
/eng-internet-publisher/eplive/expert/ebs.do?language=en
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20091123IPR65052 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
