Climate change threatens Tuvalu's survival, says Prime Minister Apisai Ielemia
Development and cooperation
2009-12-10 - 15:22
Higher tides, storm surges and warmer seawater could threaten the very existence of the people of Tuvalu, by destroying their land, crops and marine ecosystems, its Prime Minister Apisai Ielemia told the Development Committee on Thursday. He called on the Copenhagen climate change conference to deliver immediate global action to reduce CO2 emissions, so as keep the temperature increase within 1.5 degrees Celsius of pre-industrial levels.
"During high tides and storms, sea water could reach further inland taking away the already limited land and waves have already destroyed trees and crops. Seawater is also contaminating our groundwater (...) our corals are dying because of increased sea water temperature, thus affecting our marine ecosystems and our food supply", said Prime Minister Apisai Ielemia.
No to resettlement
Rejecting the possibility of any future resettlement of Tuvalu people, the Prime Minister declared: "While Tuvalu faces an uncertain future because of climate change, it is our view that Tuvaluans will remain in Tuvalu. We will fight to keep our country, our culture and our way of living. We are not considering any migration scheme. We believe if the right actions are taken to address climate change, Tuvalu will survive."
Combating climate change in Tuvalu
Tuvalu is building natural defences to protect coral reefs and the coastline and infrastructure to protect people, property and livestock from cyclones and storms as well as reducing its own CO 2 emissions, "even though they are tiny compared to those of other countries", primarily by using renewable energy.
EP support for the cause of small islands developing countries
Michael Cashman (S&D, UK) stressed the need for a deal in Copenhagen to deliver not just verbal commitments but also adequate funds. The case of Tuvalu demonstrates clearly that climate change challenges are a problem "of this generation and not of future generations", he said.
Maurice Ponga (EPP, FR) stressed the need to raise MEPs' awareness of the "daily crisis facing people on these islands", adding "let us find the funding so that the people of Tuvalu do not have to move."
Charles Goerens (ALDE, LU) urged that funding for fighting climate change should not be redirected from existing Official Development Assistance commitments. "Funding for fighting climate change should be allocated in addition. The exisitng money for development is already insufficient and we risk not meeting the Millenium Developments Goals", he said.
Noting that Tuvalu had come top in the "Happy Planet Index", which measures the well-being of nations while taking account of their environmental impact, Isabelle Lövin (Greens/EFA, SE), said that "industrialised countries have to learn a lot from islands like Tuvalu about good living and the way of using our resources."
In the chair: Nirj DEVA (ECR, UK)
With the Lisbon Treaty, in force as of 1 December 2009, the European Parliament has important new lawmaking powers. Virtually all EU legislation is now decided by the European Parliament and the Council of Ministers together - including agriculture, immigration, energy and the EU budget. As the only directly elected EU institution, Parliament's position in making sure the EU is accountable to its citizens is also strengthened, for example by MEPs having a bigger say in appointments to many of the EU's top jobs. 20091207IPR66100 Development Committee web site
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=DEVE
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
