10 reasons to follow the EP Hearings of Commissioners-designate
Hearings
Institutions
2010-01-07 - 17:48
All 26 Commissioner-designates will have to face questions from MEPs before a final vote On Monday 11 January, MEPs will begin grilling the 26 candidates for the job of European Commissioner for the next 5 years. To enable the European executive to start working swiftly, the hearings will be concentrated over 7 days, with up to 6 taking place each day. In this way, MEPs will be able to approve - or reject - the whole Commission on 26 January. Why should the marathon matter to you? Find out here!
1. No doubt a few surprises on the way: The last time this process took place in 2004 two candidates tripped and fell out with MEPs. As their nomination could not be guaranteed the whole Commission line-up had to be rearranged.
2. Members you elected in June exercise control over the EU's executive: The MEPs you returned in June will have the chance to exercise one of their key functions, which is to scrutinise and control the incoming European Commission. Politically, the make-up of the proposed Commission is centre-right which reflects the political make up of the governments in Europe and of the majority bloc in the European Parliament.
3. A good Commissioner makes a difference: Europe is at a turning point: financial crisis, climate change, jobs and growth, immigration...all challenges that no single country can face alone. The Commission has a huge responsibility in finding the right answers. A good commissioner can make the difference and a poor one can cause damage. These hearings are the "recruitment procedures" so it pays to take care!
4. Europe's foreign policy direction: For those who follow EU foreign policy the hearing of Catherine Ashton, the new High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy, will provide some indicators about the direction EU foreign policy could follow in coming years. What will the policy be towards Israel and Palestine, towards Russia and China? All of these questions could be touched upon at the hearing on Monday at 1300. Lady Ashton is present for the hearings as under her new post she is also Vice-President of the European Commission.
5. Be the first to find out their views: The hearings are a real exercise in transparency. You have the opportunity to follow them in 22 languages and make up your mind on your European politicians. They are often well known personalities at national level: among them are 16 ex-ministers, including 2 former prime ministers. Are they right for a European job? Are their plans for the next 5 years convincing? Judge for yourself...
6 . ...And then have your say! Parliament will open a discussion space on Facebook to enable you and your friends to discuss and express your opinion about the new Commissioners and what they tell MEPs. See the Facebook link below. .
7. British and Irish candidates: Catherine Ashton was nominated by the British Government and was then chosen by EU leaders to be the first High Representative. Her hearing with the Foreign Affairs Committee will be on Monday at 1300 CET.
The Irish nominee Máire Geoghegan-Quinn will be quizzed by MEPs on the Industry, Research and Energy Committee for the Research, Innovation and Science portfolio on Wednesday 13 January from 1630-1930 CET.
8. A new term, a more powerful Parliament: It's the first time that Commissioners will serve under the Lisbon Treaty. They will face a Parliament with more powers and will be more accountable to MEPs on a broad range of topics, from agriculture to budget.
9. The selection procedure will be short and to the point: MEPs decided to concentrate the "job interviews" in 7 days, in a kind of "tour de force" that will oblige them to question up to six candidates per day with each hearing lasting three hours. You can follow via streaming, and also on the special hearings website, which will be updated with timely and detailed information.
10. A truly independent Parliament: Don't be fooled - these hearings are not a formality. In the EU system, the executive is not an emanation of a parliamentary majority, so the Parliament has a far more independent relationship with it than in many countries. The hearings are a serious examination, based on competences and programs, less prone to party-political calculations. That is why it is such in important moment for the European Union...and for you: don't miss it!
20100106STO66870 Hearings website 11-19 January: Hearings programme Who's who - profile of candidates Facebook
EN
1
PHOTO
20091215PHT66415.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/hearings//default.htm;jsessionid=D4C2F1525AF70A86A48D38BE4BC6B79B?language=EN
EN
3
LINK
/hearings/static/programme/programme_it.pdf
EN
4
LINK
/hearings//commissioners/getHomePage.htm;jsessionid=D3F62E4CD1405E377234F3934B865EAB?language=EN
EN
5
LINK
http://www.facebook.com/europeanparliament
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
