Tuesday's round-up: Almunia, Füle, De Gucht, Jeleva, Reding, Šemeta
Hearings
Institutions
2010-01-13 - 12:22
The News: Super Tuesday for Commission Hearings - De Gucht, Füle, Jeleva, Reding, Šemeta, and Almunia During the second day of hearings, members of 10 committees "grilled" 6 commissioners-designate. During 18 hours of hearings, the nominees fielded hundreds of questions ranging from taxation, trade and competition to fundamental rights, enlargement and humanitarian aid. MEPs took an attentive look at competences and attitudes of both Commission newcomers and "old hands" set to change their portfolios.
Joaquín Almunia: fair competition to tackle the crisis
Competition Commissioner designate Spain's Joaquín Almunia held the economic and monetary affairs portfolio in the outgoing Commission. During the hearing he underlined the importance of taking the interests of citizens affected by the crisis into account and the role of competition in the coordinated crisis exit strategy, underlining the importance of the budgetary discipline. "We are against tax havens", he said.
MEPs asked what he thought about competition and state aid to the banking and transport sectors as well as other services of general economic interest; fines for anti-competitive practices and fiscal races to the bottom.
Mr Almunia said, "competition policy is only an instrument, not an end in itself... We have a "competition policy that is unique in the world, but it has to be enforced and explained,", He underlined the importance of competition in the transport sector.
Štefan Füle: "There are no shortcuts to EU membership"
The former Czech ambassador to NATO and outgoing Minister for European Affairs delivered a diplomatic and balanced presentation on EU enlargement and neighbourhood policy. He said there is a distinct dividing line between the two policies and excluded speculation that countries already established as membership candidates might be "downgraded" to partners within the neighbourhood programme.
Answering questions about his youth, he classified his membership of the Communist party in the 1980s as a mistake and noted that already apologised. "Everyone has his personal history. At the time when I was able to make choices, I put my skills at the service of Czechoslovakia and the Czech Republic."
Karel De Gucht: fighting protectionism and non-tariff barriers
Outgoing Development and Humanitarian Aid Commissioner and former MEP Karel De Gucht of Belgium is set to undertake the trade portfolio. He was questioned about Doha development talks, regional free trade agreements, trade barriers and measures against counterfeiting and dumping.
He said the EU should step up action against unfair trade practices and protectionism. He promised to focus not only on multilateral trading systems, free-trade agreements and regional links, but also on dismantling non-tariff barriers and concluding a good Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement. "We need trade and more trade to preserve our social system because it brings growth," he said.
Rumiana Jeleva: "The cornerstone of my policy will be coordination"
Bulgarian commissioner-designate for International Cooperation, Humanitarian Aid and Crisis Response, Rumiana Jeleva said her priorities would be the defence of International Humanitarian Law, better access to help for people in need, a clearer distinction between humanitarian and military roles and the security of humanitarian aid workers on the ground. She noted that available resources must be used in the best way possible. "This is why at the cornerstone of my policy will be coordination," she said.
A considerable part of the hearing was focused on accusations of a possible conflict of interests. Ms Jeleva firmly rejected the accusations and denied rumours of giving false information in her declaration of financial interests, after several MEPs raised questions. "I don’t have anything to hide...I would like to point out that I have been a public person since 2007. I have declared everything I have been obliged to. Any allegations against my husband or myself are totally, completely unfounded."
Viviane Reding: "We should never be driven by fear, but by values"
Luxembourg's Commissioner Viviane Reding is expected to take up Justice, Fundamental Rights and Citizenship in the next Commission. She told members of the Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs, Legal affairs and Women's Committees that in the last decade, justice has been neglected in favour of security, but the Lisbon Treaty now allows a balance to be struck.
Further she said that fundamental rights such as data protection would be "top of the line". Asked about personal data protection and the possible use of body scanners in airports, she said, "we will not let anyone dictate to us rules that go against fundamental rights on anti-terrorism grounds...our need for security cannot justify any violation of privacy. We should never be driven by fear, but by values".
Algirdas Šemeta: "Every euro has to be accounted for"
Members of the Budgetary Control, Economic and Monetary Affairs and Internal Market Committees assessed whether Budget Commissioner Algirdas Šemeta of Lithuania has the qualities for the Taxation and Customs Union, Audit and Anti-Fraud portfolio. Issues addressed during the hearing included OLAF reform, spending errors, corporate taxation, VAT fraud, counterfeit goods, tax havens, "green" taxes and e-customs.
"The fight against any type of fraud will be at the very heart of my daily work," he said, underlining the importance of transparency and respect for tax-payers' money, "fair tax competition" within the EU; avoidance of double taxation, the simplification of structural spending rules, development of e-customs and adoption of the energy taxation directive.
20100108STO66996 Press releases Watch the hearings Europarltv programmes on the hearings Flickr : Photos from the hearings
EN
1
EUROPARL-TV
http://europarltv.europa.eu/swf/EmbedPlayer.swf?vid=454953aa-37cc-4bc8-9e6f-9ea8c38a230e&cid=0c8dedcf-1098-46c9-9b85-6f2b0f0b120d&lang=en&bitrate=512&loop=off&autoplay=off&startVolume=medium&showTitle=on&showBottom=on
EN
2
LINK
/hearings//press_service/default.htm;jsessionid=9FA50ADAD9BAA4E79233CD61C5486FB3?language=EN
EN
3
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/frd/vod/research-committee-and-other;jsessionid=C9656AAA11590D806308EFA532994160?byLeftMenu=researchotherevents&isSearchOtherEvents=true&language=en
EN
4
LINK
http://www.europarltv.europa.eu/ParliamentLive.aspx
EN
5
LINK
http://www.flickr.com/photos/european_parliament/sets/72157623020237893/show/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
