Summary of the hearing of Günther Oettinger - Energy
Hearings
Institutions
2010-01-14 - 13:10
Security of energy supply, energy efficiency, the role of nuclear power, energy poverty and his own suitability for the post were among matters raised by Members of the EP Industry and Environment Committee at the hearing of Günther Oettinger, Commissioner-designate for Energy.
"Over the next five years I want to contribute, with you, towards a Europeanisation of our energy policy", said Mr Oettinger. "We need a comprehensive paradigm shift in energy policy", added the candidate Commissioner, who saw the "decarbonisation of the energy supplies" of the EU and greater energy security as priorities for his term of office.
Renewable energy and nuclear energy
The share of nuclear and renewable energies in the EU's energy supply was a point raised by several MEPs. Alejo Vidal-Quadras (EPP, ES) asked whether Mr Oettinger was prepared to set "an integrated target for all low-emission forms of energy" (including nuclear energy), since the target of 20 per cent renewable energy by 2020 was not enough to cut emissions. Giles Chichester (ECR, UK) wanted to know if Mr Oettinger believed renewable energy could achieve the same share of European electricity production as nuclear energy.
In the long term, said the Commissioner-designate, a figure of over 20 per cent for renewable energy would be needed. He added that in the coming years we must start to talk about the decade after the present one. He also believed that the Desertec wind and solar energy project in north Africa must not become an "exploitation of Africa" but "the start of a new partnership, a win-win situation".
As for nuclear energy, he had "respect for national decision-making powers". "There are countries that see nuclear power as a long-term option, not just a stopgap technology. I have to accept that", he said. However, "I see myself as a moderator, not an ambassador for nuclear power", was Mr Oettinger's reply to a question by Anni Podimata (S&D, GR). The EU's role, he believed, lay in the areas of nuclear safety, atomic energy research and the disposal of radioactive waste.
Energy efficiency
To questions by Lena Ek (ALDE, SE), Vladimir Urutchev (EPP, BG) and Jorgo Chatzimarkakis (ALDE, DE) on achieving the energy efficiency target of 20% by 2020, Mr Oettinger replied that "guidelines that give long-term planning security are not a disadvantage for industry but an advantage in future markets" and that he was prepared "to intervene strongly" in the areas of electricity generation, industrial production and buildings.
Energy supply and security
What measures was Mr Oettinger planning to improve energy security and solidarity, asked Lena Kolarska-Bobińska (EPP, PL), Arturs Krišjānis Kariņš (EPP, LV) and Niki Tzavela (EFD, GR).
"Our goal must be to bring the raw material, under fair conditions and with planning security, into the European market and then to make it available to every national market and industrial purchaser, but on the same terms", answered the Commissioner-designate. It was important "to learn lessons" from the Nord Stream project, he said. He argued against seeking "insular solutions" through bilateral agreements. The Baltic states must be fully integrated into the European electricity and gas network, he went on, adding that the development of the Southern Gas Corridor provided an opportunity to open up new sources of gas in Azerbaijan.
Marisa Matias (GUE/NGL, PT) believed the EU still had a lot of catching up to do in the area of biomass production as part of the diversification of energy sources. Mr Oettinger saw this as "another opportunity for farmers" but said the issue must be taken forward in a "sensitive and differentiated" way. He would be submitting a report on land use change.
Energy poverty
Energy use must not be socially divisive was Mr Oettinger's reply to a question by Kathleen Van Brempt (S&D, BE) on the question of energy poverty. To another question, by Zoltán Balczó (NA, HU), he replied that EU policy sought to ensure that energy price rises remained "moderate and affordable". A code might be devised, under which energy would not be immediately switched off if someone had not paid their bill for two weeks.
The right person for the job?
Germany 's federal finance ministry had found that Baden-Württemberg had not fully implemented the EU money laundering directive, said Norbert Glante (S&D, DE). In the light of this, he asked the candidate Commissioner, who is the former Minister President of that German region, how he thought he could enforce EU policy. The EU directive had only been transposed at national level in August 2008 and only one other Land had so far done as much as Baden-Württemberg, replied Mr Oettinger.
"It is an open secret that you have close ties to the CEOs of E.ON and RWE", said Claude Turmes (Greens/EFA, LU), in an allusion to the implementation of EU single market law such as the third energy market package on the unbundling of energy companies. Marita Ulvskog (S&D, SE) also expressed concern that Mr Oettinger was too close to "certain private interests".
Mr Oettinger replied that he had no shares in energy companies EWF, EnBW, E.ON, RWE or Vattenfall. "I am the Commissioner proposed by Germany but I have European obligations", he added.
14/01/2010
In the chair: Herbert REUL (EPP, DE)
20100113IPR67198 Hearings website - documents, procedure, background Industry, Research and Energy Committee site Video on demand - watch the hearing Broadcast quality video summaries plus photo coverage via FTP server Broadcast quality audio via FTP server audio, 10:43 audio, 10:43
EN
1
LINK
/hearings/default.htm?language=EN
EN
2
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=ITRE
EN
3
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/frd/vod/search-other-events?language=en
EN
4
LINK
ftp://epavvideoget:mo12ssb@ftpeps01.europarl.eu.int/epavvideo/Hearings
EN
5
LINK
ftp://epavradioget:mo12SSB@ftpeps01.europarl.eu.int/epavradio/hearings
EN
6
MULTIMEDIA
20100114MLT67302.asf
EN
7
MULTIMEDIA
20100114MLT67300.mp3
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
