The Week Ahead 18-24 January 2010
Institutions
2010-01-15 - 10:46
Plenary session and hearings of Commissioners-designate – Strasbourg
Commission hearings. Four further hearings of Commissioners-designate will take place (Monday-Tuesday ). With all 26 hearings completed, EP President Jerzy Buzek, the leaders of the political groups and the chairs of the parliamentary committees will meet on Thursday to assess the performance of the proposed team of Commissioners.
Spanish Presidency. Spanish Prime Minister José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero will debate with MEPs the programme of the Spanish presidency of the Council during the first half of 2010. Mr Zapatero will have a bilateral meeting with President Buzek and also join him for a press conference. (Wednesday). Ombudsman election. Parliament will elect one of three candidates for the post of EU Ombudsman, responsible for investigating complaints of maladministration in the EU institutions (Wednesday).
Earthquake in Haiti. President Buzek will open the session with a statement on the earthquake in Haiti (Monday). Later, MEPs will debate the situation in Haiti with the Commission (Thursday).
Foreign Policy debates. MEPs will debate the situations in Iran, Iraq and Yemen, and EU/Tunisia relations, with the Council and Commission (Tuesday).
Copenhagen summit. Parliament will debate the outcome of the Copenhagen climate change summit with Commission and Council (debate Wednesday, vote on resolution in February).
SWIFT. MEPs will debate with the Council the situation over data protection agreements with the US covering banking data held by SWIFT (Wednesday).
ACP-EU agreement. Plans to revise the agreement on relations between the EU and African, Caribbean and Pacific countries will be debated (Tuesday, vote Wednesday).
EP President/Polish Parliament. President Buzek will address the Sejm in Warsaw and also meet leader of political parties there (Friday).
20100115IPR67369 For details of all the week's events, see The Agenda
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20100400AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
