MEPs raise questions on the use of body scanners
Justice and home affairs
2010-02-11 - 13:52
The safety and effectiveness of body scanners was questioned by MEPs ©Belga If body scanners are to be used they must be introduced across the whole EU, but before that, questions about their efficiency, dangers to public health and the risks to fundamental rights must be dealt with, MEPs said Wednesday during a debate on the fight against terrorism. Better sharing of intelligence data and the fight to prevent radicalisation were also discussed.
Body scanners
The threat of terrorism has not been reduced in EU and civil aviation remains a preferred target . The case of the Detroit underwear bomber was the reason behind the body scanner debate which focused on whether scanners are efficient, compatible with the right to privacy and their impact on health.
"Terrorists innovate, so we also have to," said Spain's Interior Minister Alfredo Pérez Rubalcaba, speaking for the Council. But "we need a common position on all security at airports otherwise there will be weak links which put us all at risk." Before we put body scanners in place "we must determine their efficiency, compatibility with the right to a private life and the effect on health," he added.
Belgian Socialist Saïd El Khadraoui said, "we have to stop giving the impression that scanners are 100% sure. Sometimes the objects are within the body not on the body."
Teresa Jiménez-Becerril, a Spanish member of the centre right European People's Party told MEPs that "those who talk of fundamental rights, should remember that the right to life is the most fundamental, it rises above all others".
Raising health concerns and criticising the introduction of scanners in UK airports, British Conservative Charles Tannock warned: "This is the first time ionising radiation is being forced on people...it is more dangerous to skin and soft tissue than radiation on planes".
However, Transport Commissioner Siim Kallas told MEPs, "there is no proposal to introduce compulsory machines in all airports, we will come to you after April following a study on all aspects of this technology,"
Fight against terrorism
According to date collected by Europol in 2008, EU countries reported 515 terrorist attacks with 359 individuals being trailed. Of these 50% related to Al Qaeda/Islamic terrorist, 39% to separatists movements across Europe.
Mr Pérez Rubalcaba told MEPs that "the EU counter terrorism strategy launched in 2005 in the aftermath of the Madrid and London attacks is still efficient. Now it's time to move from only pursuing terrorists to prevention, to tackling radicalisation".
Home affairs Commissioner Cecilia Malmström said she will evaluate "all counter terrorism policies" to analyse gaps or overlaps and see what legislation is needed.
Italian MEP Mara Bizzotto for the European Freedom and Democracy group said that "we need to look at the causes. Terrorism is the direct manifestation of the inability of some ethnic groups - Muslims in particular - to integrate in Europe. We have to face that".
Exchange of information
There was agreement that a major reason behind the Detroit incident was a problem of information exchange. The information is there but is not being managed effectively. “We can do more on EU level to fine tune our tools. We have to decide how to use them in a more intelligent way ,” Ms Malmström said.
"Intelligence is one way to prevent terrorism, but information needs to circulate," Luxemoubourg Liberal Charles Goerens said, He and other MEPs questioned whether the US reciprocates in this information exchange.
Swift debate
Earlier Wednesday MEPs restated concern at the lack of data protection and legal redress in the interim agreement on bank data transfers to the US via the SWIFT network. The EP votes on whether to back the agreement Thursday at noon. Click below to read more.
20100205STO68543 Press release on Swift debate SWIFT: MEPs to vote on backing or sacking EU/US data sharing deal MEPs on body scanners
EN
1
PHOTO
20100209PHT68726.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20100209IPR68674 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20100205STO68536 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20100121STO67830 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
