2 day Parliamentary session in Brussels
Institutions
2010-02-22 - 17:24
The session will be held 24-25 February NEW: The eurozone, the Greek debt crisis and the '2020' jobs and growth strategy were debated by MEPs Wednesday afternoon. It comes ahead of a debate Thursday morning on reform of the EU's troubled fisheries policy. The 2-day session held in Brussels will also see a vote on measures to cut red tape for smaller companies. The sitting also sees Members outline what they believe should be the EU's priorities for the forthcoming UN human rights council.
The outcome of the recent Presidential elections in Ukraine will also be on the agenda. The two days also see a debate the findings of a report by South African judge Richard Goldstone who led the UN fact-finding mission on the Gaza conflict.
All of the week's news can be found here online during the session.
Section 1: Full agenda
Section 2 Opening of Brussels plenary session
Section 3. Debate on the outcome of the 11 February economic Summit
Section 4. MEPs set out fisheries reform priorities
Section 5. More work for MEPs: more resources needed
20100219FCS69272
Newsletter - 24-25 February 2010 - Brussels plenary session
What are the priorities for fisheries reform?
How should EU fishery resources be managed? Parliament will set out its views when it votes on a report on Thursday. The social, environmental and economic dimensions of fisheries policy are all equally important, says a report drafted by the Fisheries Committee.
Reducing red tape for smaller companies
Micro-companies could be exempted from having to draw up annual accounts if MEPs approve an amendment to EU accounting rules on Thursday. However, these exemptions would have to be granted by EU Member States, and the companies would still have to keep records of their business transactions and financial situation.
More work for MEPs: more resources needed
Parliament will vote on plans to create 150 new jobs in the European Parliament and increase the budget for hiring MEPs' assistants. Parliament's vastly increased powers and tasks under the Lisbon Treaty mean that extra staff are needed in Parliament's political groups, its administration and to work with MEPs.
Parliament to debate Greek debt crisis and EU 2020 strategy
On Wednesday MEPs will debate the outcome of the informal European Council held in Brussels 11 February. At the summit, the EU leaders made a pledge to help Greece in its debt crisis and issued a statement in which they called on the Greek government to implement measures to reduce the budgetary deficit by four percentage points in 2010.
EP resolution ahead of UN Human Rights Council meeting
Human rights in the EU and around the world, in particular in Haiti, will be the subject of a debate at Parliament on Wednesday.
Gaza conflict and implementation of Goldstone report
Parliament will debate the follow-up to the UN fact-finding mission on the Gaza conflict led by former South African judge Richard Goldstone.
MEPs to give their views on Ukraine
Following the European Parliament's debate on Ukraine earlier this month in Strasbourg, MEPs will vote on a resolution on this topic at the Brussels plenary session on Thursday.
Women's rights 15 years after Beijing
Fifteen years after the UN's Fourth World Conference on Women, held in 1995 in Beijing, much remains to be done, believe MEPs, who on Wednesday will debate a progress report on the goals set at the conference.
Investing in energy infrastructure
The EU's energy policy is aimed at securing energy supplies, mitigating climate change and ensuring competitiveness. MEPs will debate and vote this week on legislation designed to enhance the policy by requiring EU governments to give the Commission details of any investment they are making in energy infrastructure.
Press Service Live from Weds at 1500 CET EuroparlTV
Opening of Brussels plenary session
Brussels, 24 February: MEPs observe a moments silence for the victims of the Belgian train crash and the landslides in Medeira At the start of this week's Brussels session of the European Parliament, EP President Jerzy Buzek expressed sympathy for victims of the Belgian rail disaster of 15 February and the Madeira floods of 21 February.
"To my deepest regret I must inform you that Mrs Claudia Candeago, one of our colleagues from the Communication Directorate-General, was among the victims of the train crash near Brussels. Mrs Candeago had been working in the European Parliament since December 2008. On behalf of us all, I express our sympathy and condolences to her family".
Mr Buzek also voiced Parliament's sympathy for victims of catastrophic floods on the island of Madeira, where the biggest storm since 1993 had taken the lives of more than 30 people. "In these difficult days we convey our sympathy to their families and join them in our prayers", he said. The President then asked everyone present to stand and observe a minute's silence in memory of victims of both disasters.
Mr Buzek welcomed Council President Hermann Van Rompuy to his first plenary session, Commission President José Manuel Barroso and two guests from Belarus: Ms Andzelika Borys, leader of the Union of Poles in Belarus and Mr Aleksander Milinkevich leader of Belarusian democratic opposition and a Sakharov prize-winner.
"Unfortunately, Belarus is again hitting the headlines by repressing a non-governmental organisation. The European Parliament defends the universal values, in which we all believe and which are close to our hearts. We shall be condemning all authoritarian regimes which use violence toward citizens and repress democratic organisations that do not share their convictions", said the President.
Agenda changes
The House decided on the following agenda changes:
Council and Commission statements on the situation in Belarus will be added on Wednesday, directly after the debate on the Goldstone recommendations on Israel/Palestine. Parliament will vote a resolution on this topic at its March session.
A European Commission statement on the major natural disaster in the autonomous region of Madeira will be added on Wednesday, after the one-minute speeches. Parliament will vote a resolution on this topic at the March plenary session.
A European Commission statement on railway safety, including the European signalling system, will be added on Thursday, after the debate on the fisheries green paper. There will be no resolution.
At the request of the S&D group, the plenary vote on the Lehne report on the annual accounting requirements for micro-companies was postponed to March.
MEPs debate results of informal eurozone Summit
Herman Van Rompuy, President of the European Council, made his debut in the post in the Chamber in Brussels, 24 February MEPs debated the recent economic summit held by EU leaders, which was dominated by the problems in the eurozone and the Greek deficit. The leader of the largest bloc in Parliament, Joseph Daul of the European People's Party, called for "budgetary coordination" whilst Socialist speaker Stephen Hughes called for urgent measures and rapid budget consolidation. Liberal leader Guy Verhofstadt called "nonsense" a monetary union with no real economic union.
After the Summit in Brussels, EU leaders made a pledge to help Greece in its debt crisis and issued a statement in which they called on the Greek government to implement measures to reduce its budget deficit.
Heads of States also discussed a new EU plan for jobs and growth, the EU 2020 strategy. Parliament will vote in March on a resolution on the follow-up to the summit.
Speaking for the first time in parliament in his capacity as the President of the European Council Herman Van Rompuy said that the present "institutional architecture" of the EU represented an improvement.
The former Belgian prime minister said he would act as a "bridge between national authorities and EU institutions".
No more "business as usual"
The President of the European Commission José Manuel Barroso told the House that the contraction of the economy and rising unemployment are a threat that must be addressed, as well as the aging population and the productivity gap. He said that "business as usual will not protect the EU way of life" and promised a three-pronged strategy for knowledge-based, inclusive and sustainable growth
Mr Daul said that Europe could not wait for other countries to find themselves in the same position as Greece. He quoted former French Prime Minister Eduard Balladur saying "eurozone countries' economic policy has to be approved by the euro group".
He said that Europe finds itself divided again and must act together rather than clinging to the "false economic sovereignty that each country thinks it still has".
"Let us use the chance to make Europe relevant to people"
For the second largest bloc the Socialists and Democrats, British MEP Stephen Hughes said member states are in a desperate need of solidarity and that "2020 is distant future, we need solutions for immediate problems".
He called for rapid budget consolidation but not savage cuts in public spending such as on health and education. He also doubted a tax rise could achieve the desired result.
Finally he said, "let us use the chance to make Europe relevant to people and not only to markets. 2020 should put people in the heart of European project."
"A European solution"
For the Liberal ALDE group, leader Guy Verhofstadt called for greater economic governance inside the Union. He called for a European solution to the Greek debt crisis. "It is nonsense to have monetary union at one time and not to have real economic union at the same time and Greece is the best example."
For the Greens Rebecca Harms said that if the EU is to show solidarity, a lot has to change in Greece too. She pointed out that 25% of employment is in the public sector. She also stressed that anti-Greek feelings are counter-productive.
"Focus on research, improve universities"
Timothy Kirkhope for the European Conservatives and Reformists said the European economy was losing ground to its competitors even before the crisis. "We should focus on research, improve universities". It is in the interest of our citizens that the 2020 programme creates good jobs.
For the leftist GUE/NGL group Lothar Bisky noted that banks had been saved with billions of euros and that taxpayers' money was used for speculation. He criticised the German authorities for talking about tax relief but at the same time appealing to the Greek government to raise taxes.
The leader of the Europe of Freedom and Democracy group Nigel Farage attacked Mr Van Rompuy: "Who are you? I can speak on behalf of the majority of the British people in saying we don't know you, we don't want you..."
MEPs set out fisheries reform priorities
MEPs voting on the fisheries Green Paper which aims to reform the entire policy. Brussels, 25 February The planned overhaul of the EU common fisheries policy should take better account of the huge differences across European fleets and fisheries, give greater responsibility to fishing regions, address the problem of fleet overcapacity and improve the traditional quota system, according to a non-binding report adopted by Parliament on Thursday. MEPs also call for the creation of a strong aquaculture sector and an eco-labelling system.
The report, drafted by Maria do Céu Patrão Neves (EPP, PT), which is a contribution to a wider public consultation process, was approved with 456 votes in favour, 50 against and 65 abstentions. It asks for a radical reform, warning that failure to adopt it could lead to there being neither fish nor a fishing industry in the future.
Doing away with the "top-down" approach
Fisheries management must abandon the traditional "top-down approach", instead emphasising regionalisation, subsidiarity and stakeholder involvement, to reflect the local particularities of Europe's seas and fleets, say MEPs.
Whilst firmly rejecting any attempt to adopt a single Community fisheries management model, they nonetheless warn against jeopardising harmonisation of conditions of competition and equality of opportunity for producers.
MEPs also urge the Commission to work for a separate, less bureaucratic model for managing small-scale and coastal fisheries and to improve their access to the European Fisheries Fund. The report recognises that the special situation of the outermost regions may justify positive discrimination in some areas, in particular as regards fleet modernisation.
Towards no-discards policy
MEPs ask the Commission to consider carefully possible new management models to complement the traditional system of total allowable catches (TACs), of which each Member State gets an annual national quota. This should pave the way for phasing out discards of unwanted by-catches. MEPs view discards as an unsustainable practice which should be eliminated by means of both positive and negative incentives, including discard bans if incentives prove insufficient.
Overall, MEPs demand long term science-based management plans for all fish species, to move away from the current decision-making system that encourages a short term focus.
Historical rights
Parliament believes that access to fish stocks should updated and no longer be based solely on the criterion of historical catches but that environmental and social criteria should gradually be introduced to determine who has the right to catch fish. They could include, for instance, the selectivity of the fishing gear, the contribution to the local economy or CO2 emissions.
Any change should, however, ensure that coastal communities highly dependent on fisheries keep the benefits accrued from the current regime based on historical rights.
Strong fish farming sector, eco-labelling
The report advocates a strong, high-quality and environmentally sustainable aquaculture sector that can help to meet the increasing demand in the EU, where 60% of fish consumed is caught outside EU waters.
Another demand by Parliament is for a specific eco-labelling programme to boost the image of fish products and promote healthy food.
Fisheries agreements to be assessed against strong criteria
Any new fisheries agreements, which allow EU boats to fish in third countries’ waters, should be assessed against criteria defined by Parliament and designed, inter alia, to promote sustainable fishing, enhance local employment and defend human rights and democracy.
Next steps
MEPs want the legislative reform to be finalised at the beginning of 2011 so that it is taken into account in discussions on the next long-term EU budget for 2014-2020, which they believe should include increased funding for the CFP to ensure that reforms can be implemented.
The Parliament report is a response to a Commission consultation paper, the findings of which are to be summed up in March this year. After a further assessment, the Commission will draft legislative proposals, on which Parliament will co-decide with the Council, using its new legislation powers in fisheries policy acquired with the Lisbon Treaty.
fish debate Green Paper
More work for MEPs: more resources needed
MEPs voted to back the hiring of more staff for the Parliament Funding for 150 new posts in the European Parliament and an increase in the budget provision for hiring MEPs' assistants was approved by Parliament on Thursday. Due to Parliament's vastly increased powers and tasks under the Lisbon Treaty, extra staff are needed in Parliament's political groups, its administration, and to work with MEPs.
The total cost of the new "Lisbon posts" would be €13.4 million, which represents 0.8% of Parliament's total 2010 budget of €1.6 billion. By way of compensation, Parliament decided to cut its internal reserve for buildings by €4 million, thus enabling it to stay within its self-imposed margin of 20% of the administrative expenditure of all EU institutions. With these additional measures, but also as a result of previous EU enlargements and the entry into force of the single statute for MEPs, which means their salaries are paid from Parliament's budget and no longer by national governments, Parliament's budget is now stretched to its limits. Today's vote is not the final decision. The resolution will need to be taken up in a formal budgetary proposal by the Commission, and ultimately approved by both Council and Parliament.
New staff
Parliament's vote provides for hiring an additional 75 civil servants and adding 75 posts to the staff of the political groups. The budget for hiring assistants, which is handled by Parliament's administrative services and not paid to MEPs themselves, will be raised by €1,500 per month and per MEP. MEPs will thus be able to hire more or better-qualified staff to help them cope with their new legislative responsibilities.
Seventy of the 75 new civil servants should go to reinforce staff on the parliamentary committees, where all legislation is examined before going to plenary. They will help tackle Parliament's new demands, inter alia in the agriculture, justice and home affairs, financial and economic fields. The remaining five would be hired to step up co-operation with national parliaments, which have a more important role under the Lisbon treaty.
Respecting the "20% rule"
Since 1988, Parliament has limited its administrative budget to 20% of the total EU administrative budget. Parliament uses as its reference basis the Financial Perspectives (also known as the Multiannual Financial Framework - MFF), the EU's multiannual budget. Parliament's share of EU's total administrative budget would go from 19.87% to 19.99%.
Although in 1988 the 20% ceiling was fixed on condition that it would not take account of any EU enlargements or the possible entry into force of a single statute for MEPs, Parliament has so far succeeded in keeping its administrative budget below 20% of the EU total, even though the number of EU Member States has meanwhile grown from 12 to 27 and the number of MEPs has risen from 434 to 736 and soon to 754 and even though Parliament now pays their salaries rather than the Member States.
What happens next?
The European Commission, which is the only EU institution allowed to propose amending budgets, is expected soon to table a proposal to amend Parliament's budget for 2010. This proposal could then be approved by the Council and Parliament in April.
EN
1
PHOTO
20100215PHT69014.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/news/expert/default_en.htm
EN
3
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/frd/live/live-video?language=en
EN
4
LINK
http://www.europarltv.europa.eu/
EN
5
PHOTO
20100224PHT69500.jpg
EN
6
PHOTO
20100224PHT69498.jpg
EN
7
PHOTO
20100225PHT69608.jpg
EN
9
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/fisheries/publications/reform_en.htm
EN
10
PHOTO
20100225PHT69606.jpg
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20100219STO69256 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 FCS DOC XML V0//EN
