Strengthening the democratic legitimacy of EU foreign and security policy
External relations
2010-02-24 - 10:20
MEPs are determined to make use of their budgetary power and their right of democratic scrutiny over the EU's common foreign and security policy (CFSP), including over the funding of the external action service. They also want greater parliamentary oversight in the appointment and the mandates of EU Special Representatives.
With the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty, MEPs stress the need to increase the democratic legitimacy of CFSP activity, for example by systematic consultation of the EP before common security and defence policy (CSDP) missions are launched.
These views were set out in a Foreign Affairs Committee report - drafted by Gabriele Albertini (EPP, IT) and adopted on Tuesday - on the Council report on CFSP activities in 2008.
The Foreign Affairs Committee report calls for greater parliamentary scrutiny of the appointment of, as well as the mandates given to, EU Special Representatives (EUSRs). MEPs believe that the work of certain EUSRs should gradually be handed over to EU heads of delegation. The EUSRs with regional responsibilities should provide political guidance to heads of delegation.
With the Parliament having acquired greater budgetary powers, MEPs call for a review and extension of existing interinstitutional agreements, to ensure harmonious implementation of budgetary and consultation procedures for the CFSP and the CSDP. The committee also calls for Parliament to have better access to sensitive information (classified as top secret, secret or confidential).
MEPs are concerned about the consequences of underfunding Heading IV of the EU budget ( The EU as a global player ) and hence the EU's ability to conduct a "credible and proactive" foreign policy. The EU needs extra funding to meet "unforeseen global challenges", they believe. They ask to be consulted on the procedures for urgent financing of CFSP initiatives.
The scope of the Council report on the CFSP, which deals with the year 2008, "should not be limited simply to a description of CFSP activities but should provide the opportunity to establish a dialogue with the European Parliament, evaluating its effectiveness and outlining its future direction", says the committee. The Lisbon Treaty provides for two annual debates with Lady Ashton.
Geographical and thematic priorities
Turning to geographical and thematic priorities, the committee points to the role that parliamentary diplomacy can play, describing it as a "supplementary tool" in the EU's relations with other countries and regions.
MEPs wish to see stronger global governance, they restate their commitment to the transatlantic partnership and they stress that "stability in the Western Balkans should remain a top priority in the Union’s external action".
The co-presidency of the Union for the Mediterranean "must be compatible" with the external representation of the EU, says the report. It has not yet been decided what should follow the current Franco-Egyptian co-presidency, whose two-year term of office will end in mid-2010 along with the Spanish presidency of the EU.
The other priorities highlighted by the Foreign Affairs Committee are the Eastern Partnership, cooperation with Russia, the south Caucasus, the Middle East, Afghanistan, Pakistan and Iraq.
20100223IPR69357 Committee on Foreign Affairs Albertini report available here
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=AFET
EN
2
LINK
/meetdocs/2009_2014/organes/afet/afet_20100223_0900.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
