Improving links between women and the EU
Women's rights/Equal opportunities
2010-03-01 - 16:46
Women should be better informed of the value that the EU adds to their lives and should be more visible in electoral campaigns, concluded a workshop on women's perceptions of the EU held at the European Parliament on Tuesday.
The workshop on the perception that women have of the EU and the lessons to be learnt for the 2014 European elections was the first in a series of events organized by the Parliament in the context of International Women's Day 2010.
What are women's perceptions of the EU?
According to quantitative studies done before and after the 2009 European elections, and a qualitative one in every Member State among women aged 30 to 55, women have a lower level of economic security than men, suffer higher unemployment rates and are more likely to be in temporary employment. Women also feel that gender inequality is widespread and that the EU has a role in addressing it.
"It is important to strengthen links between women and the EU by proving to them that the EU can bring added value to their daily lives", said EP Vice-President Rodi Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou (EPP, EL).
"In order to improve women's relations with the EU, priority should be given to policies such as consumer protection, solidarity and social aspects such as healthcare, rising prices and pensions", said Paul Stamper, Director of TNS Opinion, presenting the results of the survey.
Women and the media
The role of women in politics and the media in strengthening links between women and the EU was also highlighted during the debate.
"In communicating with women, it is important to have a targeted strategy that includes female angles", said Silvana Koch-Mehrin (ALDE, DE), European Parliament Vice-President and Chair of the High-level Group on Gender equality.
"Only 35% of MEPs are women, so they are still under-represented at the EU level. During the electoral campaign women did not often appear in the media", noted Edit Estrela (S&D, PT).
"There is a need to increase women's visibility as political candidates. Some women are disadvantaged by lower list positions, which leads to a lower visibility in the media. And political parties have a role to play in further promoting women candidates", concluded Susan Banducci, Professor of Political Science at the University of Exeter.
In the chair: Rodi Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou (EPP, EL)
20100301IPR69741 European Parliament opinion polls Programme of seminar "Acting together", 2 March 2010
EN
1
LINK
/parliament/public/staticDisplay.do?language=EN&id=40
EN
2
MULTIMEDIA
20100301MLT69766.pdf
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
