MEPs call for equal pay between men and women
Women's rights/Equal opportunities
2010-03-09 - 17:12
Speakers from all sides of the EP called for equal pay The continuing pay gap between men and women in the EU, violence against women and more female MEPs were some of the issues raised in the Parliament during International Women's Day on Monday. Several MEPs also criticised the fact that Commission presented a new plan how to reach gender equality in the next 5 years but did not discuss it with NGOs or the public.
Speaking in the Chamber Parliament's President Jerzy Buzek said "discrimination in society or at work should be a thing of the past."
UK Liberal Diana Wallis wants more female MEPs - in the UK Parliament she estimated that it would take 200 years to reach parity an the current rate of progress: "Much has been achieved, much can be celebrated, but there is very, very much more to do."
On the fact that women earn less than men, Dutch MEP Corien Wortmann-Kool said women make up 50% of the population but earn only 10% of the world's income. The leader of the Socialists in Parliament Martin Schulz said that society is not based on equality of rights if "for the same work men and women get different pay".
Marina Yannakoudakis for the European Conservatives and Reformists said that "the phrase just a housewife needs to be outlawed, no woman is just anything".
Marta Andreasen for the European Freedom and Democracy bloc asked the EU to stop issuing demagogic laws on equality that make life more difficult for women who wish to work. She thinks equality is not about laws but about behaviour. "I would be insulted if someone would give me special treatment at work merely due to my chromosomes."
The European Commissioner for health and consumer policy John Dalli recalled the Women's Charter presented on March 5 which is a good basis for EU future action -which aims at a gender equality plan for next 5 years.
Dutch MEP Marije Cornelissen (Greens/EFA) was sceptical that the Parliament and NGOs were not consulted for Charter. Now "we need to see deeds rather than just words".
Swedish MEP Eva-Britt Svensson (GUE/NGL) is also deeply concerned about the weak content of the Charter and no debate, she proposes to use time until next Women's Day in 2011 to discuss with the EP and public the proposals: "We will work for women's rights not just on this day the 8 March but on all days. That is what men and women in Europe need."
20100305STO70017 International Women's Day
EN
1
PHOTO
20100303PHT69909.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/parliament/public/staticDisplay.do?language=EN&id=75
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
