The Week Ahead – 15-21 March 2010
Institutions
2010-03-12 - 13:25
Committee meetings – Brussels
Food labelling. The Environment Committee votes on legislation concerning the rules on labelling of pre-packed food products. Issues include both the extent of origin labelling and the question of how to indicate how healthy or otherwise a product is (Tuesday).
Organ transplants. EU laws on common safety and quality requirements relating to the donation and transplantation of organs will be put to the vote, also in the Environment Committee. The new rules also aim to make exchange of organs between Member States simpler (Tuesday).
Economic strategy. The Economics Committee debates how to revitalise the EU economy and the supervisory framework for financial services with national MPs and guests including Elena Salgado, Spanish Minister of Economy and Finance, Commissioner Olli Rehn, the ECB's Jürgen Stark (both Tuesday), Commissioner Michel Barnier and IMF Managing Director Dominique Strauss-Kahn (both Wednesday).
EP President. President Buzek will have his first formal meeting with the College of European Commissioners ( Wednesday ). He will also have his regular meeting with European Council President Herman Van Rompuy (Thursday) .
Gas supply. The Industry Committee votes on legislation setting up an EU system aimed at guaranteeing the gas supply to customers at times of crisis (Thursday). The EP Press Service is holding a workshop for journalists on this topic, where the latest compromise amendments will be presented (Tuesday).
Structural funds. The Regional Affairs Committee votes on legislation aiming to simplify the procedures for accessing the various EU funds for regional development (Thursday).
Violence against women. Following International Women's Day, the Women's Rights Committee holds a public hearing on ways to tackle violence against women. EP President Jerzy Buzek opens the event, with participants including Bibiana Aído, Spanish Minister for Equality, Spain, Viviane Reding, Commissioner for Justice, Fundamental Rights and Citizenship and Mara Carfagna, Italian Minister for Equal Opportunities. The hearing will be followed by a press conference at 13h (Tuesday). Alongside this event, the EP Press Service is organising a seminar for journalists (Monday).
Court of Auditors. The Budgetary Control Committee will hold hearings with, and then vote on, a series of candidates proposed for appointment to the EU Court of Auditors (Monday and Tuesday).
20100312IPR70545 For details of all the week's events, see The Agenda
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20101200AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
