Property expropriation in Spain: Petitions Committee hears complaints
Petitions
2010-03-23 - 16:26
House owners on the Spanish coast deprived of their property rights after Spain's 1988 Coastal Law took effect made their case to Petitions Committee MEPs on Monday and Tuesday. MEPs questioned whether the law should have been applied retroactively and stressed that expropriated owners must be fairly compensated. They are to seek clarifications from the Spanish government and the European Commission.
Since the 1988 "Ley de Costas" coastal law took effect, "96% of owners' appeals against expropriation have been totally or partially rejected" by the courts, and owners who lose legally-built properties are being "fairly compensated" by allowing them to retain the usufruct for 60 years, said Spain's General Director for Coast and Sea Sustainability, Alicia Paz Antolín. The aim of the 1988 "Ley de Costas" coastal law, she explained, was to regulate coastal public property, set limits on urban development, and regulate the power of public authorities to protect the coast.
Unfair demarcation line
A key question was alleged "unfair demarcation" by Spanish authorities when drawing the coastal law line. "The demarcation line has been drawn in a suspicious manner, as some huge complexes and hotels have been left untouched", noted Willy Meyer (GUE/NGL, ES). "This law infringes the rights of individuals, but does not touch the rights of the owners of big hotels", added Nikolaos Salavrakos (EFD, EL). "How can the demarcation line be applied in a zigzag?" asked Carlos Iturgáiz (EPP-ED, ES).
"We question the legality of the Spanish Coastal Law", said Dutch petitioner Jan Van Stuyvesant, stressing that it had left "many thousands of houses affected by unfair expropriation". Spanish petitioner, Tomás González Díaz said "it has to be clear that we are not against the Coastal Law, we are against how and where it is applied".
Call for proper compensation
"The Spanish Government must recognize that those affected must be fully compensated", said Gabriel Mato (EPP-ED, ES), underlining that "we are talking about people who have lived in their homes for many years and who lost their property rights without an explanation".
"There has been no legal redress and no compensation", added Michael Cashman (S-D, UK), stressing that the dubious application of the Coastal Law had "taken away confidence in Spain generally". "No-one thought that in an EU country we would be expropriated of our houses with no compensation", said German petitioner Nordhild Köhler.
Property rights: an EU competence? A Human Right?
"This is a property law matter, which is outside the EU's sphere of competence. I know this is disappointing, but we don't have legal grounds to intervene", said the European Commission representative, adding that that "I've not seen any case of expropriation where EU funds have been involved".
"Human rights are part of EU competences" insisted Margrete Auken (Greens/EFA, DK). "We are duty bound to deal with this matter. It is our remit that people can come to us, and we have a broad legal basis for action" she said. Miguel Ángel Martínez (S-D, ES) replied that he was "surprised to hear that private property is a human right". "Will we have to revise the Human Rights Convention?" he asked, adding that the 60 year concession of usufruct, by way compensation, had been ruled fair in a constitutional court decision.
Next steps
After the debate, the Petitions Committee decided to send two letters, one to the Spanish Government asking for further clarifications on the application of the Coastal Law and the other to the European Commission, asking it to try to shed more light on the legal basis of these cases. The committee will reopen the debate once it has the replies.
In the chair: Erminia Mazzoni (EPP-ED, IT)
20100223IPR69375 Committee on Petitions
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=PETI
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
