The Week Ahead 5-11 April 2010
Institutions
General
2010-03-31 - 17:12
Special plenary session and committee meetings – Brussels
Plenary session. Parliament will hold a special plenary session to debate the outcome of the recent EU summit with European Council President Herman Van Rompuy and Commission President José Manuel Barroso (Wednesday).
SWIFT/data protection. The Civil Liberties Committee will be holding a first discussion of the Commission’s negotiating mandate for a new agreement with the US on access to data in the SWIFT financial communication system (Wednesday).
Resettlement of refugees. The Civil Liberties Committee is to vote on plans to set up a Joint EU Resettlement Programme, to enable a better EU response to requests to accept into Europe refugees identified by organisations such as the UNHCR as requiring resettlement (Thursday).
Language rights in criminal cases. As a counterpart to the European Arrest Warrant system, a proposed EU law would guarantee EU citizens have access to translation and interpretation when facing criminal proceedings outside their home Member State. The Civil Liberties committee holds its first-reading vote (Thursday).
Extra MEPs. The Constitutional Affairs Committee votes on the proposal to amend the EU Treaties to give effect during the present term of office to the Lisbon Treaty’s plan to increase the size of the European Parliament by 18 MEPs, rather than waiting until the 2014 European elections (Wednesday).
Blue fin tuna. The Fisheries Committee will vote on legislation to give effect in EU law to the rules of the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas (Wednesday).
Election observation in Sudan. A delegation of MEPs is travelling to Sudan to observe the general elections. The first votes are due to be cast on Sunday 11 April.
Jerzy Buzek visits Romania. The President of the European Parliament will travel to Bucharest on Sunday for an official visit to Romania (Sunday).
20100331IPR72071 For details of all the week's events, see The Agenda
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20101500AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
