The Week Ahead 26 April – 2 May 2010
Institutions
General
2010-04-23 - 13:17
Committee meetings – Brussels
Jerzy Buzek visits United States. The EP President makes an official visit to the USA, with meetings in Washington including Vice-President Joe Biden, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, House of Representatives Speaker Nancy Pelosi, Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid and Minority Leader Mitch McConnell. Mr Buzek will also open Parliament's new liaison office with the US Congress. Later he will travel to New York and meet UN Secretary General Ban Ki-Moon (Sunday-Friday).
Lorry drivers working time. The Employment Committee votes on whether self-employed lorry drivers should be included in legislation limiting the working time of road transport workers (Wednesday).
Late payments. Legislation to tackle the problem of late payments – a major issue for many small businesses – comes to a vote in the Internal Market Committee (Wednesday).
Fake medicines and pharmacovigilance. MEPs in the Environment Committee vote on measures to prevent fake medicines being sold in Europe and to ensure that there is better reporting of side effects and safety problems affecting licensed drugs (Tuesday).
Union for the Mediterranean. Ahead of the second summit in June of the new body linking the EU to its southern neighbours, the Foreign Affairs Committee will adopt its position on how to revitalise the process (Wednesday).
EU Budget 2011. Budget Commissioner Janusz Lewandowski will formally present the draft of next year's EU budget to the Budgets Committee. This is the first EU budget to be set since the Lisbon Treaty gave Parliament an equal say with the Council (Tuesday).
Derivatives markets. The Economics Committee holds a public hearing on the future of over-the-counter derivatives, one of the key instruments at the heart of the financial market crisis (Tuesday).
Energy efficiency. The Industry Committee is set to vote at second reading on measures to improve energy efficiency of buildings and the energy labelling of products, thereby formalising a deal already reached with the Council (Wednesday).
Intellectual property/ACTA. The Legal Affairs Committee is set to adopt its political stance on a range of IP issues, including counterfeiting, online piracy and the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement talks (Wednesday).
20100423IPR73276 For details of all the week's events, see The Agenda
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20101800AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
