The Week Ahead 3-9 May 2010
Institutions
General
2010-04-30 - 11:47
Plenary session and committee meetings – Brussels
Plenary session (Wednesday and Thursday)
US Vice-President. Joe Biden will address a formal sitting of the European Parliament. He will also have a bilateral meeting with EP President Jerzy Buzek and a discussion with the Conference of Presidents (Thursday).
SWIFT/PNR. Parliament adopts its position on negotiations with the United States on these two issues concerning data protection and anti-terrorist surveillance (vote Wednesday).
EU 2020. MEPs will debate the EU’s plans to improve economic competitiveness with Commission President José Manuel Barroso (Wednesday, vote next session).
Airport security charges. Parliament votes on rules to make the charges passed on to passengers for airport security more transparent (vote Wednesday).
Discharge 2008. MEPs vote on whether to approve EU institutions’ financial management in 2008 (vote Wednesday).
18 extra MEPs. Parliament will decide whether to allow treaty changes increasing the size of the European Parliament to take place without a full Convention (debate Wednesday, vote Thursday).
Committee meetings (Monday and Tuesday)
External Action Service. The committees on foreign and constitutional affairs debate their positions on the creation of the EU’s new diplomatic service (Monday -Tuesday).
Greek crisis. Spanish Deputy Prime Minister Elena Salgado, President in office of ECOFIN, will discuss Greek economy with the Economics Committee (Tuesday).
Industrial pollution. The Environment Committee holds a second reading vote on wide-ranging legislation covering pollution from industrial sites (Tuesday).
EP/Canada. President Buzek will meet Canadian Prime Minister Stephen Harper (Wednesday).
Covenant of Mayors. A large-scale meeting of mayors committed to action on climate change takes place in Parliament. Jerzy Buzek will join Spanish Prime Minister José Luis Rodriguez Zapatero and Commission President José Manuel Barroso for the opening session and a press conference.
EU Open Days. Parliament marks Europe Day by opening its doors to the public in Brussels (Saturday) and Strasbourg (Sunday).
20100430IPR73947 For details of all the week's events, see The Agenda
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20101900AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
