Budget Control Chair Luigi de Magistris: "It's simply right that Athens has to provide adequate guarantees"
Economic and monetary affairs
2010-05-03 - 17:16
Italian MEP Luigi de Magistris EP delegation looked at statistical data Crucial to establishing scale of problem and remedy The €110 billion financial bail out of Greece to meet its obligations could mark a watershed in the crisis. A Parliamentary delegation of MEPs has just returned from Athens to see for themselves the state of the Greek economy. In particular they focused on the accuracy of Greek statistical data over which there has been some controversy concerning its veracity. We spoke to the Chair of the delegation, Italian MEP Luigi de Magistris who chairs the Budgetary Control Committee.
Who are the main personalities you met, and what information did you want to obtain from them?
We met high-level government officials, especially those involved in the management of public funds. We obtained a general overview on the country's situation and on the concrete commitment of the government to overcome the crisis and to use public resources better in the future. Some things convinced us, others less so.
We can't reveal much because the evaluation will be done within the Budgetary Control committee, but we had an interesting meeting with the Bureau of Statistics, which because of the inaccurate data it promulgated is in part responsible for the current serious situation. We received weak answers regarding the fight against corruption and the squandering of public money, a fundamental matter in my opinion. We definitely noted the political willingness to get the country out of the crisis, but it's very important to us that past errors won't be committed again, and above all that funds coming from the EU will be spent correctly.
Another matter that we focused on is how speculators conceal themselves behind malicious (bush/forest) fires to obtain public resources, exploiting the calamities. We need to avoid vicious circles in which these environmental disasters turn into a plunder of public money. I asked many questions about this, which frankly weren't answered. Anyway, the mission was very serious and in-depth. I'm very happy with the work we performed, which we'll carry on during the next days.
How does the government cope with the challenge of responding to international authorities on one hand, and to listen to the needs of their citizens on the other?
The situation is really dramatic. We ourselves couldn't manage to reach our hotel because of a demonstration, and we had to go by foot through the centre, which was blocked. It looks like they're on the brink of a very severe social conflict, with people not getting paid and who risk losing their jobs. The government needs to pay the wages in the first place, before even devising an economical recovery.
Beside the will to get through the crisis, they need international help of enormous size -we're talking about 110 billion euros - without which the government can't overcome the current situation. It's right for international authorities to offer support to Greece, but they need to receive adequate guarantees. There were structural and political errors that can't be repeated.
We pointed out some important aspects which can help the economical recovery: for example a correct use of public resources, not intended as a welfare method, but as an instrument to put the economy back on track, becoming a flywheel for the recovery. If they manage to make the most of Greece's richness, like tourism and history, the government has the necessary resources to pick themselves up again.
What atmosphere could you feel in Athens regarding the European Union? Is there faith, hope, or does the country feel abandoned?
The sensation I got from my interlocutors was that they constantly felt under accusation. They need to free themselves from this state of siege, because Europe puts solidarity in first place. But it is not unconditional solidarity: Europe needs to ask for some guarantees, because Greece made a lot of errors. Also, because in this period no one is swimming in gold, it's simply right that Athens has to provide adequate guarantees.
20100430STO73836 Luigi de Magistris MEP Budgetary Control Committee Financial crises Terminology
EN
1
PHOTO
20100503PHT73991.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/members/expert/politicalBodies/view.do;jsessionid=6AA7F13B403BA0803B68D629547BDCB0.node2?language=EN&partNumber=1&group=2966&id=97129
EN
3
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do;jsessionid=A77DAC8D593B6D18918F1767AB6CC562.node1?language=EN&body=CONT
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20100414FCS72750 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
