Will 'You are here' win this year's Charlemagne Youth Prize?
Youth
Ireland
2010-05-04 - 18:28
Next Tuesday at 10am (Irish time), the winner of the European Charlemagne Youth Prize will be announced at a ceremony in Aachen in Germany. This year's Irish nominee for the prize is 'You are here' - a book project including contributions from 14 young people across Europe. The project, which was submitted by John Holten from Ardee, Co. Louth, brought together young people born after 1980 'who enjoy freedom of movement in Europe and work in a country they did not grow up in.'
The Charlemagne European Youth Prize is organised on an annual basis by the European Parliament and the International Charlemagne Prize based in Aachen. Francis Jacobs, Head of the European Parliament Office in Ireland, commented on the range of projects submitted in Ireland this year. He said that the 'variety of the projects was impressive' and spoke of the fact that 'they bring together young people across Europe, in order to exchange experiences and learn from each other.'
John Holten, who submitted this year's Irish project said that it had succeeded in creating 'greater European awareness among [the] group, including people who would normally not get a chance to meet each other or publish their work together.' The 'You are here' project, will now join the winning project from each of the other 26 EU Member States at next Tuesday's award ceremony, during which overall winners will be chosen. The winners will receive funding of between €2,000 and €5,000. The President of the European Parliament, Mr Jerzy Buzek MEP, will participate in the award ceremony next week.
In 2009, a Polish youth project 'YOUrope Needs You' was the overall winner of the Charlemagne Youth Prize. Through a series of secondary school workshops run by university students, this project conveyed interesting facts about Europe to teenagers. The second and third prize went to projects from France and Germany respectively.
Irish MEPs Gay Mitchell (Fine Gael) and Nessa Childers (Labour Party) were members of the Irish jury, along with Jean-Marie Cullen of the National Youth Council of Ireland (NYCI). Ms Childers said that she was 'delighted to be involved in a competition which encourages young people to take an active interest in EU issues.' Commenting on the point of departure chosen by the winning project, Mr Mitchell stated that 'to understand Berlin is to understand the European Union project.' Ms Cullen said that 'the NYCI welcomes this initiative which rewards young people's creativity.'
20100503IPR74048
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
