MEPs call for binding social protection for self-employed women and wives
Women's rights/Equal opportunities
Committees Women's Rights and Gender Equality
2010-05-04 - 20:15
EU Member States should organise social protection, including at least 14 weeks' maternity allowance, for self-employed women and self-employed men's wives or life partners, in accordance with national laws, said the Women's Rights Committee on Tuesday. The committee inserted amendments to this effect in a draft directive to be put to a plenary vote in May.
The committee approved the second-reading recommendation, by Astrid Lulling (EPP, LU) on a draft directive laying down equal treatment rules for self-employed men and women and their spouses, with 29 votes in favour, 1 against and 1 abstention.
Mandatory or voluntary social protection
EU Member States that provide social protection for self-employed workers would also be required to provide it for their spouses or life partners, but the Member States could themselves could decide whether this protection should be mandatory or voluntary for the spouses or partners. Member States could also provide that this protection "may be proportional to the participation in the activities of the self-employed workers", says an amendment inserted by the committee.
Maternity benefits for self-employed women and wives
As pregnant self-employed women and self-employed men's pregnant wives or life partners are economically and physically vulnerable, it is necessary to grant them the right to maternity benefits, say MEPs.
The duration of maternity benefits granted to self-employed women and self-employed men's wives or life partners (where recognised by national law), should be similar to that maternity leave for employees currently in place at EU level, said MEPs.
A sufficient maternity allowance to cover interruptions in their work for at least 14 weeks should be granted by all Member States in cases of pregnancy or motherhood of self-employed women and wives and life partners, says an amendment inserted by the committee.
If the forthcoming (separate) proposal for a maternity leave directive changes this period, then the corresponding period in the self-employed workers' spouses directive should be updated accordingly, said the committee.
Scope should not to be limited to agriculture
This draft directive should cover self-employed workers and their spouses or life partners (where recognised by national law), who habitually participate in the activities of self-employed workers, said the committee.
To enhance maternity protection for self-employed women and improve the situation of self-employed workers' spouses in all sectors, not just agriculture, Parliament has consistently called for a review of Directive 86/613/EEC on equal treatment of self-employed men and women in an activity including agriculture and on the protection of self-employed women during pregnancy and motherhood, reiterated MEPs.
Temporary replacement
Access to any existing services which supply temporary replacements enabling interruptions in occupational activity owing to pregnancy or motherhood may be an alternative to, or a part of, the maternity allowance.
Equality bodies to promote equal treatment
As amended by the committee, the draft directive would also require Member States to ensure that the equality bodies set up by Article 20 of equal treatment Directive 2006/54/EC are "competent for the promotion, analysis, monitoring and support of equal treatment of all persons covered by this Directive without discrimination on grounds of sex".
A first-reading set of recommendations drafted by Astrid Lulling, calling for rights for spouses and improving maternity protection for self-employed women and spouses, was approved in plenary in May 2009 with 550 votes in favour, 14 against and 57 abstentions.
Next steps
This draft recommendation is to be put to a plenary vote at the May II session in Strasbourg.
In the chair: Eva-Britt SVENSSON (GUE/NGL, SE)
20100504IPR74087 Women's Rights Committee web site
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=FEMM
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
