2008 budget discharge granted for most EU bodies but held back for Council
Budgetary control
Plenary sittings
2010-05-05 - 17:09
Parliament voted on Wednesday to approve the 2008 budgetary management of most of the EU's institutions and agencies. However, MEPs held back the decision on the Council's discharge for two weeks, pending further negotiations. After pressure from MEPs, a high level dialogue on the Council's discharge has been launched, aiming at a positive vote in Strasbourg. They also postponed signing off the European Police College's budget until October, citing financial irregularities.
MEPs decided to hold back their vote on the Council's discharge for 2008 until the next plenary (17-20 May) pending the outcome of a high level dialogue on the matter which has just been launched by Parliament's President Jerzy Buzek and Spanish prime minister José Luis Zapatero. Although the first discharge vote (to grant discharge or formally postpone the decision until October) should normally take place before the 15 May deadline, MEPs used this option, to hold back the vote by just two weeks, as they hope the negotiations will enable them to grant the discharge later this month. "I would like to give a second, and a last, chance to the Council to prepare all the necessary documents for the discharge." said rapporteur Ryszard Czarnecki (ECR, PL).
Better control of EU agriculture funds
Parliament decided to sign off the budget of the Commission, which manages most of the EU's funding. In their resolution, MEPs welcomed the improvements made in recent years: the average EU-27 error rate for agriculture in 2008 was - for the first time ever - below two percent. "Error" means, in this sense, not only cases of fraud but other irregularities such as mistakes in reporting or filling in forms.
However, MEPs regret that there are still large-scale errors in rural development, structural funds, research, energy and transport, enlargement and external action. They urge the Commission to prepare and send Parliament plans for further reduction of errors. They also ask the Commission and Member States to simplify the rules for receiving EU funding. "The real aim of my report is to reduce the error rate", said Polish Socialist Bogusław Liberadzki, Parliament's rapporteur.
More transparency in Member States and Commission
A general problem with controlling the spending of EU funding lies with the Member States, which spend 80 percent of the EU budget. Most States do not draw up national management declarations, as called for by Parliament for a long time, which could facilitate the control of this expenditure. Parliament welcomes the fact that Denmark, the Netherlands, Sweden and the United Kingdom have all made such declarations.
MEPs want to see more transparency in the Commission, including public information about members of expert and working groups, the setting-up of a public register of NGOs receiving EU funds and a revised code of conduct.
The Commission's discharge was granted by 520 votes to 68, with 34 abstentions.
Parliament's budget approved
By 535 votes to 73 and 29 abstentions, Parliament granted its President the discharge for the EP's 2008 budget. MEPs welcomed the "very positive developments in Parliament's financial management" which the discharge reports of the last decade have brought about. MEPs also this year adopted various suggestions on improving the transparency and efficiency of the EP's internal financial controls.
To improve the control system, MEPs request an annual debate between the Secretary-General and the Budgetary Control Committee, special training courses on procurement and an annual report on the activities of the risk manager. Bart Staes (Greens/EFA, BE) drafted the report on Parliament's discharge.
Many problems to solve for the European Police College
The only agency that was not granted discharge was the European Police College, based in Bramshill, some 70 kilometres from London. MEPs list a series of problems that need to be solved as soon as possible. For instance, the college does not follow EU rules for public procurement and in its accounts; it has sometimes recorded the same assets twice. The EU anti-fraud office OLAF is currently investigating whether the College's mobile phones, furniture, pool cars and shuttle services have been used for private purposes. MEPs voted by 605 votes to 6, with 12 abstentions to postpone granting the discharge until October.
To improve the budgetary control of the Police College, MEPs have drawn up an action plan, to be introduced by the College's director before the end of June. The Budgetary Control Committee will now monitor further improvements in the College. Parliament will decide whether to grant discharge in October, depending on the results.
All other EU agencies were granted discharge. French MEP Véronique Mathieu (EPP) was the rapporteur on the agencies' budgets.
Other institutions and European Development funds
Parliament also granted discharge to the following institutions, all by show of hands:
• 7th, 8th, 9th and 10th European Development Funds
• Court of Justice
• Court of Auditors
• Economic and Social committee
• Committee of the Regions
• European Ombudsman
• European Data Protection Supervisor
Inès Ayala Sender (S&D, ES) was the MEP responsible for the discharge of the development funds, while Ryszard Czarnecki (ECR, PL) oversaw the scrutiny of the institutions.
20100504IPR74093 Discharge 2008 - EU institutions should improve control of their spending Signing off the 2008 budget: MEPs' proposals for better monitoring of EU spending Budgetary Control Committee's webpage on 2008 discharge Members of Budgetary Control Committee Court of Auditors 2008 report: further improvements needed, say MEPs
EN
3
LINK
/activities/committees/editoDisplay.do?language=EN&menuId=2035&body=CONT&id=1
EN
4
LINK
/activities/committees/membersCom.do?language=EN&body=CONT
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20100421IPR73142 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20100322IPR71100 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20091109IPR64085 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
