Canada should lift visa requirements for all EU citizens, say MEPs
External relations
Plenary sittings
2010-05-05 - 18:20
Parliament called on Canada to ensure visa-free travel for all EU citizens in a wide-ranging resolution adopted on Wednesday. MEPs also voiced concern about the environmental impact of oil sand extraction and expressed hope that the EU-Canada summit would help speed up negotiations on a comprehensive trade agreement.
MEPs believe progress in the negotiations on a comprehensive economic trade agreement is fundamental to EU-Canada economic relations. They also expressed hope that the EU-Canada summit in Brussels on 5 May would speed up the negotiations.
Roma influx and visa requirements
In the resolution, which was adopted by show of hands, Parliament restated its concern that Canada still imposes a visa requirement on citizens of the Czech Republic, Romania and Bulgaria. In the case of the Czech Republic, these measures were taken in response to an influx of Roma people into Canada. MEPs called for the visa requirement to be lifted as speedily as possible, adding that Member States should address the situation of the Roma people.
Oil sand extraction
MEPs are concerned about the impact of the extraction of oil sand in Canada on the global environment, as the high level of CO2 emissions during the production process poses a threat to local biodiversity.
G20, Haiti
The EU and Canada should work closely together in the G20 on a coordinated global approach to fiscal consolidation, say MEPs. Parliament welcomes the fact that both countries are fully committed "to building a new Haiti that meets the legitimate and long-held aspirations of the Haitian people".
Air passenger data and anti-counterfeiting
The resolution also points out that the future EU-Canada agreement on air passenger name records (PNR) would require Parliament's consent and this issue should be "duly and jointly addressed" before the green light can be given.
Finally, MEPs express hope that Canada will fully support the EU's request to open up to public scrutiny the anti-counterfeiting negotiations (ACTA), which are currently being conducted behind closed doors by a select group of countries with a view to establishing international standards on the enforcement of intellectual property rights.
20100504IPR74108 Adopted text will be available here (click on 5 May)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
