The European Parliament and financial supervision reform
Economic and monetary affairs
2010-09-17 - 15:41
This note is intended to help journalists to cover Parliament's plenary vote on financial supervision, which marks the end of a ten-year reform campaign that gained impetus from the financial crisis, and began making real headway in 2009. We include a timeline of key events illustrating Parliament's efforts to convince EU Member States of the need for radical, not cosmetic, reform. The new system should be up and running on 1 January 2011.
A decade-old goal
Long before the financial crisis, the European Parliament regularly pointed out significant failures in the EU’s supervision of ever more integrated financial markets. Most notably, in 2000, a resolution highlighted the fact that the activities of stateless financial groups were calling into question the traditional structure of supervision. In 2002, another resolution called for a system to be set up at EU level to monitor systemic risk. Then, in 2008, MEPs called for supervisory committees to be given a legal status and enabled to impose binding decisions on national supervisors.
The rapporteurs for the current package, were chosen in October 2009 and presented their draft reports to the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee in February 2010. Four rapporteurs [1] piloted the preparation of Parliament’s position on the four different bodies to be set up, whilst another three rapporteurs [2] took responsibility for the package's more technical aspects.
EP rapporteurs on the need for radical reform of financial supervision in the EU
The rapporteurs point out that financial supervision needs to be better integrated within Europe, because the only other option is to have a less open single market. They also argue that the structure that existed during the crisis led to fragmented responses and prevented a clear picture from emerging for the supervisory committees. For these reasons, they consider that tinkering with the current system would not be the right solution and that a root and branch reform is needed necessary.
July 2010 MEPs' statement - Parliament pushes for an ambitious agreement
"MEPs have just voted in plenary on amendments to the texts setting up the EU's new supervisory architecture, tabled by the four main political groups (EPP, S&D, ALDE, Greens). The EP has decided not to vote on a legislative resolution in order to leave open the possibility of a first reading after the summer recess.
The message is clear: Parliament is willing to negotiate, but it is united in its view that the European authorities must be equipped with sufficient powers to prevent future crises and to strengthen the Single Market. The ball is now firmly in the Council's court to come forward with the necessary compromises. This gesture is a final endeavour on the part of the rapporteurs to help the new Belgian Presidency - whose efforts to date we applaud - to move the Member States to a more satisfactory position.
Since voting on a text in the EP's economics committee in May, Parliament's rapporteurs have taken part in around 20 trilogues with Council and Commission. Significant - but not sufficient - advances have been made. Critically, we require that the new supervisory architecture be in keeping with the vision laid out in the De Larosière report. Europe's citizens will accept nothing less than the most ambitious response from lawmakers to correct the problems.
Parliament stands ready to reach an agreement with Council. This is why we did not vote on a first reading, and why we will keep the process open. But in case the Council does not show the commitment and willingness needed within the weeks to come, Parliament is ready to do vote on a first reading after the summer break. We feel that progress is being made and agree to allow more time for the Council to move towards a position that reflects the needs of European citizens. Today's actions reflect our expectation of such a move in the coming days and weeks. It's a question of European credibility on a global level and in the eyes of European citizens hit by the crisis".
December 2009 EP political groups statement - Parliament will not agree to water down supervisory authorities
"The four coordinators for the EPP, S&D, ALDE and Greens political groups believe that the negotiations of the ECOFIN Council on the micro-supervision of the financial sector are going in the wrong direction.
The European Parliament, as co-legislator on this topic, will play its full role in respect of the following principles:
- The European citizens are awaiting effective measures to prevent new crises.
- A single European market needs European supervision. Businesses need credit, a true level playing field and legal certainty.
- The de Larosière report, on which the foundation of the Commission's proposal is based, proposes a European Systemic Risk Board in charge of macroeconomic supervision close to the auspices of the European Central Bank, as well as independent authorities, which should be equipped with binding and proportionate powers concerning micro supervision.
This report was already the result of a compromise and the link between macroeconomic and microeconomic must be preserved within the most coherent European framework possible".
*********
[1] Sylvie Goulard (ALDE, FR) for the European Systemic Risk Board, Peter Skinner (S&D, UK) for the European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority, Jose-Manuel Garcia Margallo Y Marfil (EPP, ES) for the European Banking Authority, and Sven Giegold (Greens/EFA, DE) for the European Securities and Markets Authority.
[2] Ramon Tremosa I Balcells (ALDE, ES) for the Specific Tasks of the ECB in the ESRB, Antolin Sanchez Presedo (S&D, ES) and Burhard Balz (EPP, DE) for the two omnibus amending directives
20100506BKG74226
General background on financial supervision
Financial supervision in Europe today
The current EU financial services committees [1] have advisory powers and can issue non-binding guidelines and recommendations. National supervisors of cross-border financial institutions must co-operate within colleges of supervisors. In the event of disagreement, however, there is no mechanism to resolve the issue. Many technical rules are determined at Member State level, and there is considerable variation among Member States. Even where rules are harmonised, their application can be inconsistent. This fragmented supervision undermines the single market, imposes extra costs for financial institutions, and increases the likelihood of failure of financial institutions, potentially with additional costs for taxpayers.
The need for change
The economic and financial crisis of 2007 - 2008 shed light on some serious shortcomings in the existing system of financial supervision in Europe. Due to the single market, financial institutions can operate across borders easily. Their supervision, however, remains uneven and often uncoordinated. A stronger EU financial sector for the future is seen as dependent on convergence among Member States on technical rules, and a mechanism for ensuring agreement and co-ordination between national supervisors. A rapid and effective mechanism to ensure consistent application of rules is also seen as necessary, as is co-ordinated decision making in emergency situations. The financial services advisory committees are not currently equipped to carry out these functions.
[1] The Committee of European Banking Supervisors (CEBS), Committee of European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Committee (CEIOPS) and the Committee of European Securities Regulators (CESR), widely known as the "Lamfalussy level 3 committees".
Key events leading to a new supervisory system
February 2009 - Publication of the de Larosière report
A high-level working group, chaired by former managing director of the International Monetary Fund and former governor of the Bank of France Jacques de Larosière, produces its findings on financial supervision in Europe.
The report calls for:
- a common rulebook for similar supervision of financial institutions in Europe,
- the setting up of a European systemic risk board (ESRB) to monitor for the buildup of risks in the bloc's financial system as a whole, and
- the creation of three European Supervisory authorities (ESAs) to replace CEBS, CEIOPS and CESR. The first new authority would cover the banking sector, the second the insurance sector and the third the securities sector. These authorities would have the power to establish supervisory standards and settle disputes between national supervisors, for instance on whether or not to bail out a particular bank.
September 2009 - European Commission tables proposals
These proposals for a new EU financial supervisory architecture take the form of a package of regulations, with the key objective of establishing the bodies suggested in the de Larosière report. However, these bodies' powers somewhat reduced by comparison with the de Larosière recommendations.
October and December 2009 - ECOFIN Council adopts common position
Council heavily waters down the Commission's proposals. Among other things, this position introduces an appeals system allowing governments to challenge decisions made by the three ESAs.
December 2009 - EP political groups say Council position is unworkable
Representatives of the four largest political groups in the EP’s Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee issue a statement that the Council’s newly-adopted position is not workable and that much of the substance of the de Larosière report needed to be restored.
February 2010 - Rapporteurs present proposals to Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee
The MEPs in charge of steering the package through Parliament present their proposals to the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee.
For further details on the February 2010 draft report see EP press release at link below.
May 2010 - EP Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee adopts position
On 10 May, the EP Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee MEPs votes to give ESAs more supervisory powers over systemically-important financial institutions and a stronger mediating role than had initially been proposed by the Commission. These would include the power to issue binding decisions addressed to a national supervisor or to an individual financial institution.
The ESAs' role in colleges of supervisors is also considerably enhanced and a proposed "safeguard clause" giving Member States the right not to collaborate with an ESA, is watered down. Finally, MEPs vote to locate all ESAs in Frankfurt and to set up a European depositors' guarantee fund and a fund for banking resolution.
MEPs vote to grant the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) the power to declare a financial emergency in Europe and not only warn about the eventuality of one. The text also gives the ESRB the task of making risk levels more easily understandable and gradable, and the tools to do it. The ESRB would be chaired by the European Central Bank President and its board would include members from a wider range of backgrounds such as academia. For further details on the Economic Affairs Committee's May 2010 position see EP press release at link below.
July 2010 - Plenary amends supervisory package, but defers final vote
In a plenary vote on 7 July Parliament approves amendments to the supervisory package by an overwhelming majority, whilst at the same time deferring the final vote so as to give the Council one last chance to show a willingness to negotiate a true overhaul of financial supervision in Europe.
The texts approved in plenary largely reflect those voted in the Economic Affairs Committee, but also include some points on which an agreement with Council had already been reached.
The political groups and rapporteurs issue a second statement condemning the Council's inability to follow up its words with actions to match and insisting that a future financial crisis can be weathered only through strong co-operation in financial supervision.
For further information on the plenary's July 2010 position see EP press release at link below.
September 2010 - Parliament and Council agree deal
On 2 September Parliament and Council Presidency negotiators agree to a deal granting ESAs powers to settle disputes between national supervisors, at times impose supervisory decisions on individual financial institutions, and investigate potentially risky financial institutions, products or activities. The deal also establishes the principle that ESAs may be empowered to ban financial products and tasks the European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA), with directly supervising credit rating agencies.
The deal also establishes the ECB President as the President of the ESRB, so as to give maximum credibility to this fledgling body, and provides for a number of tools which the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB) can use to warn of risk build-up and grade the riskiness of financial institutions. However, the power to declare a crisis will be in the hands of Member States.
Finally, MEPs secure important provisions which should allow the new bodies to develop as they acquire experience. MEPs consider it vital to provide this "growth potential", as the only way to ensure that the bodies would be able to keep up with changing times.
The agreement is a far cry from the Council's initial positions, which would have given the ESAs none of the above powers, and would arguably have made the ESRB simply another "talking shop" venue for central bankers.
For more information on the September 2010 agreement see EP press release at link below. February 2010 - More powerful EU financial supervisory bodies and less national interest, demand MEPs May 2010 - MEPs vote to beef up financial supervisory package July 2010 - MEPs back root and branch reform of financial supervision September 2010 - EP adds bite to financial watchdog rules
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20100223IPR69355 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20100510IPR74360 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20100706IPR77909 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20100902IPR80950 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
