The Week Ahead 17-23 May 2010
Institutions
General
2010-05-14 - 12:10
Plenary Session – Strasbourg
Economic crisis/Europe 2020. MEPs will debate the massive new eurozone lending facility and the associated proposals to improve economic governance with the Commission and Council. Another debate focuses on the Europe 2020 plans to improve long-term economic competitiveness (debates Wednesday, votes Thursday). The current ECOFIN Council chair, Spain’s Deputy PM and Finance Minister Elena Salgado, will also have a discussion with the Economics Committee (Wednesday).
Lorry drivers’ working time. Parliament will debate and vote on the Employment Committee’s proposal to apply the same limits on working time to all bus and lorry drivers, including the self-employed (debate Wednesday, vote Thursday).
Gender equality/self-employed. Self-employed women and the spouses of self-employed people should have similar employment rights, including to maternity leave, as apply to employees, according to a draft law which reaches a second reading vote (debate Monday, vote Tuesday).
Textiles: origin labelling. MEPs consider a law to tighten rules on “made in” labels in clothes sold in the EU (debate Monday, vote Tuesday).
Organ transplants. Parliament will decide on new rules intended to reduce waiting times for organ transplants across Europe (debate Tuesday, vote Wednesday).
Meat glue. Parliament will vote on the Environment Committee’s recommendation to block the use of bovine/porcine thrombin, used to stick together pieces of meat, which could be misleading for consumers (vote Wednesday).
Resettling refugees. Parliament will debate a plan to give financial support to EU countries accepting refugees who need to be resettled in a safe country (debate and vote Tuesday).
Hedge funds/private equity. The Economics Committee votes on the Alternative Investment Fund Managers Directive, tightening Europe’s rules on hedge funds and private equity investors (Monday).
President’s diary. EP President Jerzy Buzek’s week includes meetings with Belarusian opposition leader Anatoly Lebedko (Tuesday) and Council of Europe Secretary General Thorbjørn Jaglund (Wednesday).
20100514IPR74617 For details of all the week's events, see The Agenda
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20102100AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
