Road transport: rule-breakers should pay similar penalties EU-wide
Transport
Plenary sittings
2010-05-18 - 15:53
Lorry drivers who break rules on working time, rest periods or working conditions should pay clear and comparable penalties across the EU, says a resolution adopted by Parliament on Tuesday. The resolution criticises wide disparities in EU Member States' fines for similar offences and calls for closer harmonisation and co-ordination of penalties, in the interests of road safety and fair competition.
In the resolution, drafted by Hella Ranner (EPP, AT) and approved by show of hands, Parliament calls on Member States to find "legislative and practical ways" of reducing the differences in the types and levels of penalties applied. Minimum and maximum penalties should be laid down for each offence against these rules, it says. MEPs also urge Member States to increase the frequency of checks carried out by their national authorities and to invest in more rest facilities and parking spaces along their motorway networks.
Fines for exceeding the daily driving time by more than two hours are currently ten times higher in Spain (€4,600) than in Greece (€400). The methods used to determine the gravity of an offence also vary among Member States. For example, Belgium takes both daily driving time and total uninterrupted driving time into account but others do not, and some Member States treat holding more than one valid driver's card as a minor offence, even though it is defined as a "very serious" one by EU legislation.
Vote on lorry drivers' working hours postponed to June plenary
A request to postpone the vote on the report by Edit Bauer (EPP, SK) on working time in the road transport sector, submitted by the EPP group, was approved by Parliament on Monday afternoon by 158 votes in favour, 137 against and 7 abstentions. The Employment Committee had voted in April to include self-employed drivers in this legislation.
20100518IPR74728 Text of the resolution
-//EP//TEXT REPORT A7-2010-0130 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
