Irish language radio programme selected to compete for this year's EP Journalism prize
Culture
Ireland
2010-05-25 - 15:50
Following intense deliberations, Máirín Ní Ghadhra of Raidió na Gaeltachta has been selected as this year's Irish nominee for the European Parliament's Prize for Journalism. Máirín's half-hour programme was broadcast on Raidió na Gaeltachta last July during the first EP Plenary Session following the 2009 European Elections.
During her programme, Máirín interviewed five of the twelve Irish MEPs about their work in the EP, asking them for example how they intended to make their election promises a reality, what kind of an impact they felt their work had, etc. Máirín's programme will now compete with entries from the EU's 26 other Member States for the 2010 EP Journalism prize. The winners will be announced during a ceremony at the EP in Brussels in October of this year.
Speaking today after learning of her nomination, Máirín said 'I'm delighted that my programme has been chosen to compete for this year's prize and I look forward to representing Ireland in October.'
Now in its third year, 371 entries were received across the EU for this year's EP Prize for Journalism. During a ceremony in Brussels in October of this year, the President of the European Parliament, Jerzy Buzek MEP, will award €5000 to the overall winner in each category (TV, radio, print and online). The winning entries will be chosen on the basis that they have made an outstanding contribution to creating a better understanding of the EU or a relevant issue.
Members of the Irish Jury, which included Jennifer O'Leary, Head of News at City Channel and local radio journalist Colm Coyne, spent a considerable amount of time evaluating the Irish entries for this year's European Parliament prize for journalism, in particular in the radio category. The entries in that category were of a high standard.
Francis Jacobs, Head of the European Parliament Office in Ireland, said that 'in her programme, Máirín asked some very relevant questions about the work of MEPs and the importance of the European Parliament. She challenged the MEPs to explain their work in Brussels, in Strasbourg and in their constituencies. I am sure that it was a refreshing insight for her audience.'
This is the first time that an Irish language entry has been selected by the Irish Jury.
20100518IPR74733 Website European Parliament Prize for Journalism
EN
1
LINK
http://www.eppj.eu/view/en/index.html
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 AVI DOC XML V0//EN
