Bosnia and Herzegovina: MEPs dissatisfied over limited progress
External relations
Committees Foreign Affairs
2010-06-01 - 17:31
MEPs are dissatisfied over the limited progress made by Bosnia and Herzegovina (BiH), a potential candidate for EU membership. The nationalistic and secessionist rhetoric polarising society is detrimental to the country’s bid for EU integration, said Foreign Affairs Committee MEPs in a resolution adopted this Tuesday. Despite these failings, they nevertheless backed a proposal to allow BiH citizens visa-free travel to the EU.
Ahead of the October general elections, MEPs are concerned about the unstable political climate and the lack of will by Bosniak political forces and leaders to achieve a common vision. The use of inflammatory language and the nationalistic and secessionist rhetoric which undermine relations between the Serb, Muslim and Croat communities and the functioning of the central State must stop, says the resolution, which was adopted by 48 votes to 5 with 1 abstention.
The Foreign Affairs Committee calls for an agreement to be reached on a "properly functioning" and strengthened central state. This would improve the country's overall situation and enable it to meet the EU accession criteria. BiH is composed of two entities with a great degree of autonomy: the Muslim-Croat Federation and the Republika Srpska.
All citizens of the multi-ethnic BiH must enjoy the same rights without any discrimination, states the resolution, referring to the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) and to Article 2 of the Stabilisation and Association Agreement (respect for democratic principles and human rights).
Cooperation with the ICTY is “satisfactory”, say MEPs, who nonetheless ask the BiH authorities to facilitate the arrest of all ICTY indictees and dismantle their support networks. This should be facilitated by police cooperation between Serbian and BiH authorities.
Visa liberalisation backed
Significant progress has been made in meeting the roadmap criteria for a visa-free regime. MEPs congratulate the BiH authorities for their efforts on this front but ask them to adopt the remaining pieces of legislation. The ability to travel within the EU is seen as an important factor in further EU integration as well as inter-ethnic reconciliation, states the resolution. The proposal t o lift visa requirements for BiH citizens, tabled by the European Commission on May 27, is thus welcomed by MEPs.
Significant reforms needed
Key political reforms need to be made to meet the standards required for accession, say MEPs. These include a reform of its judicial system - a prerequisite for the EU integration process - and respect for human and minority rights, in particular for gender identity and sexual orientation. Progress also needs to be made in the fight against corruption and in strengthening independent media.
The BiH authorities are also asked to find “fair, comprehensive and durable solutions” for some of the 115,000 internally displaced persons and refugees, and to help their social integration.
Albania resolution postponed
The vote on the Albania resolution has been postponed to the committee's meeting of 25/26 June as talks between the majority and the opposition in the Albanian Parliament are ongoing.
In the Chair: Gabriele Albertini (EPP, IT)
20100531IPR75300 link to the Foreign Affairs Committee
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=AFET
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
