National parliaments back European diplomatic service
External relations
Committees Foreign Affairs
2010-06-02 - 16:02
Members of EU national parliaments gave their backing on Wednesday to the creation of an ambitious European external action service as proposed by MEPs. However, representatives of several parliaments, including the German Bundestag, voiced fears about losing their power of scrutiny over foreign policy, during a meeting between the EP Foreign Affairs Committee and representatives of national parliaments.
The representatives of the foreign affairs committees of the national parliaments of the 27 Member States, meeting in Brussels with their EP counterparts, overwhelmingly supported the vision of the two European Parliament rapporteurs, Elmar Brok (EPP, DE) and Guy Verhofstadt (ALDE, BE). The two MEPs advocate a broader scope for the service - including development policy and humanitarian aid, enlargement and neighbourhood policy - and the attachment of the service to the European Commission for budgetary purposes.
According to committee chair Gabriele Albertini (EPP, IT), "this meeting is happening just in time", at a moment when the various institutions are adopting their negotiating positions. He believed it was "essential that the EU have a common foreign policy subject to parliamentary scrutiny".
A foreign policy with parliamentary scrutiny
Wednesday's debate focused on the precise form of parliamentary scrutiny and the degree of involvement of national parliaments. Some national MPs expressed fears that they would no longer have this power of scrutiny. Former MEP José Ribeiro e Castro, now a member of the Portuguese parliament, said he was "concerned at the development of parliamentary scrutiny, which gives a central role to the EP but overlooks national parliaments".
Sevim Dagdelen of the German Bundestag believed that "foreign policy must continue to develop under parliamentary supervision, as is currently the case with the Bundestag. A weakening of the present powers of the German parliament would compromise any scrutiny we can exercise over this policy".
Charles Tannock (ECR, UK) also called for the involvement of national parliaments in the oversight of foreign policy, in particular after the phasing out of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Western European Union.
Balanced geographical recruitment
National MPs from Poland, Latvia, Slovakia and the Czech Republic, as well as MEPs including Jacek Saryusz-Wolski (EPP, PL), stressed the need to achieve a degree of geographical balance in the staff of the EEAS. They pointed out that, of the 1800 staff due to join the EEAS - 1100 from DG RELEX and 700 from the Council - citizens of the "new" Member States are under-represented.
An overall agreement before the summer recess?
The special adviser to Catherine Ashton, Mr Christoffersson, said he personally had "the impression that we are making progress and approaching the finishing line and an overall political framework for the external action service". "We would like the decisions to be taken before the summer recess", he told the meeting. "The time has come to put into practice this ambition for a common foreign policy, the divisions over the Iraq war having been overcome".
Irène Souka, director-general at the Commission in charge of human resources, said that the Commission would adopt on 9 June the proposal on a revised statute for officials. This proposal would also provide for a special category of temporary staff for individuals seconded from national diplomatic services, with contracts of an initial duration of four years renewable.
The adoption of the budgetary proposal is set to take place on 15 June.
In the chair: Gabriele Albertini (EPP, IT)
20100531IPR75301 Watch webstreaming live
EN
1
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/frd/vod/search-committees?language=en
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
