The Week Ahead 14-20 June 2010
Institutions
General
2010-06-11 - 11:08
Plenary Session – Strasbourg
Food labelling. MEPs decide on EU standards for food information labelling (debate Tuesday, vote Wednesday).
Lorry drivers’ working time. Parliament votes on whether limits on working time for road transport workers should extend also to self-employed drivers (debate Tuesday, vote Wednesday).
Language rights in criminal trials. MEPs vote on an EU law to ensure citizens facing criminal proceedings outside their own Member State have access to interpretation and translation facilities (debate Monday, vote Wednesday).
Gaza. Parliament will debate the Israeli raid on the flotilla heading for Gaza and the blockade on that territory with High Representative/Commission Vice-President Catherine Ashton (debate Wednesday, vote Thursday).
Financial issues. MEPs will debate regulating derivatives markets (debate Monday, vote Tuesday) and credit rating agencies (debate Tuesday), while also questioning the Commission on the quality of government statistics (debate and vote Tuesday).
EU and G20 summits. Parliament debates prospects for the 17 June EU summit and the 26-27 June G20 summit with Council and Commission, with votes on economic governance issues and Europe 2020 (debate and vote Wednesday). At the EU summit itself, EP President Jerzy Buzek will address EU leaders before holding a press conference. After the summit, European Council President Herman Van Rompuy will brief the leaders of the political groups on the outcome (Thursday).
Korean peninsula, Bosnia and EU-Russia. Ms Ashton will also take part in debates on tension on the Korean peninsula, the situation in Bosnia and Herzegovina and the EU’s relationship with Russia (debates Wednesday, votes Thursday).
Millennium development goals. MEPs will vote on an assessment of progress towards these goals (debate Monday, vote Tuesday). President Buzek will also take part in an event on the related “E-card” campaign (Tuesday).
EU future budgets. Parliament will decide on the creation of a special committee to work on its position regarding the next medium term budgetary framework for the EU (Wednesday).
20100611IPR75921 For details of all the week's events, see "The Agenda"
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20102500AGD00000 BY-DAY NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
