The new EU agricultural policy
Agriculture
Committees Agriculture and Rural Development
2010-06-16 - 09:26
Plans for a strong, common EU agricultural policy, equipped to deliver public goods such as climate change reduction, food security and food quality, based on a fair support system and reformed to improve competitiveness and returns to farmers were set out by the Agriculture Committee on Tuesday.
The plans, drawn up by George Lyon (ALDE, UK), and approved with 41 votes in favour, 2 against and no abstentions are the Agriculture Committee's contribution to the debate on the future of the Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) after 2013. They should help to influence the European Commission's CAP reform plan, to be published after the summer break.
New aims deserve commensurate budget
Whilst rural development policy should remain an integral part of the new CAP, European agriculture also faces new challenges, such as food security, the fight against climate change, renewable energies, water management and biodiversity, notes the committee. A strong agricultural policy is therefore needed to benefit European society as a whole, and help achieve the EU 2020 strategy goals, add MEPs.
To ensure that the CAP delivers these public goods, the funds allocated to it must be "at least maintained during the next financial period" (from 2013), say MEPs. The committee also stresses that the CAP should not be "renationalised" (i.e. returned to national control) and that direct payments to farmers should be fully funded from the EU budget, to avoid any co-financing by Member States that could harm fair competition within the single market.
A fair payments system
"A fair distribution of CAP payments (...), fair to farmers in both new and old Member States" should be the guiding principle of CAP reform. The Commission should therefore come up with objective criteria to reduce disparities in direct payments, where the current hectare basis is not sufficient, and to reflect regional diversity. The level of direct payments should be maintained to avoid negative consequences for farmers and consumers and a transitional period should also be agreed to allow farmers to adapt to changes, MEPs agreed.
Moreover, to avoid over-production crises, some specific instruments to manage production capacity should be retained, so as to ensure sustainable growth, said the committee.
Competitive agriculture...
The high food safety, environment, social legislation and animal welfare standards that Europe's farmers must meet should be rewarded, say MEPs. (CA 21) Imports from third countries should meet the same criteria with due respect for WTO rules, and traceability should be improved to allow consumers make an informed choices, they add.
...with a strong quality policy...
Food quality policy is also crucial to improving the sector's competitiveness, says the committee. Geographical indications of origin need to be strengthened and enforced, so as to allow the EU to keep its leadership in this area, through protection and promotion instruments, it adds.
...can guarantee fair returns to farmers
Increased competitiveness would also allow farmers to cover costs, respond to market signals and earn stable returns. To ensure fair revenues to the farming community, the committee proposes strengthening producers' bargaining power in the food supply chain vis-à-vis the retailers and other players and improving price transparency.
Crisis safety net
To take account of market developments and particularly of extreme price volatility and subsequent crises, the committee calls for a safety net mechanism, to include public and private storage and intervention, backed by instruments specifically designed to increase price stability. It also proposes new measures, such as creating futures markets or a harvest risk insurance policy to cope with extreme climate conditions.
Rural development still essential
To counter abandonment of land, ensure the survival of EU agriculture and promote green growth, rural development must remain an essential aim of the future CAP and the current two-pillar structure (production support and rural development) should be maintained, says the committee. Agriculture urgently needs to attract young farmers and women, adds the committee, suggesting that this could be achieved through favourable loans for investment to meet high start-up costs and overcome difficulties in accessing credit.
In the chair: Paolo DE CASTRO (S&D, IT)
Procedure: own initiative
Plenary vote: July (Strasbourg)
20100614IPR76020 Agriculture and Rural Development Committee
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=AGRI
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
