Baltic "BONUS" strategy to fight pollution
Research and innovation
Plenary sittings
2010-06-16 - 13:13
To combat pollution, climate change, acidification, over-exploitation and biodiversity loss in the Baltic Sea, the EU is to co-fund "BONUS", a seven-year joint R&amp;D programme initiated by Baltic coastal states Denmark, Estonia, Finland, Germany, Latvia, Lithuania, Poland and Sweden. A plan to match their money with €50 million in EU funds was approved by Parliament on Wednesday.
The Baltic Sea ecosystem, a semi-enclosed European inland sea, has been seriously polluted by dumped chemical weapons, such as gases dating from the Second World War and by heavy metal compounds, organic substances, radioactive material, heating oil and petroleum spills. Intensive farming in the area has also led to excessive inputs of fertilisers and organic material.
Joint R&D efforts
The coastal Member States' national research and development programmes for the Baltic are not sufficiently well-co-ordinated to achieve the required "critical mass", says Parliament's resolution. BONUS should integrate them into a "durable, co-operative, interdisciplinary, well-integrated and focused multinational research programme", supporting the aims of the Baltic Sea Strategy, the Marine and Maritime Strategy and the Water Framework Directive.
BONUS will focus on environmental research, but also draw together other research work on how fisheries, aquaculture, agriculture, infrastructure, energy, and transport affect the ecosystem. The programme is "all about creating sustainable Europe, rich in resources. The Baltic is important in the culture of all littoral states, they have a long tradition and we have to keep it for our children", said Rapporteur Lena Ek (ALDE, SE), in her presentation on Tuesday.
Implementation and funding
The programme will be implemented by the Baltic Organisations’ Network for Funding Science, BONUS EEIG, established in Helsinki, and should last for 7 years. It follows the previous programmes BONUS ERA-NET (2004-2006) and ERA-NET PLUS (2007-2011).
The EU will contribute up to €50 million over the life of the programme, including €1.25 million for the strategy phase and €48.75 million for implementation, thus matching the contribution of the eight participating states.
The Commission and the Court of Auditors will be empowered to carry out any checks needed to ensure that the EU funds are properly managed. An interim evaluation of BONUS must be done by the end of 2014 and a final one by the end of 2017.
Parliament approved the programme with 630 votes in favour, 14 against and 6 abstentions.
20100615IPR76094 Adopted text will be available here (click on 16 June) Report on Joint Baltic Sea Research and Development Programme BONUS-169 Profile of rapporteur Lena EK (ALDE, Sweden)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
2
LINK
/oeil/file.jsp?id=5821182
EN
3
LINK
/members/expert/alphaOrder/view.do?language=EN&id=28127
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
