Human rights: Congo, Nepal, Libya
Human rights
Plenary sittings
2010-06-17 - 16:27
In three resolutions adopted in Strasbourg on Thursday, the European Parliament denounces the murder of a human rights campaigner in the Democratic Republic of Congo, urges all sides in Nepal to work together for political stability and expresses dismay at reports that 18 people were executed in Libya last month.
Condemnation of murder of human rights activist in Congo
The killing of a prominent human rights activist in the Democratic Republic of Congo is strongly condemned in a resolution which describes the murder as "part of a growing trend of intimidation and harassment" of opposition figures in the country.
Floribert Chebeya Bahizire, the executive director of human rights organisation La Voix des Sans Voix (VSV), was found dead in his car in Kinshasa on Wednesday, 2 June 2010 after having been summoned by the police. His driver, Fidèle Bazana Edadi, is still missing.
The UN Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions, Philip Alston, said the circumstances of the killing ‘strongly suggest official responsibility’ Other leading international figures, including EU High Representative Catherine Ashton and UN Secretary General Ban Ki-Moon, have issued statements condemning the murder of Mr Chebeya Bahizire and have called for an independent investigation.
Parliament's resolution describes the killing as "part of a growing trend of intimidation and harassment of human rights defenders, journalists, political opponents, victims and witnesses in the DRC" and says "numerous journalists and human rights activists have been killed in suspicious circumstances in the DRC in the past five years".
The EP "forcefully condemns the killing" and the fact that the driver is still missing. It calls for "independent, credible, thorough and transparent commission of inquiry to be set up" and "for steps to be taken to ensure that the families of both men are protected".
More broadly, Parliament "expresses its deep concern regarding the general degradation of the situation of human rights defenders in the DRC" and calls on the DRC authorities to comply with international human rights standards. It also stresses "the need to tackle corruption and bring to justice the perpetrators of human rights abuses within the Congolese armed and police forces" and "calls on the Government of the DRC to ensure that those responsible for breaching human rights and international humanitarian law are held to account and that it cooperates fully" with the International Criminal Court.
* * *
MEPs call for national unity in Nepal
The long-running political instability in Nepal is a source of serious concern to the European Parliament, which calls on all sides to work together for national unity and support a constitutional settlement.
In November 2006 a Comprehensive Peace Agreement (CPA) between the Seven Party Alliance and the Maoists (UCPN), who controlled large parts of the country, ended a 10-year armed conflict that had caused some 13,000 deaths. The agreement paved the way for a Constituent Assembly (CA) and an interim government including the Maoists.
Unfortunately, many of the terms of the peace agreement remain unfulfilled and "the ongoing political instability is having a crucial impact on the social, economic and touristic development of Nepal", say MEPs.
Parliament's resolution expresses "deep concern about the non-existence of a constitution based on democratic values and human rights". It "urges the CA and all the political actors involved to negotiate without preconditions, to show flexibility, to avoid any provocative actions and to work together for national unity in order to find a clear structure for the new constitution" and "to establish a functioning federal democracy".
MEPs also call on the international community, including the EU and the Member States to play a role in the integration of former Maoist combatants into the Army or other security forces and urge the UN to screen out from its peacekeeping positions any members of the security forces guilty of human rights violations. In addition, MEPs call on EU Member States to continue to ban exports of lethal weapons to Nepal.
* * *
MEPs condemn reported executions in Libya
In a resolution on Libya, Parliament strongly condemns the reported execution of 18 people in that country last month and reiterates its total opposition to the death penalty. It also calls on Member States not to deport migrants to Libya if they risk execution there.
According to a Libyan newspaper report, 18 people, including nationals of Chad, Egypt and Nigeria, were executed in Tripoli and Benghazi on 30 May after being convicted of premeditated murder. Their identities have not been made public by the Libyan authorities.
Parliament's resolution reiterates "its longstanding opposition to the death penalty in all cases and under all circumstances". It "strongly condemns the execution of the 18 people on 30 May 2010 and expresses its condolences and its solidarity with the families of the deceased", and "asks Libya to disclose the names of the 18 people executed, including those of the foreign nationals". It also urges Libya "to make progress towards a moratorium on executions".
Moreover, EU Member States that deport migrants to Libya should "stop doing so immediately where there is a serious risk that the person concerned would be subjected to the death penalty, torture or other inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment", says the resolution.
Lastly, Parliament argues that "any cooperation or agreement between the EU and Libya must be conditional on the ratification and implementation by Libya of the Geneva Convention on Refugees and of other major human right conventions and protocols".
20100616IPR76237 Adopted text will be available here (click on 17 June)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
