MEPs using "Oral Questions" to scrutinise Commission & Governments
Institutions
2010-06-22 - 13:30
Question time: An MEP takes the floor in the Chamber MEPs concerned over Credit Rating Agencies Validity of statistics for measuring economies also questioned The role of Credit Rating Agencies, suspect football agents and a Women's Charter were just three issues raised by MEPs last week in so called "Oral Questions". This is a vital tool of Parliamentary scrutiny of both the European Commission and the Council of Ministers where Governments conduct their European negotiations. Here as some of those questions tabled during the 14-17 June Parliamentary session.
Credit Rating Agencies: Barnier favours a European one
Questions were raised about credit rating agencies by several MEPs. For the leftist GUE/NGL Group Nikolaos Chountis and Jürgen Klute asked about the possibility of setting up a European Credit Rating Agency.
In a separate question Udo Bullmann of the Socialists, Jean-Paul Gauzès of the centre right European People's Party and Liberal Sylvie Goulard questioned the "freedom" given to Rating Agencies to assess the creditworthiness of economies of EU members.
Competition Commissioner Michel Barnier said that competition and the greatest degree of transparency in the way Rating Agencies work is essential. He admitted they have not always worked in best possible way "with sometimes unfortunate consequences".
He also agreed with MEPs who raised the issue of conflict of interest "inherent" in how Rating Agencies operate. He called for measures to enhance competition between them and declared himself "personally" in favour of a European Credit Rating Agency, especially geared to sovereign debt.
A Women's Charter for Europe?
A group of MEPs asked Europe's Citizenship Commissioner Viviane Reding about gender equality and the possible involvement of other European institutions and Civil Society in a new Women's Charter. Ms Reding called the Charter a political commitment to promote equality which sets three global priorities: combating violence, stopping genital mutilation and enhancing female participation in decision-making.
The question was put by Zita Gurmai (Socialists), Britta Thomsen (Socialists), Ilda Figueiredo (GUE/NGL), Eva-Britt Svensson (GUE/NGL), Antonyia Parvanova (Liberals) and Marije Cornelissen Greens/EFA).
Unscrupulous football agents
For the Culture Committee German MEP Doris Pack (European People's Party) questioned the role of football agents and accusations of them engaging in money laundering and tax evasion. She asked the EU could do to stop this.
Sport Commissioner Androulla Vassiliou agreed that action is desirable and that the EU's executive would try and coordinate a common approach across Europe to football agents. She said a new white paper of sport was due soon by the Commission which would consider this issue.
Statistics...can they be trusted?
Improving the surveillance of statistics submitted by European governments to Eurostat was one of the issues raised in a question by Austrian centre right MEP Othmar Karas and British Liberal Sharon Bowles. On behalf of their colleagues on the Economic and Monetary Affairs Committee, they also called for Eurostat to have extra powers to investigate the finances of countries.
It comes in light of the fact that Greece is known to have submitted statistics that were questionable at best when it joined the euro.
In reply Europe's Economic & Monetary Affairs Commissioner Olli Rehn told the House that a Regulation was being finalised accords enhanced auditing powers to Eurostat and spoke of immediate reinforcement of staff and increased visits to countries.
European States selling torture instruments
Gabriele Albertini (European People's Party) for the Foreign Affairs Committee and Vital Moreira (Socialists) for the International Trade Committee referred to an Amnesty International report on continuing exports of instruments of torture despite 2006 regulation banning their export. These include batons, metal thumb cuffs and electric-shock implements.
In response Catherine Ashton told the house that "shortcomings in implementation must and can be addressed". She went on to say that "Eleanor Roosevelt used to say, ‘It is better to light a candle than curse the darkness’. This is valid for our human rights policy too" said the EU's foreign policy chief.
20100611STO75908 All Oral Questions Parliamentary Questions website Oral Questions defined
EN
1
PHOTO
20100621PHT76373.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/sidesSearch/sipadeMapUrl.do?PROG=OQ&language=EN&startValue=0
EN
3
LINK
/QP-WEB/application/intro.do?language=EN
EN
4
LINK
/sides/getLastRules.do?language=EN&reference=RULE-115
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
