Fighting poverty: a minimum income and better access to jobs
Social policy
Committees Employment and Social Affairs
2010-06-24 - 16:17
A minimum income, better access to the job market, public services and social protection: these are the measures recommended by Parliament's Employment Committee in a draft resolution on combating poverty that was adopted on Wednesday. However, a call for an EU framework law on a minimum income did not receive the support of a majority of members of the committee.
Poverty affects around 85 million people or 17% of the EU's population. The risk of poverty is greater for children and young people up to 17 years of age (20%) than for the population as a whole. Older people (19%) are also vulnerable, stresses the report drafted by Ilda Figueiredo (GEU/NGL, PT), which was adopted by 23 votes to 5 with 14 abstentions.
Minimum income
Introducing minimum income schemes in all EU Member States is one of the most effective way to combat poverty, guarantee an adequate standard of living and foster social integration, argue MEPs, who call on the Commission to present "an initiative" in this area. They also urge the Commission to give "genuine meaning and content" to this year's European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion.
However, an amendment calling on the Commission to bring forward a draft EU framework law on a minimum income, in order to introduce minimum income systems throughout the EU did not receive the backing of a majority of members of the Employment Committee. As a result, the S&D group abstained in the final vote on the report. Rapporteur Ilda Figueiredo, who backed the idea of a framework directive, is hoping for a more favourable vote in plenary but in any case thinks the resolution contains "positive progress".
A minimum income should be pitched at 60% of the median income of the country concerned, says the draft resolution, which also calls for better access to the labour market, public services, housing and social protection as part of the fight against poverty. Salaries and wages must be decent and pensions must include a basic old-age allowance to ensure people enjoy a dignified retirement, say MEPs.
The working poor
In the resolution, MEPs also seek to draw attention to the increasing number working poor. They stress that a living wage must always be above the poverty threshold and that workers who remain below the poverty threshold should receive top-ups that are unconditional.
Efforts must also be made on pay and minimum wage levels, since the poverty affecting people in employment implies inequitable working conditions, says the draft resolution.
The goal of the EU2020 Strategy, which seeks to remove 20 million people from poverty, falls short of the target of the Lisbon Strategy, which was to overcome poverty, MEPs point out.
24.06.2010
In the chair: Pervenche BERÈS (S&D, FR)
Procedure: Own-initiative
Plenary vote: October, Strasbourg
20100621IPR76438 Committee on Employment and Social Affairs
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=EMPL
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
