European Parliament caps bankers' bonuses
Economic and monetary affairs
Committees Economic and Monetary Affairs
2010-06-30 - 12:58
New rules on capital requirements for banks and a cap on bonuses for bankers are the results of negotiations between Council and Parliament which were concluded with a deal late on Tuesday. The European Parliament is confident that the agreement delivers tough and effective rules that will cover all bonuses awarded or paid from 2011 onwards. It will be the first cap on how bankers are paid worldwide.
"Two years on from the global financial crisis, these tough new rules on bonuses will transform the bonus culture and end incentives for excessive risk taking. A high-risk and short-term bonus culture wrought havoc with the global economy and taxpayers paid the price. The public want banks to prioritise stability and lending over their own pay and perks. In the last two years the banks have failed to reform, and we are now doing the job for them." Arlene McCarthy the rapporteur in charge of the negotiations for the Parliament said.
Together these new rules will lay the foundations for a safe and sound capital base and a responsible pay and bonus policy, so that taxpayers don't face the risk of bailing out the banks once again.
A different bonus culture
This new EU wide law will transform the bonus culture and end incentives for excessive risk taking. These incentives for chasing short term bonuses over the long term health of the financial system played a key role in the crisis. The new rules mean reward is linked to long term performance.
Upfront cash bonuses will be capped at 30% of the total bonus and to 20% for particularly large bonuses. In place of upfront cash between 40 and 60% of any bonus must be deferred and can be recovered if investments do not perform as expected. Moreover at least 50% of the total bonus would be paid as "contingent capital" (funds to be called upon first in case of bank difficulties).
Bonuses will also have to be capped to salary. Each bank will have to establish limits on bonuses related to salaries, on the basis of EU wide guidelines, to help bring down the overall, disproportionate, role played by bonuses in the financial sector.
Finally, bonus-like pensions will also be covered. Exceptional pension payments must be held back in instruments such as contingent capital that link their final value to the underlying strength of the bank. This will avoid situations, similar to those experienced recently, in which some bankers retired with substantial pensions unaffected by the crisis.
Harsher treatment for bailed out banks
To address moral hazard the law will introduce special measures for bailed out banks and it will restrain the overall amounts paid in bonuses, encouraging bankers to prioritise a stronger capital base and lending to the real economy over their own pay and perks. The rules will also require that the repayment of taxpayers is the priority.
Capital requirements for stable banks
New capital rules for re-securitisations and the trading book will ensure banks are properly covering the risks they are running on their trading activity, including for types of investments like mortgage backed securities that were central to the crisis.
Next steps
Following Wednesday's official agreement from Council, the text will now be submitted to the Parliament's July plenary. The vote will take place on Wednesday, 7 July. Once this is finalised ,the rules are expected to take effect in January 2011 for the bonus provisions and not later than 31 December 2011 for the capital requirements provisions.
On Friday 2nd July, Mrs McCarthy will hold a press briefing at 10.15 UK time at the EP's London Information Office (2 Queen Anne's Gate, London SW1H 9AA, Tel: 020 7227 4300 Fax: 020 7227 4302 )
20100630IPR77285 Profile Rapporteur Arlene McCARTHY
EN
1
LINK
/members/expert/groupAndCountry/view.do?group=2953&country=GB&partNumber=1&language=EN&id=2173
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
