Belgian ministers outline Council Presidency priorities
Justice and home affairs
Committees Legal Affairs
2010-07-14 - 11:46
Belgian government ministers this week continued outlining the priorities for their country's presidency of the EU Council to a range of European Parliament committees. MEPs took the opportunity to question the ministers as they embarked upon their six-month spell in office.
International trade
Concluding the Doha Development Round, signing the EU-South Korea Free trade agreement, pressing ahead with negotiations for an Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement and the relations with key EU trading partners (US, China, Russia) are the Belgian Presidency's international trade priorities as set out by Deputy Prime Minister and Minister for Foreign Affairs and Foreign Trade Steven Vanackere on 13 July.
On the development dimension of trade, Mr Vanackere highlighted the need to conclude the regional Economic Partnership Agreements (EPAs) with the ACP countries and to start the review of General System of Preferences (GSP).
MEPs sought assurances that Parliament's common trade policy powers, and in particular its consent to international agreements, would be properly implemented, as required by the Lisbon Treaty, through specirfic forms of inter-institutional co-operation.
In the chair: Vital Moreira (S&D, PT)
Education and culture
Finding an agreement on the introduction of the "European Heritage Label" so as to "to bring citizens closer to Europe" is a key priority for the Belgian Presidency, said Fadila Laanan, Minister for Culture, the Audiovisual sector, Health and Equal opportunities of the French community of Belgium. Among other cultural priorities, the minister said she would back the development of creativity and innovation, and culture as a means to combat social exclusion. She also said she would like to start discussion about a possible support mechanism for European cinema.
Mrs Laanan was followed by Flemish Minister for Education Youth, Equal opportunities and Brussels affairs Pascal Smet, who outlined priorities in the education and youth sector, including setting as medium-term objectives a 10% reduction in the numbers of young people leaving school without qualifications, and 10% increases in the number of those obtaining higher education diplomas and professional qualifications. Finally, Flemish Minister for Finance, Budget, Work, Town and country planning and Sport Philippi Muyters said the Presidency's key focus in the field of sport would be the social role of sport, including promoting fair play and the fight against doping.
In the chair: Doris Pack (EPP, DE)
Regional development
The Belgian Presidency will deepen the debate on the future of EU regional policy, especially on setting clear thematic and geographical objectives, and will focus on its contribution to the EU 2020 strategy for growth, Rudy Demotte, Minister-President of the Walloon Region and of the French Community, told the Committee on Regional Development on 13 July.
Replying to questions on new , alternative criteria for distributing EU funds, Mr Demotte said he favoured considering new factors in addition to GDP, such as unemployment. Mr Demotte recognised that being "a mystery to many stakeholders" is one of EU regional policy's greatest handicaps and hence that simplification and making institutional debates understandable to end users - local authorities and citizens - will be essential. Asked about plans for the future cohesion policy, Mr Demotte said that the answers will largely depend on resource planning, where the Parliament could "help us to develop an offensive and forward looking approach".
Agriculture
"We need a strong and common agricultural policy" said Sabine Laruelle, Belgium's Minister for SMEs, the self-employed, agriculture and science policy told the Agriculture Committee on 13 June, adding that the Presidency will "lobby hard to have a substantial agricultural budget" to end "disparities in payments between new and old Member States".
Asked by MEPs about the long-awaited Commission legislative proposal on the dairy sector and particularly about whether there should be public management of the market, Ms Laruelle said the EU "needs to take action quickly" although "there is no majority in Council to have a centralised system". Generally, the Presidency's priorities very much reflect those of the committee, as outlined by chair Paolo De Castro (S&D, IT). Besides the future of the CAP after 2013 and the regulation of the dairy sector, these are: EU food quality policy, with a proposal expected by the end of the year, specific provisions for the outermost regions, WTO negotiations and GMOs.
In the chair: Paolo De Castro (S&D, IT)
Immigration and asylum
Laying the first foundations for a Common European Asylum System by 2012 is the Belgian Presidency's top priority in this area. Melchior Wathelet, State Secretary for the Budget, Migration and Asylum Policy, Family Policy and Federal Cultural Institutions told Civil Liberties Committee MEPs on 13 July that the Presidency aims for a "balanced" asylum and immigration policy. "Our vision involves a global approach (...) based on solidarity between the Member States" and with a clear focus on responsibility, he said.
The Presidency hopes to make progress on four of the six proposals currently in the Council: the Eurodac regulation, the long-term residence directive, the qualification directive and the Dublin regulation, said the minister. The two other proposals - on asylum procedures and the reception directives - "haven't gone so far as the others (...) and we feel that we are not going to finalise these two texts" during the Belgian Presidency, he added.
Among the legal migration priorities, the minister aims to complete negotiations on the single permit directive and to make progress on the upcoming proposals on seasonal workers and intra-corporate transferees. In the fight against illegal immigration, the readmission agreements and the role of Frontex are top of the agenda. Unaccompanied minors and visa liberalization will also get special attention.
In the chair: Sophie in 't Veld (ALDE, NL)
Constitutional Affairs
I mplementing the Lisbon Treaty, the Framework Agreement between Parliament and the Commission and the reform of EP election rules are the Presidency's key constitutional affairs priorities, Belgium's Secretary of State for European Affairs Olivier Chastel told the Constitutional Affairs Committee on 13 July. Issues falling under the Lisbon Treaty include the EU's accession to the European Court of Human Rights, the citizens' initiative, the 2011 budget, delegated acts and relations between the Council and the rotating Presidency. MEPs stressed the importance of delivering the promises of the Lisbon Treaty to citizens and the need for reforms to ease the economic crisis.
In the chair: Carlo Casini (EPP, IT)
Civil Liberties, Justice and Home Affairs
As priorities in the area of justice, Minister Stefaan De Clerck on 12 July highlighted the proposals on the European protection order, child pornography and human trafficking. During its term in office the Belgian Presidency also aims to make progress towards a general agreement on data protection: “we have to take our time to get this agreement right”, the minister added. The Presidency plans to “put together a new and feasible model” for a European investigation order, to boost the role of Eurojust and cross-border judicial and police cooperation. Better access to justice for citizens and strengthened procedural rights are also on the Belgian agenda. "We are taking modest steps because we know the undertakings involved (...) and we want to remain realistic", he concluded.
For her part, home affairs minister Annemie Turtelboom said she expected the Belgian Presidency to put flesh on the European security plan launched by the Spanish Presidency and to develop a methodology for implementing the plan. She favoured a "global, integrated" approach to "cross-border issues" such as "mobile criminal gangs" and hoped to develop the exchange of information between Member States for this purpose. She also called for work to be done at "grassroots level" to prevent extremism and radicalisation, using police on the beat.
In the chair: Juan Fernando López Aguilar (S&D, ES)
Industry, Research and Energy
On Monday 12 July, Belgian ministers Jean-Claude Marcourt and Benoît Cerexhe presented Presidency priorities in the field of industry, research and innovation. The key tasks are implementing the EU2020 strategy, while supporting research, innovation and a durable industrial policy as a basis for a lasting development. MEPs were pleased with the emphasis on industrial policy, but urged the Council to commit more money for research and cut ting red tape . They noted that most EU research programme funding ends up in big enterprises , because small ones cannot afford l engthy and costly application procedures.
On energy policy, Minister Paul Magnette stressed the importance of measures to reduce energy poverty and protect consumers. He also promised to pave the way for adoption of the Energy Action Plan. Other priorities are regional co-operation within the energy sector, policy debate on the energy infrastructure package and a review of guidelines for the Trans-European Energy Networks. Committee members called for specific measures to improve energy efficiency , with a sharper focus on clean, sustainable sources. They also urged the Council to provide more funds for projects like ITER, an experimental fusion reactor to be built in Spain, which fac e an uncertain future.
In the chair: Herbert Reul (EPP, DE)
Legal affairs
Better protection for victims of crime, and especially of domestic crime, the fight against human trafficking, sexual exploitation and child pornography, reinforced legal co-operation among Member States and better access to justice for citizens are Belgium's key legal affairs priorities as set out by Justice Minister Stefaan De Clerck on 5 July.
To take account of greater mobility in Europe, laws on cross-border divorce (Rome III) and on succession and wills are also high on the Belgian Presidency’s agenda. Mr De Clerck also looked forward to making progress on mutual recognition of judicial decisions, cross-border judicial and police co-operation, a European investigation order, and reinforcing the powers of Eurojust. Finally, the Presidency also aims to “find some solutions to get the ball rolling” on the Statute for a European Private Company.
For the single market, a European patent is the key priority, said Enterprise and Simplification Minister Vincent Van Quickenborne.“80% of my energy will be invested in the European patent”, the minister told MEPs. The first step for this patent is the language regime, presented last week by the Commission. Consumers’ rights, the late payments directive – on which the Belgian Presidency hopes to reach a first reading agreement with Parliament – and copyright will also be major issues during the Belgian Presidency, he concluded.
In the chair: Klaus-Heiner Lehne (EPP, DE)
20100705IPR77752 Legal Affairs Committee
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=FR&body=JURI
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
