LUX film prize: 3-film shortlist for 2010
Culture
General
2010-07-27 - 12:05
Akadimia Platonos, Die Fremde and Illégal were the three films shortlisted on Tuesday for the European Parliament's 2010 LUX film prize, during an event at the Venice International Film Festival. Like past LUX Prize contenders, these films speak to Europeans' hearts and identities, forcing us to ask ourselves about our cultural and family relations, and the rules by which we live.
The three contenders, unveiled in the "Venice Days" (Giornate degli Autori) section of the Venice International Film Festival, were produced in Greece/Germany ( Akadimia Platonos by Filippos Tsitos), Germany ( Die Fremde by Feo Aladag) and Belgium/France/Luxembourg ( Illégal by Olivier Masset-Depasse).
As with previous winners — Auf der anderen Seite (2007), Le silence de Lorna (2008) and Welcome (2009) — the 2010 LUX Prize winning film will receive European Parliament financial support for subtitling the film into all the 23 official languages of the European Union (EU), an adaptation of the original version for the visually- or hearing-impaired, and the production of a 35 mm print per EU member state.
This year's contenders will be screened in the Venice Days’ premises (10-11 September), and again at the European Parliament’s Brussels premises (26 October-19 November). Members of the European Parliament will vote for the winning film and the 2010 LUX Prize will be awarded on 24 November by the President of the European Parliament at its headquarters in Strasbourg.
Akadimia Platonos (Plato's Academy)
Every day Stavros raises the metal shutters of his cigarette store, puts out the newspapers in front and then sets out the chairs where he and his friends sit all day, looking out on the dusty intersection and surrounding grey buildings that shelter their businesses. They’re all very proud of the way their dog Patriot, on the opposite pavement, barks at every passing Albanian. Stavros and his friends don’t like these foreigners even though they’re willing to do the jobs the Greeks won’t do, nor do they like the recently arrived Chinese. By the store’s entrance, Stavros’ increasingly senile mother mopes in an armchair, regardless of the affectionate care lavished on her by her devoted son. Then one day she suddenly falls upon an Albanian worker, embracing him and calling him «my son» in Albanian. In fact, what does Stavros really know about his parents? His mother has always told him that after his father died up north, she moved to Athens, when he was but a year old. Now Stavros’ pals start looking askance at him: is he Greek or Albanian? Does he really have the right to sing the racist little ditty: «Albanian, Albanian, you’ll never become a Greek…»?
Die Fremde (When we leave)
What would you sacrifice for your family’s love? Your values? Your freedom? Your independence? German-born Umay flees her oppressive marriage in Istanbul, taking her young son Cem with her. She is hoping to find a better life with her family in Berlin, but her unexpected arrival creates intense conflict. Her family is trapped in their conventions, torn between their love for her and the values of their community. Ultimately they decide to return Cem to his father in Turkey. To keep her son, Umay is forced to move again. She finds the inner strength to build a new life for her and Cem, but her need for her family’s love drives her to a series of ill-fated attempts at reconciliation. What Umay doesn’t realize is just how deep the wounds have gone and how dangerous her struggle for self- determination has become.
Illégal
Tania and her 14 year-old son Ivan are illegal immigrants from Russia, who have been living in Belgium for 8 years. In a permanent state of alert, Tania lives in constant fear of having her identity checked by the police - until the day she is arrested. Mother and the son are separated. Tania is placed in a holding centre. She does everything in her power to find her son again, in spite of the constant threat of deportation hanging over her head.
Film directors' perspectives on Europe
Akadimia Platonos director Filippos Tsitos says: “e verybody agrees that the European Union is a good idea. The disagreements begin when one has to decide who has the right to enter the Union, who has the right to remain in it, who is going to get help from it, and which of its members are to have more privileges than others. Discrimination hangs around these decisions. Tolerance is the beginning of the solution. And how an individual can tolerate his very own self is the subject of Akadimia Platonos . Winning the LUX Prize would be a recognition that the film deserves - but I will be honest: i n these very difficult times for arthouse movie-making and the much harder times Greece is experiencing, all help is welcome! Making small, independent, non-English speaking movies nowadays can be compared to swimming in a wild ocean at night. You constantly feel like you are about to drown. So you are thankful for anything that helps you stay out of the water.”
For Die Fremde director Feo Aladag, “we live in a multicultural society, which can no longer simply promote consensus but must find new ways to get around increasing divergence. That will only happen with ongoing dialogue and by allowing ourselves to be being guided by our similarities rather than by our differences. My belief is that a harmonious co-existence is possible if we, in the name of empathy, grow beyond the shadows of our principles and convictions. This theme is universal, as it affects all of us, whether it is people who love one another, or people who share a society, a country or a planet and who are therefore a community. We would like to address our very special thanks to the European Parliament for promoting European films in order to make them cross borders and travel around Europe through the LUX Prize, to reach a widespread audience and to promote diversity, solidarity and hope in our societies.”
Illégal director Olivier Masset-Depasse says “the LUX Prize is, for me, a wonderful initiative encouraging the circulation of films on a European scale. What is a film that cannot be seen? Because of this it is clear that the prize is a real opportunity for Illégal because I think that what I show in this film can be widely applied in many European countries. I hope to create as wide a debate as possible across Europe. The LUX Prize would be an excellent starting point as wide a dissemination of this film as possible.”
European Parliament commitment to culture
The LUX Prize was established in 2007, as a tangible symbol of the European Parliament’s commitment to the European film industry and its creative endeavours. Since then, the LUX Prize has cast an annual spotlight on films that go to the very heart of the European public debate. Beyond the stories they tell, these films trigger questions for Europeans: the values they share or question, the project of building Europe, and the way they address cross-border concerns such as immigration, justice, solidarity, public freedoms or fundamental rights. No matter which social issue it illustrates, each film gives a glimpse of Europeans, their lives, their convictions and doubts, and their quest for identity.
The three shortlisted contenders were chosen by the same panel that made the ten-film LUX Prize 2010 Official Selection on 28 June.
20100727IPR79248 Venice Days web site EP press release: European Parliament LUX prize - 10-film 2010 official selection announced LUX Prize web site
EN
1
LINK
http://www.venice-days.com/newsENG.asp
EN
3
LINK
http://www.lux-prize.eu/
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20100628IPR77108 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
