LUX film prize screenings in Venice
Culture
2010-09-09 - 10:40
The 3 films will be shown at "Venice Days" 10-11 September Special screening for 27 people - one from each European Union country "Plato's Academy", "When we leave" & "Illégal" shortlisted A group of 16-26 year olds from across Europe with a special interest in films will be in Venice this week for a special screening of the 3 finalists of the European Parliament's LUX film Prize. "Plato's Academy", "When we leave" and "Illégal" have been chosen as they deal with themes that currently affect many people in Europe. The three films deal with immigration, racism, ageing and family entanglements.
The film lovers have been especially chosen and include film bloggers, photographers and independent film makers. The Chair of Parliament's Culture Committee Doris Pack said the aim was to "give a voice to a new young audience, by promoting dialogue among the young men and women invited to attend, European film industry professionals and representatives of the European Parliament.”
Akadimia Platonos (Plato's Academy) by Filippos Tsitos, Greece, Germany
Every day Stavros raises the metal shutters of his cigarette store, puts out the newspapers in front and then sets out the chairs where he and his friends sit all day, looking out on the dusty intersection and surrounding grey buildings that shelter their businesses. They’re all very proud of the way their dog Patriot, on the opposite pavement, barks at every passing Albanian. Stavros and his friends don’t like these foreigners even though they’re willing to do the jobs the Greeks won’t do, nor do they like the recently arrived Chinese. By the store’s entrance, Stavros’ increasingly senile mother mopes in an armchair, regardless of the affectionate care lavished on her by her devoted son.
Then one day she suddenly falls upon an Albanian worker, embracing him and calling him "my son" in Albanian. In fact, what does Stavros really know about his parents? His mother has always told him that after his father died up north, she moved to Athens, when he was but a year old. Now Stavros’ pals start looking askance at him: is he Greek or Albanian? Does he really have the right to sing the racist little ditty: "Albanian, Albanian, you’ll never become a Greek…"?
Die Fremde (When we leave) by Feo Aladag, Germany
What would you sacrifice for your family’s love? Your values? Your freedom? Your independence? German-born Umay flees her oppressive marriage in Istanbul, taking her young son Cem with her. She is hoping to find a better life with her family in Berlin, but her unexpected arrival creates intense conflict. Her family is trapped in their conventions, torn between their love for her and the values of their community. Ultimately they decide to return Cem to his father in Turkey. To keep her son, Umay is forced to move again. She finds the inner strength to build a new life for her and Cem, but her need for her family’s love drives her to a series of ill-fated attempts at reconciliation. What Umay doesn’t realize is just how deep the wounds have gone and how dangerous her struggle for self- determination has become.
Illégal Olivier Masset-Depasse, Belgium/France/Luxembourg
Tania and her 14 year-old son Ivan are illegal immigrants from Russia, who have been living in Belgium for 8 years. In a permanent state of alert, Tania lives in constant fear of having her identity checked by the police - until the day she is arrested. Mother and the son are separated. Tania is placed in a holding centre. She does everything in her power to find her son again, in spite of the constant threat of deportation hanging over her head.
MEPs will vote for the winning film and the 2010 LUX Prize will be awarded in Strasbourg on 24 November by the President of the European Parliament.
20100902STO81051 27 Times Cinema Blog LUX film prize: 3-film shortlist for 2010 LUX Prize 2010 Venice Days
EN
1
PHOTO
20100901PHT80856.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://27timescinema.cineuropa.org/
EN
4
LINK
http://www.lux-prize.eu/
EN
5
LINK
http://www.venice-days.com/newsENG.asp
-//EP//TEXT IM-PRESS 20100727IPR79248 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
