Arctic: MEPs and MPs debate retreating ice, governance needs and seal product import ban
External relations
Committees Foreign Affairs
2010-09-15 - 11:58
Retreating Arctic ice that could open up new oil and gas reserves and fisheries and hence require stronger international governance, Arctic wildlife management, and the impact of the 19 August European Court of Justice preliminary ruling suspending the EU ban on seal product imports, took centre stage at a meeting of MEPs and MPs in Brussels on 13-15 September.
The Ninth Conference of Parliamentarians of the Arctic Region (CPAR), which brings together MEPs and MPs from Canada, Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway, Russia, Sweden and the USA, was hosted by the European Parliament in Brussels, on 13-15 September.
An appeal to remedy the lack of a clear governance system for the Arctic was launched by EP Vice-President Diana Wallis (ALDE, UK), who, in her opening speech, urged the Arctic Council to "increase its capacity to deal more thoroughly with issues in the region and bring leaders together".
Ms Wallis also reiterated the European Parliament's call, in an October 2008 resolution, for an international treaty to protect the Arctic.
EU role in Arctic politics
Pat the Cope Gallagher, (ALDE, IE), Chair of Parliament's CPAR delegation, said "I believe it is important for the European Union to play a more active role in Arctic politics. The EU can be a positive force in terms of assisting those living in the region to face the enormous immediate and long-term challenges. However, our discussion on the management of living resources in the Arctic region, which touched upon the sustainable management of seals, highlighted that Europe needs to better understand the unique way of life that exists in the Arctic region".
"Global warming is rapidly changing the Arctic region. As a result of melting snow and ice, new shipping routes are opening up, new fishing grounds are now available and there are greater opportunities for oil and gas exploration. It is estimated that 30% of the world's undiscovered oil and gas resources are within the Arctic region", stressed Gallagher.
"The fact that this meeting is held outside the Arctic Region is a sign of the growing interest for the region", said Danish Foreign Minister Lene Espersen, who chairs the Arctic Council until May 2011, when another EU Member State, Sweden, is to take over the Arctic Council's two-year presidency.
Marine mammals
Sustainable hunting of seals and whales is "an essential part of Arctic society which attracts international attention", noted Danish MP Sofia Rossen (Inuit Ataqatigiit party), who urged hunters and researchers to work together on this issue.
In discussion, MPs stressed the need to protect traditional hunting. "The management of living resources should be based on science, not on feelings or on morals", said Norwegian MP Eirik Siverstein, who also stressed that "the rights of indigenous to hunt and gather must be upheld".
The placing of seal products on the EU market was made subject to strict conditions approved by the European Parliament In May 2009. These products could be imported only if they resulted from hunting traditionally conducted by Inuit or other indigenous communities and which contribute to their subsistence, said the resolution drawn up by Ms Wallis.
The seal product sales ban was due to come into force on 20 August 2010, but was temporarily suspended by a preliminary ruling the European Court of Justice at the request of Inuit organisations and companies selling seal products.
The Althing (Icelandic Parliament) will host the tenth conference in 2012.
In the Chair : Pat the Cope Gallagher (ALDE, IE)
20100913IPR82033 9th Conference of Arctic Parliamentarians Foreign Affairs Committee Watch webstreaming live
EN
1
LINK
http://www.arcticparl.org/
EN
2
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=AFET
EN
3
LINK
/eng-internet-publisher/eplive/public/default.do?language=en
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
