Sudan: MEPs concerned by impact of referendum on southern independence
External relations
Committees Foreign Affairs
2010-09-30 - 11:06
MEPs on Wednesday debated the impact of the upcoming referendum in the southern part of Sudan with British diplomat Rosalind Marsden, the new European Union Special Representative for Sudan. Mrs Marsden was the first among the newly appointed senior officials from the EEAS to be heard by the Foreign Affairs Committee.
Rosalind Marsden, who was appointed the new European Union Special Representative for Sudan to replace the Dane Torben Brylle, took up her duties on 1 September. She was UK Ambassador to Sudan for three years.
Mrs Marsden told MEPs that “the coming months will be decisive for the future of Sudan. It will also determine if Sudan can move to lasting peace”. “The EU should continue to focus its attention on Darfur region but should not neglect the eastern part of Sudan”, she added.
MEPs welcomed her nomination and some, notably Véronique De Keyser, who headed the EU Election Observation Mission for the presidential elections, asked her about the impact of a possible split-up of the country.
Reaching an agreement on oil, citizenship and post-referendum arrangements ahead of the ballot will be crucial for the future of Sudan, she said in reply to questions by Alf Svensson (EPP, SE), Charles Tannock (ECR, UK) and Ulrike Lucanek (Greens/EFA, AT).
On the fate of South Sudanese people living in the North, she said “it is important to urge the parties to make every effort to come to an agreement on this issue so that individuals aren't targeted”.
Asked by Judith Sargentini (Greens/EFA, NL) about the International Criminal Court and the possible attendance of Sudan’s Omar al-Bashir at the upcoming EU-Africa Summit, Mrs Marsden responded that the EU had consistently supported the court as an institution and had not hesitated to make its position clear when President Bashir visited Kenya recently.
Future Head of EU Delegation to Japan to attend hearing
The Austrian Hans Dietmar Schweisgut, the nominee for the Tokyo Delegation, is expected to attend a hearing with MEPs on 5 October in Brussels.
Before taking up their posts, EU Special Representatives and Heads of Delegations to countries and organisations which Parliament considers "strategically important" have to appear before the Foreign Affairs Committee, under the agreement reached on the External Action Service with the Council, the Commission and the High Representative and endorsed by Parliament last July.
29.09.2010
In the chair : Gabriele ALBERTINI (EPP, IT)
20100927IPR83710 link to the Foreign Affairs Committee
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=AFET
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
