Frequently asked questions about the EU Budget
Budget
2010-10-18 - 16:23
On Wednesday, 20 October, MEPs will vote on next year's EU budget. This year is the first in which Parliament has a full say on the whole EU budget, including farm spending, under the new Lisbon Treaty rules. Below are some replies to the most frequently asked questions on the EU budget.
.
20101015BKG87331
Why does the EU need a budget?
The EU has several ways of implementing its policies. Law-making and co-ordination are two options. Another is funding programmes through a common budget. This option is used when spending at national level is insufficient to achieve a given goal and tackling issues together EU-wide makes sense. Examples include environment programmes, research projects or humanitarian aid. If all EU Member States were to pay for all policies directly from their own budgets and execute them individually, it would create enormous administrative burdens and it would be less efficient and cost effective. Where policies are better implemented at national level the EU is generally not involved.
How is the budget composed?
The EU's annual budgets are divided into five categories of expenditure, called headings:
1. Sustainable Growth
1A: Competitiveness for Growth and Employment
1B: Cohesion for Growth and Employment
2. Preservation and Management of Natural Resources
(This heading includes agriculture and environment)
3. Citizenship, Freedom, Security and Justice
3A: Freedom, Security and Justice
3B: Citizenship
4. EU as a global player
5. Administration
When budgets are being discussed within the European institutions, you will often hear "heading 4" or "H4", instead of "foreign affairs budget". Each heading is divided into "budget lines", each of which has its own name and number.
Commitments and payments
The EU budget distinguishes between commitments and payments. "Commitments" refer to the amounts that the EU may commit (e.g. by signing a contract or starting a call for tenders procedure) and these amounts are merely the result of political debate in a certain year. "Payments" are money paid out in line with commitments. Payments in year N, may result from commitments given in previous years. For this reason, the level of payments is usually higher in the last years of a multiannual "financial framework" (i.e. budgeting) period.
How is the budget decided?
Every year, the European Commission presents a draft budget to the Council of Ministers and the European Parliament, as the two arms of the budget authority. Both the Council and Parliament state positions with regard to the Commission draft. Thereafter, the two institutions spend up to 21 days in "conciliation" talks to agree on a common position.
Key dates for the 2011 budget procedure
27 April 2010 – Commission presents its draft budget
12 August – Council approves its position on the draft budget
28 September – 7 October – Parliament´s Budgets Committee approves its position
19 October – Parliament debates budget in plenary session
20 October – Parliament approves its position in plenary vote
27 October – Conciliation committee starts work
11 November –last day for Conciliation Committee work
November (date to be confirmed) – Conciliation Committee approves joint text
22-25 November – Parliament approves 2011 budget in plenary
Can the Parliament change the Commission draft as it likes?
No. First of all, the budget has to be agreed by EU Member States in the Council of Ministers as well. But apart from that, the budget authority has only limited room for manoeuvre, because the EU's annual budgets are bound by the Multi-annual Financial Framework (MFF), also known as the "Financial Perspective", which sets maximum levels of spending per heading for each year of the period. The current MFF is in place for the period 2007-2013. The reason for having such long-term frameworks lies in the nature of the EU's expenditure. Very often these are big investment projects that need a lot of preparation before they can be contracted and several years to be executed. Total payments are therefore generally low in the early years of a new MFF, but rise in later ones as work gets done and bills start coming in.
Can the budget be amended after it has been adopted?
Yes. The Commission may propose, during the year, that the budget be amended to cope with unavoidable, exceptional or unforeseen circumstances. The Commission may also, on its own initiative or at the request of the other institutions with their own budget sections, present a letter of amendment to the draft budget in the light of information which was not available when the draft was established. Both amending budgets and letters of amendment are subject to the same procedural rules as the general budget. However, the European Parliament is not a big fan of amending budgets. This procedure is sometimes referred to as the "patchwork approach" and does not add to clarity and transparency. For 2011, Parliament has taken the view that that all the likely expenditures should be budgeted for, even if - in the end - they might not occur.
What is different now that the Lisbon Treaty is in force?
EU Member States' contributions to the EU budget are not be affected by the Lisbon Treaty. However, the budgetary procedures have undergone important changes. The European Parliament now plays a stronger role in EU budgetary decisions because it has a say on all categories of expenditure. Before the Lisbon treaty, Parliament could not decide upon ”compulsory expenditure”(mainly on agriculture). There is now only one reading of the European Commission's draft budget by Council and Parliament (before there were two). When both Council and Parliament have established their positions vis-à-vis the Commission's proposal, they will have a 21-day "conciliation period" to reach a common agreement. This means that the annual budget procedure ends in November instead of December, as was the case with the Nice Treaty.
However, if Council and Parliament fail to reach a consensus, the system of "provisional twelfths" will enter into force. This would mean that the same appropriations as in the preceding budget year are to be used, on a month-to-month basis, until an agreement is reached on the budget. . But not only the rules have changed. The Lisbon Treaty also introduced a set of new policy priorities, such as climate change, energy, civil protection, sports, space and the setting up of the European External Action Service (foreign affairs). However, these were not foreseen when the current MFF was established in 2006.
How do annual budgets relate to the Financial Perspective (MFF)?
The MFF, or Financial Perspective, sets annual maximum amounts for the different categories of spending for 2007-2013. The maximum amount that can be shuffled between budget lines is limited to 0.03% of gross national income (GNI).
The current MFF was established in 2006, but new priorities have been introduced by the Lisbon Treaty, which has meanwhile entered into force. Furthermore, the financial and economic crisis required unforeseen EU intervention, including the creation of four new supervisory authorities. This led to new spending within existing categories and exhausted the reserves and margins set in 2006. As a result,there is even less room for manoeuvre than before to accommodate new or unexpected priorities.
Parliament advocates opening up the ceilings and margins, so as to allow more space for political discussion and proper budgeting. The basis for this discussion is the Mid-term Budget Review, which will be presented by the Commission on 19 October. The revision Parliament is asking for is not about increasing the EU budget – even though it is unlikely that all new EU tasks could be created without costing a single additional Euro cent. MEPs are asking the other institutions to make sure that the budget framework is in line with today´s reality. The first Financial Perspective covered 1988-1993. One reason for creating a long-term budget framework was to avoid the yearly budget clashes between the EU institutions and give the Union budget ”peace”.
Is the EU budget different from national budgets?
Yes it is. The EU budget focuses on the needs of Europeans; it is not a redistributive mechanism. It builds important infrastructure (e.g. waste-water plants, road and rail networks), provides funding for areas like research, training and agriculture, with the aim of improving the lives of Europeans and projecting Europe's values in the world.
The lion's share of the financial contributions of every EU Member State to the EU budget consists of national VAT and an equal share of gross national income (GNI). The EU does not have debts and the policies are meant to leverage national measures, where spending at national level could not achieve equally good results. The EU budget should not therefore be considered a "28th budget", but rather a budget in support of the other 27.
How big will the EU's 2011 budget be?
The Parliament's Budgets Committee proposes an overall amount of €142,650 million in commitments, which represents 1.146% of gross national income in the EU. Parliament's Budgets Committee expects payments to amount to 130,140 million. Positions of Parliament, Council and Commission regarding budget 2011
EN
1
MULTIMEDIA
20101015MLT87368.pdf
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 BKG DOC XML V0//EN
