New momentum in EU-Moldova relations
External relations
Plenary sittings
2010-10-21 - 13:21
The European Parliament has welcomed the latest moves by the Republic of Moldova to improve relations with the EU and the country's willingness to seek a solution to the Transnistrian issue. In a resolution adopted on Thursday, MEPs call for a "more robust EU role" in mediating in the regional conflict.
The non-binding resolution stresses the substantial progress in EU-Moldova relations over the last year and calls on the Commission to swiftly adopt a visa liberalisation plan for Moldovan citizens.
MEPs also welcome the willingness of the Moldovan government to seek a solution to the dispute over Transnistria, a breakaway territory located at the eastern Moldovan border with Ukraine and governed de facto by a secessionist force since early 1990s. This is in line with statements made last May by EU Foreign Policy High Representative Catherine Ashton after the Moldovan government presented an "aide memoire" confirming its readiness to further engage with all its partners.
MEPs "support the territorial integrity of the Republic of Moldova" and call upon all parties to return to formal talks "in the 5+2 format" which brings to the negotiating table Moldova, Ukraine, Russia, Transnistria and the OSCE, with the US and the EU as observers. A "more robust EU role" could be useful in finding a solution to the problem, especially by fostering confidence-building and supporting joint projects with local communities, believe MEPs.
Parliament also approved the recent initiative launched by German Chancellor Angela Merkel and Russian President Dimitri Medvedev (known as the "Meseberg initiative") to create an EU-Russia Security Committee to discuss regional issues such as a settlement of the Transnistria conflict.
Lastly, the resolution notes "the very good start" to negotiations on the Association Agreement with the Republic of Moldova (in January this year) and calls for a clean pre-election campaign ahead of national elections on 28 November.
Note to editors
Last August Parliament gave its green light to grant €90 million to crisis-hit Moldova. This country shares a Partnership and Cooperation Agreement with the EU since 1998 and is now negotiating a closer Association Agreement, covering assistance on political, trade, social, cultural and security matters.
20101020IPR89508 Adopted text will be available here (click on 21 October) €90 million EU grant to crisis-hit Moldova approved by EP Trade Committee (30.08.2010)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
2
LINK
/en/pressroom/content/20100830IPR80651/
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
