MEPs push for nature reserve protection of 20% of the world's land and seas
Environment
Committees Environment, Public Health and Food Safety
2010-10-27 - 14:51
The European Parliament delegation at the biodiversity convention in Nagoya, Japan, is pushing for 20% of the world's land and seas to be protected as nature reserves. MEPs are calling for a comprehensive agreement to be concluded, as the basis for practical measures to be presented at the next convention in two years' time.
The European Parliament delegation at the biodiversity convention in Nagoya, Japan, is pushing for 20% of the world's land and seas to be protected as nature reserves. MEPs are calling for a comprehensive agreement to be concluded, as the basis for practical measures to be presented at the next convention in two years' time.
"We are biting the hand that feeds us if we do not halt the loss of animal and plant species", said delegation leader Jo Leinen (S&D, DE), adding that "equally important as fighting climate change is making sure that stable ecosystems will also exist in future. Biodiversity is not only about protecting tigers, pandas or natural parks but about the livelihood of future generations". He also underlined that the EU and its Member States must lead the fight to protect biodiversity, even given the present economic situation.
Economic value of biodiversity
"I very much welcome that we are now able to quantify the loss of biodiversity. Money is a language which most of us understand well and is a common denominator for all of us. But it is not only about quantifiable values, but about the common global goods which we should not squander", said Mr Leinen. "Let's hope that the TEEB report will make the same for biodiversity as the Stern report did for climate change". The Economics of Ecosystems of Biodiversity, known as the TEEB study, highlights the economic costs of biodiversity loss. For example, insect pollination alone is worth about €1 billion a year.
Global Strategic Plan
Parliament's Nagoya conference resolution says ambitious targets are needed for 2020:
• including the values of biodiversity in national accounts, • eliminating harmful subsidies for biodiversity (e.g. agriculture, fisheries), • zero net deforestation, • halting overfishing and destructive fishing practices, and • protecting 20% of land, fresh water and sea areas.
Access and benefit sharing (ABS)
"Without a successful conclusion of negotiations on an international regime for access to and sharing the benefits of genetic resources and a wider agreement on the strategy to be followed after 2010, the aims of the Convention may not be achieved", warned MEPs. They insist that the ABS protocol negotiations must lead to clear and transparent rules on access to genetic resources and fair benefits for host countries. They also point out that biodiversity, the preservation of plant and animal species, also helps tackle climate change.
Biofuels
Parliament underlines the need for the Conference of Parties (COP 10) to adopt a recommendation on biofuels, given the extreme importance of assessing the direct and indirect impacts of biofuels on biodiversity and of establishing biofuel certification and sustainability. "Destroying natural habitats and continued logging of rain forests to make way for biofuel crops are definitely not a solution", warn MEPs.
About Parliament's COP-10 delegation The delegation, in Nagoya from 25 to 27 October, is headed by EP Environment Committee Chair Jo Leinen (S&D, DE). Its members are Richard Seeber (EPP, AT), Esther de Lange (EPP, NL), Bogusław Sonik (EPP, PL), Karin Kadenbach (S&D, AT), Sandrine Belier (Greens/EFA, FR), Kartika Tamara Liotard (GUE/NGL, NL), Anna Rosbach (EFD, DK), Gerben-Jan Gerbrandy (ALDE, NL), Bas Eickhout (Greens/EFA, NL) and Miroslav Ouzky (ECR, CZ).
20101027IPR90609 European Parliament's Nagoya Conference Resolution COP 10
EN
2
LINK
http://www.cbd.int/convention/cops.shtml
-//EP//TEXT TA P7-TA-2010-0353 0 NOT XML V0//EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
