Data protection in transatlantic relations: searching for a framework agreement
Justice and home affairs
2010-10-27 - 17:58
A passenger gets his fingers scanned by an agent of the French customs police on October 19, 2009 at Roissy-Charles de Gaulle international airport, during the launch of the Passage automatisé rapide aux frontières extérieures Schengen (PARAFES) project. ©BELGA Future EU-US data protection agreement in the framework of police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters was discussed on Monday by MEPs, representatives of the Council and the Commission, the US ambassador to the EU and several experts in the field from both sides of the Atlantic. "It is very important to build up common standards in a time when more and more data are being exchanged", stressed the EP's rapporteur, Jan Philipp Albrecht (Greens/EFA).
The hearing, organised by the EP's Civil Liberties committee, was divided in three sessions and focused on issues such as strengthening the transatlantic dialogue on data protection, shared values, constitutional constraints and possible common solutions or the impact of a new EU-US framework agreement.
The objective of the agreement is to set up a framework for any further discussion on the issue of data protection.
The main difference between the EU and US is that Washington does not want the agreement to be retroactive and applied to previous specific agreements.
So far, the European Commission has proposed a draft mandate to the Council of Ministers. The EP will have to give its green light to the final agreement.
Security and privacy
Jan Philipp Albrecht told the hearing that "it is very important to build up common standards in a time when more and more data are being exchanged". That's why he asked for an agreement "as early as possible".
For the European Commission Françoise Le Bail, director general of the Justice Directorate said: "Our security depends very much on our ability to fight terrorism and crime", and for that "we need to exchange data". Ms Le Bail asked for an agreement based "on our common values" but recognised that it is "complex" to find common standards.
For the Council of Ministers, Belgian minister of Justice Stefaan de Clerck expressed his wish for the negotiations to end "as soon as possible". The Belgian presidency would like to reach an agreement by the end of December. He explained that "at this moment we have different systems, it's a real puzzle, which complicates the work of officials and policemen, as well as the exercise of citizens' rights".
The US ambassador to the EU William E. Kennard also stressed the existence of common values for the EU and the US, contesting the "stereotype": "it is not true that USA pays more attention to security than to privacy". "We can have both things; they are the two sides of the same coin".
MEP Alexander Alvaro (ALDE) agreed that "privacy and security are not opposed" adding that "neither must take precedence", but wondered where the dividing line should be drawn between "what is legal and what is legitimate".
Retroactive?
Mr Kennard expressed "doubts" regarding the retroactive application of the agreement (as defended by the EU), saying that "previous agreements would have to be reopened" and that "it would create legal uncertainty".
Rapporteur Albrecht replied that "we do not only want standards for the future, we also want to discuss again some issues".
Greek Socialist MEP Stavros Lambrinidis argued that, on the contrary, if the agreement was not retroactive "there would be a lot of confusion and no legal certainty".
Maltese MEP Simon Busuttil (EPP) welcomed a "change of approach" by the US authorities towards the EP, and asked the US to be "as flexible as possible" in the negotiations.
Rui Tavares (GUE/NGL) was "worried if the general agreement does not invalidate the previous ones" and underlined that the solution would be to "give this agreement supremacy over the others".
20101025STO89954 Press release Video of the hearing Background documents and information
EN
1
PHOTO
20101025PHT90150.jpg
EN
2
LINK
/en/pressroom/content/20101025IPR90054/
EN
3
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/frd/vod/player;jsessionid=EA696106F66C3A7593E2D2D241A1B65F?category=COMMITTEE&eventCode=20101025-1500-COMMITTEE-LIBE&format=wmv&byLeftMenu=researchcommittee&language=en#anchor1
EN
4
LINK
/activities/committees/hearingsCom.do;jsessionid=C558E50A480FF6BA3B70E1A3ED551257?language=EN&body=LIBE
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
