Charlemagne Youth Prize winners visit the European Parliament
Culture
2010-10-28 - 15:32
The three winners of the Charlemagne Youth Prize (L to R): Ireland (Line Simenstad)Bulgaria (Mariya Koteva); Germany (Sascha Emrich). On 26 October, Members of the European Parliament's Culture and Education Committee welcomed the 2010 winners of the Charlemagne Youth Prize. MEPs complimented the winners on their presentations, which they described as "inspiring, fun and entertaining". We got the chance to speak to the three winners.
First prize in the 2010 European Charlemagne Youth Prize competition went to the German project " European CNC Network - Train for Europe ". A total of 24 vocational schools from 21 European countries worked together for more than 3 years to produce a scale-model locomotive with wagons. Second and third prizes went to " You are here ", an Irish book project and " Best Engineering Competition BEC " from Bulgaria, respectively.
"We want to honour young people who think with a community mindset, who cherish our common future and who see Europe as united in diversity. That is why this Youth Prize is so important for us", President Jerzy Buzek said in his speech at the award ceremony in Aachen back in May 2010.
According to the jury the winning projects symbolized "the importance of European unity" and the "ability to overcome the limits of national and cultural boundaries by working together".
21 countries, 1500 participants, one project
The German winner Sascha Emrich explained that the most difficult part of the project (Train for Europe) was to “ organize the whole process" and to cope with the " many different languages" of the participating schools.
"We had 1500 people involved in the project and we had to arrange all the necessary project meetings. We were mostly communicating in English, but when things got too difficult to explain we would start to use our hands and feet" she said.
"We connected Europe in a symbolic way"
It was a huge relief for all the participants when - after three years of hard work - they could finally assemble the train: "When we did the final coupling of all the different wagons (each representing the countries and regions of Europe) and saw that it actually worked, it seemed we had connected Europe itself in a symbolic way. It was a very good feeling for all of us".
Sascha Emrich revealed to us that he is already planning a new "train project" for next year. But this time he wants participation from "all European countries".
Don't be scared to show your project to the world
All three winners were amazed by the hectic and dynamic environment in the European Parliament. Line Madsen Simenstad, who won the second prize, said "what probably fascinates me the most was the whole machinery of translation and how all the languages are treated equally in the Parliament".
Line Madsen hoped that the Charlemagne Youth Prize would be more known in the future and urged all participants to participate in the promotion of the prize.
Mariya Koteva from Bulgaria, who won the third prize, was very excited about the "beat in the EP": "There are so many things happening here, it's really a rush... and everybody is just so nice to us and interested in our projects".
Asked what advice she would give to other young people, who are considering participating in next year's edition of the Charlemagne Youth Prize, Koteva said: "I would advise young people not to be scared to show their project to the European Parliament, because people here really appreciate what we do".
The Charlemagne Youth Prize
The European Charlemagne Youth Prize aims to encourage the development of European consciousness among young people through their participation in European integration projects. The prize is awarded to projects, "which foster understanding and promote the development of a shared sense of European identity".
Read more about the Youth Charlemagne Prize below and see how you can participate in next year's edition of the competition.
Charlemagne Youth Prize 2011
23 January 2011: Deadline for submitting projects:
11 March 2011: National juries will select a national winner from each of the 27 EU countries
14 April 2011: A European jury will select the winner from the 27 projects submitted by national juries
31 May 2011: Representatives of the 27 national projects will be invited to the award ceremony in Aachen, Germany
20101025STO89956 EuroparlTV from the Prize ceremony Speech by the EP President at the award ceremony in Aachen Train for Europe on YouTube video European CNC Network Rule
EN
1
PHOTO
20101025PHT90162.jpg
EN
2
VIDEOLINK
http://www.europarltv.europa.eu/en/player.aspx?pid=e0c6274b-6ca6-45ae-9576-248c90587765
EN
3
LINK
/president/view/en/press/speeches/sp-2010/sp-2010-May/speeches-2010-May-7.html
EN
4
LINK
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Atj864W38AU
EN
5
LINK
http://www.cnc-network.eu/
EN
6
LINK
http://www.charlemagneyouthprize.eu/view/en/rules.html
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
