A European response to the challenges after the crisis
Economic and monetary affairs
General
2010-11-09 - 21:14
Economic growth and job-creation, economic governance and the completion of the single market were the areas discussed at a joint meeting of MEPs and MPs from all EU Member States on Monday and Tuesday at the European Parliament in Brussels.
The meeting - titled "Beyond the crisis: How should Europe respond to the challenges ahead?" - was organised by the European Parliament and the Belgian Federal Parliament. It was co-chaired by EP President Jerzy Buzek, André Flahaut, Speaker of the Belgian House of Representatives and Willy Demeyer, deputy Speaker of the Belgian Senate.
Buzek calls for not just monetary but economic union
In the opening speech on Monday Mr Buzek said "we have done our utmost to achieve progress in the process of recovery. Parliament has adopted legislation which will better supervise the financial markets". "Once we have stabilised the markets and dealt with ongoing economic issues we have to concentrate our effort on the exit strategy: to help our economies grow and to create jobs", he added. "I am personally convinced that we have to move towards a genuine economic, and not just monetary, union," concluded Mr Buzek.
Over 200 participants s ubsequently discussed the key issues in three working groups: on growth and jobs, on European economic governance and on ways to complete the European single market. The groups' reports were presented on Tuesday at the meeting's plenary session.
What kind of growth and jobs for the Europe of tomorrow?
Summing up the first panel's conclusions, Belgian MP Bruno Tuybens said there would be no growth and job creation unless there was greater EU involvement and the social agenda was taken into account. The green economy, the knowledge economy and green research, as well as innovation, were crucial. Corporate involvement was indispensable for creating new jobs and special attention needed to be paid to young people and the over-fifties. Contacts should also be stimulated between European business communities so they could exchange ideas.
What kind of European economic governance?
On behalf of the second working group, Pervenche Berès MEP (S&D, FR) first stressed the need to involve national parliaments in discussions about European economic governance, saying there could be "n o efficient economic governance if EP and national parliaments are not involved and working hand-in-hand."
Greater tax harmonisation was needed "not so much in levels but rather in the extent of corporate taxation". We should also "think about a tax on financial transactions" and discuss "under what conditions we could have a European public rating agency", she believed.
Completing Europe's single market
Spanish Senator Jordi Vilajoana i Rovira said that a majority in the third working group agreed on the need to strengthen the freedoms of the single market, which required more harmonisation of legislation among Member States. Transposition of EU law into national systems must be done properly and more smoothly.
EU regulation in the digital market was needed, as was tax harmonisation across the EU. Public procurement laws and the services directive were other areas requiring attention.
Miguel Angel Martínez Martínez, Vice-President of the European Parliament, emphasised in his concluding remarks that the Lisbon Treaty recognises the importance of national parliaments and provides for cooperation between the EP and national parliaments. He added "This cooperation is vital".
Council and Commission
Belgian Prime Minister Yves Leterme stressed that " public means must be put at the service of growth" and that the EU funds and flexibility instrument should be used better. He also pointed out that the EU 2020 strategy needed to be implemented as quickly as possible. In addition, "an audacious industrial strategy" was required to strengthen the EU's industrial capacity. Mr Leterme also pointed to economic supervision and economic integration as areas in need of enhancement.
European Commission President José Manuel Barroso stressed the need for the Member States to cooperate, to maximise their leverage at world level. He added "this is the time to stick together and see what we can do better at European level", and he concluded "while the "M" in the Economic and Monetary Union is very important, the "E" is just as important".
20101108IPR92708 Link to the archives JPM Beyond the crisis: How should Europe respond to the challenges ahead?
EN
1
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/frd/vod/search-other-events?language=en&format=wmv&byLeftMenu=researchotherevents
EN
2
LINK
/webnp/cms/lang/en/pid/1463
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
