Single Market Forum: taking it forwards
Free movement of services
Committees Internal Market and Consumer Protection
2010-11-11 - 09:24
How to move ahead, by turning words into deeds and rooting the EU single market in citizens' minds, was the key theme at this first public hearing on the European Commission's Single Market Act proposals. Many MEPs and Professor Mario Monti urged the Commission to act faster to put the proposals into effect.
The European Commission's Single Market Act proposals were debated by MEPs for the first time on Tuesday, with Internal Market Commissioner Michel Barnier, Professor Mario Monti, Belgian Federal Minister for the Internal Market Vincent van Quickenborne and Belgian State Secretary for European Affairs Olivier Chastel and others, at an Internal Market Committee event attended by over 600 people.
Louis Grech (S&D, MT), author of a report setting out recommendations for the Commission's Single Market proposals, stressed in his speech that "the economic and social backing of all citizens is needed for the realisation of this European project". The Internal Market Committee was hosting this forum "to give real value to all stakeholders and to connect European citizens and civil society to the decision-making process by creating a new framework for dialogue".
Commissioner Barnier assured MEPs that many of Parliament's Grech report proposals had been taken on board. He then outlined the key Single Market Act proposals, describing the text as an "action plan", but also as a starting point for dialogue with all stakeholders over the next four months.
Dialogue or vision?
Professor Monti expressed his "surprise at the four months' debate" plan. "I had thought that the Act could go on to legislation right away", he said, reminding the audience that he himself had already conducted a six-month consultation on behalf of Commission President Barroso prior to the launch of the Single Market Act.
"Moving the single market ahead is a very urgent matter", he continued, adding that in his view the political vision needed to take the single market forwards "will not come from further rounds of consultations". Mr Monti regretted that Commission President José Manuel Barroso himself had not "taken centre stage" to underline the Act's urgency.
Andreas Schwab (EPP, DE), by contrast, praised efforts to listen to and "positively involve all stakeholders and citizens". Zuzana Roithová (EPP, CZ), pointed to the European Patent "and many other issues where the Council is stalling".
"If Europe is in disagreement, you know about it, but if Europe is making progress you don't. Citizens are not properly informed about what Europe can do for them", said Mr van Quickenborne.
Single market - not a flagship, but the sea
Morten Løkkegaard (ALDE, DK), agreed that "the speed is not ambitious enough" and expressed surprise that the Commission had chosen to present its Single Market Act "in the middle of a Council summit". "Political visibility" is certainly "not yet where it should be" agreed Mr Monti, observing that "the single market is not a ship. It is the sea and the wind which allows all the flagships to proceed". This was enthusiastically applauded.
Heide Rühle (Greens, DE), called for more "transparency" in the hearings and at the same time urged the Commission to do more on climate change and sustainable growth.
Direction agreed
Summing up, Committee Chair Malcolm Harbour (ECR, UK), said "we do not agree on everything, but we agree on the direction", although he too shared "a bit of the frustration that we are not moving right away". However, Mr Harbour also said that he would much rather have a realistic timetable, which people can meet, than a more challenging one which no one meets.
The Single Market Forum is set to become an annual event bringing together single market stakeholders. The next forum will take place in autumn 2011 in Poland during the first Polish Presidency.
In the chair: Malcolm Harbour (ECR, UK)
20101108IPR92674 Internal Market and Consumer Protection Committee Watch webstreaming live
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=IMCO
EN
2
LINK
/wps-europarl-internet/frd/live/live-program?language=en
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
