Future CAP: Agriculture Committee's first thoughts on Commission plans
Agriculture
Committees Agriculture and Rural Development
2010-11-19 - 17:08
European Commission plans to make EU farm policy fairer to farmers, and at the same time more responsive to public concerns, were welcomed by Agriculture Committee MEPs on Thursday. However, MEPs also voiced concerns about how the plans could affect farmers, and the difficulty of putting them into practice.
The need to "re-legitimise" the EU's common agricultural policy (CAP) in the eyes of public opinion, by "opening the policy to the concerns of our society" was stressed by Agriculture Commissioner Dacian Ciolos as he presented the Commission's "CAP towards 2020" communication to Agriculture Committee MEPs on Thursday. Committee chair Paolo De Castro (S&D, IT), assured Mr Ciolos of the committee's support, but also stressed that the Parliament is fully aware of its new legislative powers under the Lisbon Treaty.
Fairer direct payments
Taking up Parliament's July 2010 proposals to make direct payments fairer for farmers and Member States, the communication proposes a basic income support to provide a uniform level of aid, additional help for areas with natural constraints, and an (optional) national ceiling for payments received by large farms. The Commission also proposes to include a mandatory "greening" element in the direct payments system.
Focus on farmers
While sharing the Commission's wish to retain the CAP's current two-pillar structure (direct payments and rural development), Parliament's rapporteur Albert Dess (EPP, DE), said " we must focus on the needs of our farming community" and "make sure money go to investment and not to bureaucracy".
James Nicholson (ECR, UK), also urged the Commissioner to "address farmers' concerns, instead of creating red tape", particularly as regards proposed new environmental requirements, and stressed that the CAP is "a policy for farmers, to provide food supply, and not a social or environmental policy".
Commissioner Ciolos replied that the future CAP will simplify, but make full use of, existing tools to enhance environmental sustainability.
"No legislation before an agreement on the 2011 budget"
"We have to be careful to avoid making EU farmers less competitive" when trying to make CAP green, said George Lyon (ALDE, UK), adding that the recent failure to agree an EU budget for 2011 would make it "difficult to process any legislation".
The new CAP should have "at least the same budget as in the previous years", said Lorenzo Fontana (EFD, IT), adding that new "green" requirements should be introduced only if the budget is "consistent" with them.
The Commission "manages a limited budget for both old and new policies" and there is a need to balance policy ambitions and actual financial means, observed Mr Ciolos.
Jobs as a payment criterion
Plans to make payments fairer and stabilise farmers' incomes were welcomed by Luis Capoulas Santos (S&D, PT), who nonetheless regretted that "employment is not an element for the distribution of support".
Martin Häusling (Greens/EFA, DE), praised the general aim of making the future CAP "acceptable not only for farmers but also for the society at large". He also agreed with Mr Capoulas Santos that payments should be related to job creation.
Patrick Le Hyaric (GUE/NGL, FR), worried that "competitiveness could be to the detriment of EU agriculture", and proposed that a "protection mechanism" be put in place, as "the current tools do not go far enough".
The Agriculture Committee will now start debate the Commission communication and put forward its own proposals by the start of next year.
Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development
In the chair : Paolo DE CASTRO (S&D, IT)
Procedure: debate with the Commission
20101115IPR94712 Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development Commission Communication on the CAP towards 2020
EN
1
LINK
/activities/committees/homeCom.do?language=EN&body=AGRI
EN
2
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/agriculture/cap-post-2013/communication/index_en.htm
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
