Kim Clijsters at European Parliament to promote childcare NGO
Human rights
2010-11-22 - 14:18
Kim Clijsters at the European Parliament, Friday 19 November 2010 1 million children in Europe not with parents due to poverty Kim Clijsters at EP to support NGO "SOS Children's Villages" Over 1 million children in Europe are not in the care of their parents due to poverty and material deprivation. Former world tennis no 1 Kim Clijsters was at the European Parliament Friday (19 November) to promote the work of the NGO "SOS Children's Villages". It was part of event - "Breaking the Poverty Cycle - Strengthening Families and Communities" - hosted by MEPs Véronique De Keyser and Ernst Strasser. We spoke to the Belgian tennis star about her work for the NGO.
What is your motivation for supporting the SOS Children's Villages' project? Have you been influenced by the fact that you are a mother?
Of course, this was probably the biggest influence and it was a key factor behind me and my husband (Basketball star Brian Lynch) supporting this cause. We obviously get a lot of requests from charities and I was already looking for a cause in Belgium that I could really put myself behind and Children's Villages was something that automatically I felt very good with. I started reading a little more about it so that I was able to learn more about what they do. The fact that they are in Belgium was probably the main key for me.
In January 2010 you donated prize money from the Australian tournament to the local children's hospital and participated in the "Hit for Haiti" charity exhibition that raised more than £100,000. Apart from money, what can you, a tennis star, do to improve the situation of children in need?
Money is important to support charities like this, but I think it is not just about the money. As tennis is a worldwide sport, I am able to provide my help on a worldwide basis. I think that people know about the charities we work with and it brings more awareness. Hopefully, people can take this as an example and can help out. It doesn't have to be for the same cause, but anybody who can help out for any good cause that can help children live a better life and become a better family person, counts.
The global economic crisis has hit many EU families, and some argue that this is a time for budget cuts not increased spending. Should the EU spend more to support families in need?
I really don't think it is up to me to comment on the political side of it. Like I said before, money is important but you don't create the most important things, which are health and support that you can get and awareness. Obviously, this is one of the reasons why Brian and I are here, because we think that we can provide support on a worldwide basis. I am really excited about the project and the fact that we can help a lot of children.
Around 1 million children in Europe are not in the care of their parents often because of poverty and material deprivation. What would your message to MEPs here today be?
To just keep working hard on this project. It is probably a number that can surprise a lot of people, 1 million children just in Europe. A lot of people probably think that this is something that only happens in third-world countries and it is surprising that there are so many. I was surprised as well. So keep working hard for the future to improve and any child, one step at a time, is an improvement. It starts small, gradually builds up and I think that is the message. Just keep working hard and stand strong behind what you believe.
20101119STO96280 Video: Breaking the Poverty Cycle SOS Children's Villages Press Release: Fighting Poverty
EN
1
PHOTO
20101119PHT96448.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://ec.europa.eu/avservices/player/streaming.cfm?type=ebs&sid=169247
EN
3
LINK
http://www.sos-childrensvillages.org/pages/default.aspx
EN
4
LINK
/en/pressroom/content/20100621IPR76438
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
