Parliament's 2010 LUX Cinema Prize goes to "Die Fremde"
Culture
General
2010-11-24 - 12:49
In a special ceremony on Wednesday Parliament awarded this year's LUX Cinema Prize to "Die Fremde", by Feo Aladağ (Germany), which highlights the problem of "honour killings" by depicting the drama of a Turkish family living in Germany.
Parliament's President Jerzy Buzek awarded this year's LUX Cinema Prize to "Die Fremde" director Feo Aladağ, the first woman ever to compete for the prize. The film's lead actress Sibel Kekilli was also at the ceremony, as were representatives of the two other finalists shortlisted for this year's prize: "Akadimia Platonos" by Filippos Tsitos (Greece and Germany) and "Illégal" by Olivier Masset-Depasse (Belgium).
Awarding the prize, the EP President Jerzy Buzek said "the three films deal in a very sensitive way with the issue of identity, and the differences between a collective identity and an individual one. This is an important topic because in an ever more integrated Europe we will have to answer the question what it actually means to be European, and what our many identities - local, regional, national and European - mean in a united continent. If we want to create a true European demos, we have to be able to truly understand each other. What better way than through culture, art, music and, of course, films?"
Receiving the prize, Mrs Aladağ said "I made Die Fremde because I believe we live in a multicultural society which can no longer rest on promoting consensus but must rather find new ways in dealing with arising divergence. The LUX Prize is an essential bridge between national identities and beyond. That is why, for me, the European Parliament's commitment to culture and education is of such great importance."
The winner will receive European Parliament funding, worth €90,000, for subtitling the film in all official EU languages, adapting the original version for visually- or hearing-impaired people and producing a 35 mm print per EU Member State or for the DVD release.
Parliament awards the annual LUX Prize to films that illustrate or question the founding values of European identity, explore Europe’s cultural diversity or contribute insights to the EU integration debate.
Since its establishment in 2007, the LUX Prize winners have been Auf der anderen Seite by Fatih Akin (2007), Le Silence de Lorna by Jean-Pierre and Luc Dardenne (2008) and Welcome by Philippe Lioret (2009).
20101124IPR99468 More information on the LUX film prize
EN
1
LINK
http://www.luxprize.eu
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
