Anti-counterfeiting accord: MEPs set out content conditions for ratifying the deal
External/international trade
Plenary sittings
2010-11-24 - 14:32
ACTA, the newly-finalised but yet-to-be-signed multilateral anti-counterfeiting trade agreement, faced its first major test on Wednesday, when MEPs passed a resolution welcoming it as a step in the right direction, but calling on the European Commission to confirm that it will have no impact on basic freedoms and existing EU legislation.
MEPs, who now have the power to veto international agreements concluded by the EU, are "fully aware that the agreement will not solve the complex and multi-dimensional problem of counterfeiting". However, they consider that "it is a step in the right direction".
The "negotiated text reflects the main concerns expressed by Parliament over recent months," says the resolution, tabled by Christian Democrats (EPP) and European Conservatives and reformists (ECR) who welcome the European Commission's repeated statements that ACTA will not go beyond or require any changes in the existing EU intellectual property rights legislation. They point out that in this area, "EU law is already considerably more advanced than the current international standards".
MEPs nonetheless call on the Commission "to confirm that ACTA’s implementation will have no impact on fundamental rights and data protection, on the ongoing EU efforts to harmonise intellectual property rights enforcement measures, or on e-commerce".
The resolution, approved on Wednesday with 331 votes in favour, 294 against, and 11 abstentions, reiterates that the Lisbon Treaty extended Parliament's powers, and points out that its consent is needed for ACTA to enter into force in the EU.
The aim of the ACTA agreement, between the EU, the US, Australia, Canada, Japan, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand, Singapore, South Korea and Switzerland, is to strengthen the enforcement of intellectual property rights and to help to combat counterfeiting and piracy of goods such as clothing of luxury brands, music, and films.
In this context, MEPs welcome the fact that "ACTA membership is not exclusive and that additional developing and emerging countries may join".
Transparency of negotiations deemed sufficient
MEPs welcome the fact that after Parliament's "strong representations", in March and September, the transparency of ACTA negotiations has "fundamentally improved" and that "since the negotiating round in New Zealand, Parliament has been fully informed of the course of the negotiations".
Geographical indications
While "acknowledging the efforts made by the Commission to include the protection of geographical indications within the scope of ACTA", MEPs regret that the agreement "does not define ‘counterfeit geographical indications’, as this omission could create confusion".
No searches of travellers' luggage or "three strikes" internet disconnection rule
MEPs also welcome Commission statements that "neither personal searches nor the so-called ‘three strikes’ procedure will be introduced by this agreement". As they point out, "no ACTA signatory, and particularly not the EU, may be mandated to introduce 'three strikes' or similar regimes", as an internet disconnection penalty for three online copyright infringements.
Finally, Parliament hails the fact that at EU insistence, ACTA signatory countries should not be obliged to make camcording (illegally recording films in cinema) a criminal offence. MEPs therefore welcome the fact that "parties agreed that the criminalization of camcording is merely optional".
Next steps
The eleventh and final round of ACTA negotiations was held in Tokyo from 23 September to 2 October. However, ACTA "is not yet initialled" and "it is the Commission’s prerogative, as a negotiator, to determine the point at which negotiations are technically finalised and at which the agreement can be initialled," EU Trade Commissioner Karel de Gucht told MEPs in Strasbourg on 20 October. A technical meeting to finalise the legal wording will take place in Sydney from 30 November to 3 December 2010.
Background
In Parliament's previous ACTA resolution, passed on 10 March, MEPs called for the negotiations to be transparent. Furthermore, they demanded that no personal searches should be conducted at EU borders and that the agreement should not introduce any kind of "three strikes" internet disconnection as a penalty for three online copyright infringements.
In a written declaration signed by a majority of MEPs by September this year, Parliament also stressed that the agreement should not impose any harmonization of EU copyright, patent or trademark law nor weaken fundamental rights such as freedom of expression and the right to privacy. Furthermore, ACTA should not harm global access to legal, affordable and safe medicines, emphasized MEPs.
20101124IPR99549 Adopted text will be available here (click on 24 November)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
