Future energy strategy: energy efficiency should top the EU agenda
Energy
Plenary sittings
2010-11-25 - 12:44
Energy efficiency should be a key priority of Europe's energy strategy for 2011-2020, say MEPs in a resolution adopted on Thursday. Applying existing legislation in full, promoting energy projects and strengthening EU external energy policy are among the other priorities.
The future strategy should also strive to achieve a single energy market, security of supply and affordable energy prices for all consumers, says the resolution, drafted by Lena Kolarska- Bobińska (EPP, PL) and approved on Thursday, with 560 votes in favour, 52 against and 62 abstentions.
Energy efficiency and implementation of legislation
MEPs stress that energy efficiency should be at the top of the EU agenda, as a cost-effective way to cut energy dependency, combat climate change, create jobs and curb energy bills. They call on the Commission to assess the implementation of existing legislation, and say that if its findings prove unsatisfactory, then the forthcoming revision of the EU Energy Efficiency Action Plan should include further EU measures for Member States, such as individual efficiency targets designed to bring about overall energy savings of at least 20% at EU level, whilst taking account of national circumstances.
The resolution reiterates Parliament's call for 50% of homes to be fitted with smart meters by 2015 and 80% of consumers to be equipped with intelligent metering systems by 2020, enabling them to monitor their consumption and so improve the energy efficiency of their homes.
Promoting energy projects
MEPs call on the Commission and Member States to step up work on EU southern gas corridor projects and especially the Nabucco Asia to Europe gas pipeline, and to promote the DESERTEC (clean power from deserts) and TRANSGREEN (low carbon and renewable energy networks) projects through the Mediterranean Solar Plan. Regional projects such as the “Mediterranean Ring” (grid interconnection) and the “Baltic Interconnection Project” should also be promoted, they add.
External energy policy
The EU should have a strong international voice in its energy relations. The resolution says that EU Energy Community membership should be extended to more EU neighbouring countries, and notably those in the Eastern Partnership. Diversifying supply sources could make it easier to deal with future supply crises, say MEPs, who stress the importance of further expanding the European liquid natural gas fleet, and ask the Commission and Council to work closely with NATO to align EU and NATO energy security strategies. They also call for a special energy dialogue with the countries of the Caspian region and voice support for the dialogue on the EU strategy for the Black Sea.
20101125IPR00553 Adopted text will be available here (click on 25 November)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
