Public broadcasters need more independence and more funding
Culture
Plenary sittings
2010-11-25 - 12:29
Public service TV and radio channels in some EU Member States stand in need of proper financial backing as well as safeguards for their independence, says a resolution adopted by the European Parliament on Thursday. These broadcasters also need to boost their presence on the internet, add MEPs.
Public broadcasters in some Member States are confronted with "major problems jeopardising their political independence, their viability and even their financial basis", according to the resolution, which was adopted by 522 votes to 22 with 62 abstentions.
Political interference must end
The resolution calls on the Member States to "end political interference regarding the content of services offered by public broadcasters", adding that respect for European standards on freedom of expression, media pluralism and the independence, remit and funding of public service media should be a priority for all Member States. Parliament suggests that the European Audiovisual Observatory should analyse how the Member States have applied these standards and insists that Member States should be held "accountable for failing to fulfil these commitments".
Proper funding and transparency needed
Member States are urged "to provide appropriate, proportionate and stable funding for public service media" to enable them to fulfil their remit, and to guarantee their political and economic independence. At the same time Parliament notes that "transparent ownership of private broadcasters has to be guaranteed in all Member States" and calls on the Commission "to monitor and support progress to this end".
Reach out to the younger generation via the internet
In order to reach young people who access the media almost exclusively via the Internet", public broadcasters are called upon "to offer attractive, quality online content". In addition, Member States should adopt laws on public service broadcasting on the internet, say MEPs.
Address the digital divide
Parliament not only urges the Member States to make it easier for consumers to switch from analogue to digital television but also asks them to "address the digital divide", for example between urban and rural areas. With digitisation all individuals in all regions must have equal access to public service broadcasting, believe MEPs. And access to "broadcasting of the highest level" needs to be ensured irrespective of consumers’ and users’ ability to pay.
Copyright rules should reflect the digital era
Lastly, the Commission is asked "to adapt copyright to the new digital era", to facilitate the re-use of archive content and to put in place "extended collective licensing systems and easy one-stop-shop systems for the clearance of rights". Content aggregators on the internet should be made to respect existing laws and the Commission should "consider ways in which search engines and internet service providers could contribute to the financing of content creation".
20101125IPR00530 Adopted text will be available here (click on 25 November)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
