Divorcing international couples can choose which law governs their break-up
Citizens' rights
Plenary sittings
2010-12-15 - 14:07
International couples who wish to end their marriage will soon be able to choose which EU country's law governs their divorce, under new rules approved on Wednesday by the European Parliament and already backed by EU justice ministers on 3 December.
The new rules will for example allow a Spanish-German couple living in France to agree whether Spanish, German or French law applies to their divorce. Parliament gave its approval to the legislation today by 537 votes to 20, with 80 abstentions.
Preventing a "rush to court"
International couples (i.e. couples of different nationalities, couples living apart in different EU countries or living together in a country other than their home country) will be allowed to choose which law applies if they separate, so long as it is the law of a country to which they have a close connection (such as habitual residence or nationality). The regulation also stipulates which law is to apply should the spouses fail to agree on a choice.
The new rules aim to prevent a "rush to court" or "divorce shopping", where one spouse rushes to court before the other to exploit advantageous laws in a particular European country.
No overriding of national laws
However, a Member State cannot be required to recognise as marriage, even for the sole purpose of its dissolution, an act that is not considered to be such by the law of that State", stressed Legal Affairs Committee rapporteur Tadeusz Zwiefka (EPP, PL).
"In the same way, it would be contrary to the principle of subsidiarity to impose on a judge in a Member State whose law does not provide for such an act, a requirement to pronounce the divorce", he added.
The text now states clearly that "Nothing in this Regulation shall oblige the courts of a participating Member State whose law does not provide for divorce or does not deem the marriage in question valid for the purposes of divorce proceedings, to pronounce a divorce by virtue of the application of this Regulation".
What is not covered?
The regulation should apply only to the dissolution or loosening of marriage ties, and the national law determined by the regulation's conflict-of-law rules should apply only to the grounds for divorce and legal separation.
The regulation will not apply to the legal capacity of natural persons, the existence, validity or recognition of a marriage, the annulment of a marriage, the name of the spouses, the property consequences of the marriage, parental responsibility, maintenance obligations and trusts or successions.
There are around 122 million marriages in the EU, of which around 16 million (13%) are considered "international". There were over 1 million divorces in the 27 EU Member States in 2007, of which 140,000 (13%) had an "international" element. The Member States with the biggest shares of international divorces in 2007 were Germany (34,000), France (20,500) and the UK (19,500).
A new procedure
The new legislation, which will enter into force in 18 months, was agreed via the "enhanced co-operation procedure" among EU Member States. Fourteen states are so far taking part: Belgium, Bulgaria, Germany, Spain, France, Italy, Latvia, Luxembourg, Hungary, Malta, Austria, Portugal, Romania and Slovenia. Other EU Member States may join at any time. This is the first use of this procedure in the history of the EU.
20101215IPR10128 Adopted text will be available here (click on 15 December) Profile of rapporteur Tadeusz ZWIEFKA (EPP, PL)
EN
1
LINK
/activities/plenary/ta/calendar.do?language=EN
EN
2
LINK
/members/public/geoSearch/view.do?country=PL&partNumber=1&language=EN&id=28301
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
