Joschka Fischer: European states must "combine interests" for common good
Future of Europe/European integration
2011-01-13 - 12:42
Green team: Joschka Fischer makes his point at the European Parliament, Green MEP Daniel Cohn-Bendit looks on. Straight speaking German Foreign Minister calls for closer European integration Warns that loss of sovereignty in Europe occurring due to competition form Asia Joschka Fischer, former German Foreign Minister and leading Green politician was at the European Parliament Wednesday (12 January) to take part in a conference entitled "The United States of Europe - Towards a Transnational Society?" An avowed federalist on European matters, Mr Fischer used the conference to call for greater European unity and for Europe to "combine our interests" to weather the economic storm. We caught up with him and asked his views on the current state of Europe.
It is often said that Europeans feel increasingly distant from the European Institutions (such as the European Commission, Council and Parliament). Participation in European elections has been declining for 30 years. What can be done to fight this trend, particularly for the next European elections in 2014?
Political parties should develop specifically European joint programs, not national programs distant from European issues. They must then seek suitable candidates who must be prominent figures.
Many commentators believe that Europe has taken on an Intergovernmental orientation and that the 27 member countries pursue their own interests and less and less the common interest of the European Union. How can the spirit of European integration be revived?
The crisis has taught us a severe lesson and we must learn. It requires more unity, at least in the euro area. I am still optimistic however, that the crisis will lead Europe to establish an economic union. I see no alternative. What should the Europe of the future resemble?
It's very simple. Every day we are losing part of our sovereignty to the emerging powers. Yet we still wonder if we should abandon our sovereignty (in favour of the EU) or not. We are losing that sovereignty anyway! It's just that it is going to non-European powers in the East (like China). We are losing importance and losing our position. The world is changing dramatically and the question that Europeans must answer is what will be the place of Europe in ten years.
Europe must be strong. This will only be possible if we combine our interests. It's laborious but it is possible if we exercise our sovereignty in a common manner. The aim would be to enter the "United States of Europe", a true association of democratic states that pool their sovereignty. But our national identities continue to exist and the United Nations will continue therefore to play a strong role.
What role will the European Parliament play in it?
The European Parliament must now use the remaining time to ensure that the next European elections are truly European. In Germany, political parties were campaigning on national issues and not really European ones. I guess it was similar in other countries. The European Parliament has a good opportunity. It has more powers and its citizens must feel that it represents them democratically. The question of a European tax seems very interesting. The battle is already lost if one advocates a tax increase. But things are different if the European tax is offset by reduced contributions from European Union member states.
***
Joschka Fischer was at an event organized by the Spinelli group in the European Parliament, a think tank striving for a federal Europe. It was created in September 2010 by Liberal MEPs Guy Verhofstadt and Sylvie Goulard, Green MEPs Daniel Cohn-Bendit and Isabelle Durant. French philosopher Jean-Marc Ferry also took par in the conference. This interview took place on Wednesday 12 January and was conducted in German.
Joschka Fischer
Born 1948 in Germany
Prominent Green politician
Foreign Affairs Minister 1998-2005 under Gerhard Schröder
Creator and member of the think tank "European Council on Foreign Relations
Currently political advisor for the Nabucco pipeline
20110110STO11398 Spinelli group website Altiero Spinelli, un grand défenseur de l'intégration européenne - Article (11/09/2007)
EN
1
PHOTO
20110110PHT11455.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://www.spinelligroup.eu/
EN
3
LINK
/sides/getDoc.do?type=IM-PRESS&reference=20060518STO08373&format=XML&language=EN
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
