Social media seminar looks at role of Facebook et al in European discourse
Information
2011-01-16 - 16:35
The Butterfly Europe event: when social media and networks make European Public Opinion. (From top L-R) Steffen Thejll-Moller (Digital Strategist, Fleishman Hillard), Alexander Alvaro (MEP ALDE-DE) and Marietje Schaake (MEP ALDE-NL). Pros and cons of Social Media revolution on politics discussed Facebook, twitter and other forms popular with many MEPs What is the current role and likely future role of social media tools like Facebook and Twitter in framing European discourse? That was the central question debated by MEPs, senior civil servants involved in Communications, bloggers and civil society representatives on 12 January. Italian think tank "Lo Spazio della Politica" organised a round table discussion called "Butterfly Europe" on social media at the European Parliament.
Positive impact of social media
1-More people are involved in European decision-making and possibility to interact with MEPs
Gianni Pittella MEP (of the Socialists and Democrats) told those present that "with social media we reach far more people than with traditional media. If we print a brochure on Europe, it is 99% wasted money, if we organize a radio or TV programme we reach a limited target, but if we use Facebook or organize chats on social media we easily reach more than one million people".
2-Fast and immediate results
"I want just to get a sense of what people think and social media is the fastest way. With them you reach networks of networks" said German Liberal Alexander Alvaro.
According to Dutch Liberal Marietje Schaake "sometimes you get news from Twitter or Facebook sooner than from newspapers, like for the case of the recent riots in Tunisia. On social media the first hints of this appeared 3 weeks earlier than in traditional media".
Obstacles in the way...
1- People on social media don't reflect all of society
Marietje Schaake said that "it is dangerous to see social media as a tool of direct democracy. They could create the risk that politicians follow only the majority voice of people active on social media".
2-The input of social media is limited
Alexander Alvaro noted that "it is my job to make up my mind on the issues: I have never really changed my opinion because of what people say to me on Facebook or Twitter".
3- A time consuming activity…
Mr Alvaro went on to say that "many colleagues don't use social media by themselves. But if you don't do it yourself, you can't really understand social media dynamics".
Ms Schaake stated that "I do everything by myself and it is not easy to keep it constantly updated. But you are not authentic if you don't communicate yourself".
4- Different approaches from MEPs
French GUE/NGL Member Marie-Christine Vergiat told those present that: "Facebook can be a tool to inform, but also to misinform. For me Facebook is a way to discuss with people I choose to connect with. I refuse to have a public "fan page" on FB - it does not permit the same quality of communication".
And for the future?
Attendees of the workshop saw a preview of a new "EU digital trends" survey by a Brussels consultancy firm on MEPs' social media habits. Over the last year the use of social media by MEPs has doubled, especially Facebook. On the other hand, blogging has decreased.
An estimated 60% of MEPs are active on social networks. According to the survey, most of them see these networks predominantly as a powerful means to communicate their views to citizens. The MEPs in the workshop emphasised the power of social media as a way to engage with citizens and constituents in dialogue.
Looking ahead Mr Alvaro noted that "for the 2014 European elections social media will probably play a major role, they will be more sophisticated and intelligent", he added.
EP & Facebook
110,000 - fans on the EP Facebook page (14 Jan 2011)
900,000 - the total number of fans and friends of MEPs on Facebook
215,000 - the total number of followers of MEPs on twitter
20110110STO11400 Website of the event EP Facebook page EP Twitter page EP Flickr page EP YouTube page
EN
1
PHOTO
20110110PHT11447.jpg
EN
2
LINK
http://butterflyeurope.lospaziodellapolitica.com/
EN
3
LINK
http://www.facebook.com/#!/europeanparliament
EN
4
LINK
http://twitter.com/Europarl_EN
EN
5
LINK
http://www.flickr.com/photos/european_parliament/
EN
6
LINK
http://www.youtube.com/user/EuropeanParliament
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 STO DOC XML V0//EN
