Viktor Orbán sets out Hungary's EU Presidency priorities
European Council
Plenary sittings
2011-01-19 - 13:47
Bolstering EU economic co-ordination, strengthening the single market, common energy policy, agreeing an EU-wide strategy for integrating Roma people, progress on EU enlargement, and finalising the Danube recovery strategy were the key priorities set out for Hungary's first six-month EU Presidency (January-June 2011) by Prime Minister Viktor Orbán on Wednesday. Mr Orbán also promised that Hungary's media law would be amended if it proves incompatible with EU legislation.
Mr Orbán began by stressing the need to reduce debt through work. To this end, he urged the EU to step up its economic co-ordination and stimulate the single market so as to revive the economy and create jobs. The Presidency will work on the legal framework to make the temporary crisis mechanism permanent after 2013, he said, and asked Parliament's support to get the EU's proposed economic governance legislation into force without delay. He also stressed the need to strengthen the common energy policy, and in particular north-south pipeline connections.
He hoped that by the end of June, the EU will agree a common strategy for integrating Roma people, sign an EU enlargement deal with Croatia and expand the Schengen area to the six countries waiting in the wings. He also stressed the need to finalise the Danube strategy to help eastern and central Europe to recover from the economic downturn.
Responding to criticism of Hungary's media law, Mr Orbán said that it would be amended if necessary to comply with EU legislation, but warned that criticising Hungary's domestic policy would be detrimental not only to Hungary, but to the EU as a whole.
Commission President José Manuel Barroso thought the Presidency's "strong Europe" motto appropriate, stressing the need to implement structural reforms without delay and looking forward to "fruitful partnerships" with it on economic governance and energy policy. He also stressed the importance of the "European Semester" economic policy co-ordination plan, "front-loading" economic growth measures and the Single Market Act. On the media law, he stressed that press freedom is a "sacred principle" and promised that the Commission's assessment would treat Hungary impartially.
Joseph Daul (EPP, FR), stressed that the only way to end attacks on the euro is to put public finances back on a sound footing, inter alia by beefing up EU economic governance and improving labour market flexibility. He also welcomed Mr Orbán's commitment to energy policy and stressed the need to act on rising food commodity prices.
Martin Schulz (S&D, DE), welcomed Mr Orbán's employment priority and also his willingness to amend the media law. He nonetheless noted that the members of the Media Council created by the law to ensure "balanced" press coverage were all members of Mr Orbán's party, or closely associated with it. He urged Mr Orbán to withdraw the act, and come back with a better one. As President in office, "you have do all you can to defend the democratic values of Europe", he added.
Guy Verhofstadt (ALDE, BE), backed the Presidency's priorities, and in particular that of strengthening EU economic governance. He stressed the need for real economic governance, and warned against watering down the Commissioner Rehn's proposals in this area. He pointed out that speculators were trading on differences within the euro zone, and that "nowhere else in the world is there a currency without a bond market". On the media law, he stressed that the aim of media governance is not to guarantee "proper" information, but to uphold pluralism.
Daniel Cohn-Bendit (Greens/EFA, FR), argued that the media law "is not in line with EU values", and suggested that Mr Orbán was at risk of becoming a populist and failing to understand the essential nature of democracy. "Democracies never die through too much freedom", he added.
Lajos Bokros (ECR, HU), said there were "eleven other elephants in the room", referring to national laws passed in recent months. He accused the Hungarian government of "working against solidarity".
Lothar Bisky (EUL/NGL, DE), emphasized the need for more eastern European input to EU policy making. On the media law, he pointed out that "the media is there to scrutinise government, not the reverse".
Nigel Farage (UKIP, UK), warned Mr Orbán that Hungary was now part of a union "increasingly similar to the old Soviet Union" and urged him to "stand up and fight for democracy".
Prime Minister Orban called the criticism on the media law and accusations of dictatorial attitudes offensive: "this is a slap in the face of the Hungarian people. I will always defend my people and my country."
This led to reactions by Messrs Schulz and Cohn-Bendit. Mr Schulz rejected the idea that criticism of a media law was the same as criticism of the Hungarian people, adding "Please wear your European hat and don't play the Hungarian people against the European people." Mr Cohn-Bendit accused Mr Orbán of "populism", adding that he had "lost his appetite" for a planned lunch with the Prime Minister.
20110119IPR11954
-//EP//DTD IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
-//EP//STYLESHEET IM-PRESS 20050901 IPR DOC XML V0//EN
